Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Title 4 (RESERVED)
Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Title 6 HEALTH AND SANITATION
Title 7 (RESERVED)
Title 8 ANIMALS AND FOWL
Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND SAFETY
Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Title 11 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Title 12 (RESERVED)
Title 13 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Title 14 WATER
Title 15 SEWERS
Title 16 TREES
Title 17 (RESERVED)
Title 18 FIRE
Title 19 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Title 20 SUBDIVISIONS
Title 21 ZONING

Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
Chapter 1.04 SERVICE OF NOTICE
Chapter 1.08 DATUM PLANE
Chapter 1.12 CUSTODY AND USE OF OFFICIAL SEAL AND OTHER INSIGNIA
Chapter 1.16 PRISONERS AND IMPRISONMENT
Chapter 1.18 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS

Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
1.01.010 Code adopted.
There is hereby adopted by the city that certain code entitled The Glendora Municipal Code—1967 containing certain ordinances of a general and permanent nature, as compiled, consolidated, revised, codified and indexed in the following chapters, namely, Titles 1 through 21, inclusive, of which code not less than three copies have been and now are filed in the office of the city clerk and which is hereby referred to and adopted by reference as if incorporated and set out at length in Ordinance 1058 under the provisions of California Government Code Sections 50,022.1 to 50,022.8. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 1968)

 

1.01.020 Effective date—Repealer.
The provisions of this code shall be in force on and after February 15, 1968, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature in force on September 19, 1967, and not contained in this code, are hereby repealed from and after February 15, 1968, except as provided in Section 1.01.030 of this chapter. (Ord. 1058 § 2, 1968)

 

1.01.030 Effect of code.
The repeal provided for in Section 1.01.020 of this chapter shall not affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right, established or accruing before September 19, 1967; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city’s indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; nor shall such repeal affect the administrative ordinances or resolutions of the council, not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this code; nor shall it affect the annual tax levy; nor shall it affect any right or franchise conferred by ordinance or resolution of the city on any person or corporation; nor shall it affect any ordinance relating to the salaries of the city officers or employees; nor shall it affect any ordinance naming, opening, accepting, vacating, or establishing streets or alleys in the city; nor shall it affect any ordinance relating to annexation or consolidation or deannexation; nor shall it affect any ordinance applying any zone classification to any specific real property; nor shall it affect any ordinance establishing fire districts or zones; nor shall it affect any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered on or prior to September 19, 1967; nor shall it affect Ordinance 1050, adopted September 11, 1967, or any ordinance passed after September 19, 1967. (Ord. 1058 § 3, 1968)

 

1.01.040 Definitions and construction.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and phrases, where used in this code, shall have the meaning and construction given in this section:

“Code” means the “Glendora Municipal Code.”

“City” means the city of Glendora.

“City council” means the city council of the city of Glendora.

“County” means the county of Los Angeles.

“Gender” means and includes the masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.

“Number” means and includes the singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.

“Oath” means and includes affirmation.

“Person” means and includes any natural person, firm, association, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, organization, club, company, corporation, business trust, or their manager, lessee, agents servants, officers, or employee of any of them.

“Shall,” “may.” “Shall” is mandatory, “may” is permissive.

“State” means the state of California.

“Tenses.” The present tense includes the past and the future tenses and the future tense includes the present tense;

“Title of office” means and includes the use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city of Glendora. (Ord. 1051 § 1, 1967)

 

1.01.050 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid, or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The governing body of the city, declares that it would have passed this code with each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, clauses or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 1096 § 1, 1969)

 

1.01.110 Penalty for violation.
(a)     Every person who violates any section of this code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, unless such violation is made an infraction pursuant to subsection (b) of this section or a misdemeanor/infraction pursuant to subsection (c) of this section. Every violation that is a misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to the above penalties the court may order that the guilty party reimburse the city for all of its costs of investigating, analyzing and prosecuting the enforcement action against the guilty party, including but not limited to city staff time and attorneys fees; the court shall fix the amount of any such reimbursement upon submission of proof of such costs by the city.

(b)     Every person who violates any section of this code made an infraction pursuant to such section or pursuant to subsection (c) of this section shall be guilty of an infraction; provided, however, that a fourth violation and all subsequent violations thereafter of the same section, regardless of when the violation occurs, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Every violation that is an infraction shall be punishable by a fine as set forth in Government Code Section 36900.

(c)     Every person who violates any section of this code made a misdemeanor pursuant to such section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; provided, however, then when the city attorney determines that it would be in the best interests of justice the violation shall be reduced to, and prosecuted as, an infraction.

(d)     Every person who violates any section of this code shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which the violation is committed, continued or permitted by such person. Violations may be prosecuted in the name of the people of the state or redressed by civil action. (Ord. 1753 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1730 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1596 § 1, 1992; Ord. 1468 § 1, 1985; Ord. 1416 § 1, 1983; Ord. 1058 § 4, 1968; Ord. 1052 § 1, 1967)

 

1.01.120 Failure to pay fine, costs.
Upon the rendition of judgment against any defendant for violation of any provisions of this code, the magistrate shall make an order and enter the same upon his or her docket, that if the defendant shall neglect or refuse to satisfy such judgment and costs of suit, he or she shall be confined in the city jail or other place of confinement provided for that purpose, one day for each five dollars of such judgment and costs, and during such confinement he or she may be required to labor upon the streets or do other work for the city under the supervision and direction of the chief of police. Execution shall be issued immediately upon the rendition of judgment. (Ord. 1053 § 1, 1967)

 

1.01.130 Authorization to cite.
The city council does hereby authorize the city manager and his or her designee(s) to have citation powers. (Ord. 1703 § 1, 1999)

Chapter 1.04 SERVICE OF NOTICE
1.04.010 Manner.
Whenever a notice is required to be given under this code, unless different provisions are otherwise specifically made, such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified, at his or her last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office.

Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the city or by affidavit of any person over the age of eighteen years, which shows service in conformity with this code or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. (Prior code § 1.18)

Chapter 1.08 DATUM PLANE
1.08.010 Adopted.
The United States Geological Survey datum plane is hereby adopted as the official datum plane for the city. (Prior code § 1.17)

Chapter 1.12 CUSTODY AND USE OF OFFICIAL SEAL AND OTHER INSIGNIA
1.12.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to specify the permissible uses for the use of the official seal, city logo, and other official insignia of the city of Glendora. (Ord. 2037 § 3, 2019)

 

1.12.020 Official seal and city logo.
(a)     The city seal, consisting of a circular disc one and seven-eighths inches in diameter and having the words “City of Glendora, County of Los Angeles, State of California” cut around the outer edge thereof, and the words “Incorporated, November 13, 1911” within the circle is hereby adopted as the common seal of the city. The seal of the city of Glendora is as adopted by the city council on 1955. The city seal is set forth below:

 





 

(b)     The city logo(s) and other insignia(s) are set forth below:

 

City of Glendora Logo

 





 

 

Community Services



Library



 

Police Department

 







 

Water Commission



Other



(Ord. 2037 § 3, 2019)

 

1.12.030 Custodian of the official seal.
The city clerk shall be the custodian of the seal of the city. (Ord. 2037 § 3, 2019)

 

1.12.040 Use of official city seal, city logo, city letterhead stationery, business cards or other official insignias.
(a)     City seal, city logo(s) and insignia(s), city letterhead stationery, business cards or other official insignias of the city or city department or office may be used for purposes directly connected with the official business of the city.

(b)     It is unlawful for any person without prior approval of the city council to knowingly or willfully use, or cause the use of, a copy or replica of the seal of the city, a copy or replica of the city logo, the original or a copy or replica of city letterhead stationery, business cards, or any other official insignias of the city or any city department or office for any private or commercial purpose.

(c)     It is unlawful for any person to use any design so closely resembling the city seal, city logo(s), insignia(s), city letterhead stationery, business cards or other official insignias as to be apt to deceive without first having obtained the permission of the city council therefor. (Ord. 2037 § 3, 2019)

 

1.12.050 Purposes defined.
(a)     “Private purpose” means and includes, but is not limited to, the promotion, support or endorsement of or opposition to: (1) any candidate for a public office or the support or endorsement of or opposition to any ballot measure, initiative, referendum, or any other matter voted upon at a public election; (2) any person, issue or cause; or (3) any religious, charitable or otherwise not for profit organization entity or cause.

(b)     “Commercial purpose” means and includes, but is not limited to, the promotion, support endorsement of any person, group, entity, corporation, partnership, limited liability company, firm or association which is for profit and/or connected in any way with trade, commerce or business. (Ord. 2037 § 3, 2019)

 

1.12.060 Severability.
If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or applications of the provisions of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application and, to this end, the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. (Ord. 2037 § 3, 2019)

Chapter 1.16 PRISONERS AND IMPRISONMENT
1.16.010 Place of imprisonment.
Any person sentenced to imprisonment or sentenced to pay a fine, and in default thereof, to be imprisoned for the violation of any provision of this code or of any other city ordinance may be imprisoned in the city jail or in the county jail. (Prior code § 1.9)

 

1.16.020 Care and treatment of prisoners.
The chief of police shall procure and use such means as he or she shall deem necessary for the security of all prisoners under his or her charge and may prescribe and administer such rules and regulations as shall be deemed necessary to keep good order among the prisoners and compel them to do their work.

The prisoners shall be treated with the utmost kindness compatible with the enforcement of the rules and regulations necessary to compel discipline and obedience to the officers in charge. (Prior code § 1.10)

 

1.16.030 Authority to compel labor.
Any person imprisoned in the city jail for violation of this code or any other city ordinance may be compelled, during the term of the sentence, and upon order of the court, to labor on the streets, or other public property or works within the city. (Prior code § 1.11)

 

1.16.040 Court order requiring labor.
The court, at the time judgment is rendered or at any time thereafter during the period of the sentence, may make an order requiring any person so imprisoned to do labor on the streets or other public property or works within the city. (Prior code § 1.11)

 

1.16.050 Supervision of labor.
Such labor shall be performed under the direction and control of the chief of police or other responsible person appointed by the chief of police, and in case of the absence or disability of the chief of police, then under the direction and control of any responsible person appointed by the court. (Prior code § 1.11)

Chapter 1.18 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
1.18.010 Purpose and intent.
The city council finds and declares that:

(1)     There is a need for an alternative method of enforcement for violations of the Glendora Municipal Code, state codes, and any other applicable statues or laws.

(2)     This chapter makes any violation of these provisions within this code and applicable state codes subject to administrative citation and fine(s).

(3)     This chapter establishes the administrative procedures for the enforcement, collection, review, and appeal of administrative citations and fine(s) pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4 and is considered the city’s general police powers.

(4)     The issuance of an administrative citation under this chapter is solely at the city’s discretion and is one option the city has in addressing a violation of this code and applicable state codes. By adopting this chapter, the city does not intend to limit its discretion to utilize any other remedy, whether independently or concurrent, civil or criminal actions for such violations that the city may select in a particular case. The procedures established in this chapter shall be in addition to criminal, civil or any other legal remedies established by law that may be pursued to address violations of this code and applicable state codes.

(5)     The city adopts this administrative citation and administrative hearing program in order to achieve the following goals:

(A)    To protect the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens within the city of Glendora;

(B)    To gain compliance with this code and those applicable state codes, as well as other ordinances and regulations in a timely and efficient manner;

(C)    To encourage voluntary compliance with the provisions of this code and applicable state codes and to eliminate nuisances for the protection and benefit of the entire community;

 

(D)    To provide for an administrative hearing process to appeal the administrative citations and fine(s) that are imposed;

(E)     To provide a method to hold a person responsible when failure or refuse to comply with the provisions of this code or applicable state codes, or other ordinances or regulations, or terms and conditions imposed on licenses, permits, or entitlements issued or approved by the city of Glendora;

(F)     To minimize the expense and delay where the sole remedy is to pursue persons or responsible persons in the civil or criminal justice system. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 2008)

 

1.18.020 Authority and scope.
(a)     The city manager is authorized to promulgate procedural rules and regulations governing the administration of this chapter.

(b)     The city manager, or his or her designee, shall have the authority to administer and enforce these provisions for this chapter.

(1)     Any person or responsible person violating any provision of this code or applicable state code may be issued an administrative citation by an officer or official of a department as provided in this chapter.

(2)     Whenever an officer or official charged with enforcement authority of this chapter determines that a person or responsible person is allowing, causing, committing, continuing, permitting or maintaining a violation of this code, the officer or official may issue an administrative citation.

(3)     When the violation pertains to building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or other similar structural or zoning regulations that create an immediate danger to health, safety, or the welfare of the community, a citation may be issued forthwith.

(4)     An officer or official may issue a citation for a violation not committed in his or her presence if it is determined through an investigation that the person or responsible person cited did commit, aid or abet the commission of a violation of this code.

(5)     When the violation pertains to sidewalk vending, a citation must be issued as set forth in Chapter 10.77, Sidewalk Vending, Sections 10.77.070 Violations and penalties and 10.77.080 Ability-to-pay determinations.

(c)     The city manager, or his or her designee, may dismiss a citation at any time if determination is made that it was issued in error, in which event any deposit of fine(s) shall be refunded. Notice of such action shall be given to the person or responsible person in writing.

(d)     Any officer or official from a department is hereby authorized to issue an administrative citation to any person or responsible person found in violation of the code. (Ord. 2046 § 2, 2020; Ord. 1908 § 1, 2008)

 

1.18.030 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in the context of this chapter, shall have the following meanings:

“Administrative citation” means any citation issued pursuant to this chapter by an officer or official to any person or responsible person for violation of the code.

“Administrative hearing” means an oral proceeding before a hearing officer regarding the administrative citation.

“Building violation” means any violation of this code, which may also pertain to building, housing, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or other similar structural or zoning regulations, including regulations or laws set forth in Title 19 of this code.

“City” means the city of Glendora.

“Code” means any and all codes and ordinances adopted by the city.

“Correction period” means the period of time allowed for a person or responsible person cited to correct a violation shown on an administrative citation and/or notice of violation.

“Department” means the department and its division(s) who are responsible for administering the code. The department may be any of the following: police department, community services, planning and redevelopment, public works department, finance department and/or any other department authorized to issue administrative citations pursuant to this chapter.

“Director” means a department-head of a department, or his or her designee, who is authorized to administer and enforce the code.

“Land use approval” means any approval required for a particular use of land, including, but not limited to permits, licenses, conditional use permits, variances or subdivision maps.

“Legal interest” means any interest that is represented by a deed of trust, quitclaim deed, mortgage, judgment lien, tax or assessment lien, mechanic’s lien or other similar instrument, which is recorded with the county recorder.

“Minor” means minor child under the age of eighteen.

“Notice of violation” means any form or variations of titles of a written notice provided by any officer or official of a department issued to any person or responsible person to inform such person of violation(s) of the code and to advise such person of the date that such violation(s) must be corrected in order to avoid the issuance of an administrative citation.

“Officer” or “official” means any person, officer, official, agent or employee acting on behalf of the city with the authority to enforce or regulate the city code or applicable state codes, in accordance with the provisions of this code.

“Person” means and includes any natural person, minor, firm, association, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, organization, club, company, corporation, business trust, or their manager, lessee, agents, servants, officers, or employee of any of them.

“Responsible person” means any person whom an officer or official determines is responsible for causing or maintaining a violation of the code. The term “responsible person” includes, but is not limited to a property owner, tenant, independent contractor, or person in possession of real property, or an owner or authorized agent or person of any business, company or entity, or the holder or the agent of the holder of any land use approval or any other permit, license or entitlement.

“Violation” means a violation of the code. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 2008)

 

1.18.040 Administrative citation.
Any person or responsible person violating any section of this code that is subject to this chapter may be issued an administrative citation by an officer or official of a department as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 2008)

 

1.18.050 Administrative citation—Violation.
(a)     General Code Violation. Any person or responsible person allowing, causing, committing, continuing, permitting or maintaining a code violation that do not create an immediate danger to health or safety may first be issued a notice of violation with a reasonable correction period within which to correct or otherwise remedy the violation prior to the service of an administrative citation and prior to imposition of administrative fines. The issuance of an administrative citation may be issued by any officer or official of that department after noncompliance with a notice of violation or to a repeat offender of the same offense within a twelve-month period.

(1)     Each and every day a violation of this code or applicable state code exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense.

(2)     Any person or responsible person violating any provisions of this code is subject to being issued an administrative citation by any officer or official from that department.

(3)     Administrative fine(s) shall be assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by the officer or official and shall be payable directly to the city of Glendora or its agent.

(4)     Fine(s) shall be assessed in the amounts specified in Sections 1.18.080.

 

(5)     Every person or responsible person who applies for and receives a license or permit, or any type of land use approval (e.g., subdivision maps, conditional use permits, variances, etc.) or other entitlement, shall comply with all conditions imposed upon the issuance of the license or permit, or any type of land use approval or other entitlement. If a person violates any condition of such license or permit, or land use approval or other entitlement, he or she may be issued an administrative citation and be liable for fine(s) under the provisions of this chapter.

(6)     The city may take into consideration the fact that a person or reasonable person has been issued an administrative citation when the city is determining whether to grant, modify, suspend, revoke, or deny any license or permit, or any type of land use approval or other entitlement regarding that person or property, and such administrative citations are evidence that the person has committed a violation of the code.

(b)     Building Code Violation. Any person or responsible person allowing, causing, committing, continuing, permitting or maintaining a code violation pertaining to building, plumbing, electrical or other similar structural or zoning issues that do not create an immediate danger to health or safety may first be issued a notice of violation with a reasonable correction period within which to correct or otherwise remedy the violation prior to the service of an administrative citation and prior to imposition of administrative fines. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1.18.050 of this chapter, any person or responsible person may be issued a first administrative citation if the violation continues after the correction period has expired.

(1)     The person or responsible person issued a notice of violation for a building violation may request an extension of the correction period, provided that a request is filed with the director of building and safety before the correction period ends. The director may, in his or her discretion, grant a reasonable extension of the time period to correct the violation, if the person or responsible person has supplied substantial evidence showing that the correction cannot reasonably be made within the correction period indicated on the notice of violation. The filing for such an extension does not, unless granted, extend the correction period or any other time periods set by this chapter.

(2)     If a building violation has not been corrected by the end of the correction period, the officer or official has the authority to issue the person or responsible person a second administrative citation for failing to comply with the violation(s). The person or responsible person to whom the notice of violation was issued shall be liable for and shall pay to the city of Glendora or its agent the fine(s) described in the administrative citation by the date prescribed for payment pursuant to Section 1.18.090(a). A third administrative citation may be issued and additional fine(s) imposed for every day the violation continues uncorrected from the date of issuance of the second administrative citation. The fourth and subsequent violation of the same code shall be prosecuted as a misdemeanor citation or any other remedy available to the city pursuant to Section 1.18.080(a)(1). (Ord. 1908 § 1, 2008)

 

1.18.060 Content of administrative citation.
(a)     An administrative citation shall contain the following information:

(1)     Date, approximate time, and address or description of the location where the violation(s) was observed or occurred;

(2)     The person or responsible person’s date of birth, any state issued identification number or driver’s license number, height, weight, hair color, eye color, race, sex and any other description as needed or available;

(3)     The code section(s) or condition(s) violated and a brief description of the violation(s);

(4)     An order to the person or responsible person to correct the violation(s) within the time specified, and an explanation of the consequences of failure to correct the violation(s);

(5)     The amount of the fine for each violation;

(6)     If necessary, a brief description of the action required to correct the violation(s);

(7)     An order prohibiting the continuation or repeat occurrence of the city code violation(s) described in the administrative citation;

(8)     An explanation of how the fine(s) shall be paid and the time period by which and the place to which it shall be paid;

(9)     A statement indicating that “Payment of a fine or fines shall not excuse a failure to correct a violation of the code or codes cited, nor shall it bar concurrent or further enforcement actions by the city.”

(10)   Identification of rights of appeal, including the time within which the citation may be contested and the manner in which to request a hearing to contest the administrative citation;

(11)   The name of the officer or official including his or her employee identification number and if possible the signature of the person or responsible person. The refusal or absence of any person or responsible person to sign a citation shall not affect its validity or related subsequent action or proceeding, nor shall signing a citation constitute an admission that the person has committed a violation of the code;

(b)     Any other information deemed necessary for enforcement or collection purposes;

(c)     Any other information deemed necessary by the city manager or his or her designee. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 2008)

 

1.18.070 Procedure for serving administrative citation.
An administrative citation or notice may be served by any one of the following methods:

(a)     Personal Service. An officer or official shall attempt to locate and personally serve the person or responsible person and obtain the signature of such person on the administrative citation. If the person or responsible person served refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the administrative citation or the subsequent proceedings.

(b)     Service by Mail. If the officer or official is unable to locate or personally serve the person or responsible person, the administrative citation shall be served by first-class mail, postage prepaid, or certified mail with a declaration under penalty of perjury of service by mail executed by the person mailing the administrative citation. The administrative citation shall be addressed to the person or responsible person at the address shown on the last equalized property tax assessment rolls for Los Angeles County for a building or property related violation, or to any address known for the responsible person for all other violations. Service by mail shall be deemed to be effective service on the date it is mailed and shall not affect the validity of the administrative citation or of the subsequent proceedings.

(c)     Service by Posting. If the officer or official is unsuccessful in either personal service or service by mail, the administrative citation shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the real property where the violation occurred. Such posting shall be deemed to be effective service on the date of posting and shall not affect the validity of the administrative citation or of the subsequent proceedings.

(d)     Service by Publication. If the officer or official does not succeed in serving the person or responsible party personally, by certified mail or regular mail, and the city is not aware that the such person has a legal interest in any real property within the city, the officer or official shall cause the administrative citation to be published once a week for four consecutive weeks in a local newspaper published at least once a week.

(e)     The failure of any person or reasonable person to receive a citation or notice shall not invalidate any fine, late charge(s), actions or proceedings that is imposed or brought pursuant to this chapter, if service was given in a manner stated in this section. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 2008)

 

1.18.080 Administrative fine.
(a)     General Code Violation. Pursuant to California Government Code Section 36900(b), fine(s) associated with the issuance of an administrative citation for violations of city ordinance are hereby adopted.

(1)     A misdemeanor citation into court may be issued to any person or responsible person who has committed a fourth or subsequent violation of the same code within one year from the date of the first administrative citation or the city may at its discretion utilize any additional remedies available in seeking compliance.

(b)     Building Code Violation. Fine(s) pursuant to California Government Code Section 36900(c), for an administrative citation issued for a Building and Safety Code violation are hereby adopted.

(1)     A misdemeanor citation into court may be issued to any person or responsible person who has committed a fourth or subsequent violation of the same code within one year from the date of the first administrative citation or the city may at its discretion utilize any additional remedies available in seeking compliance. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 2008)

 

1.18.090 Payment of administrative fine.
(a)     The fine(s) shall be paid to the city of Glendora or its agent within twenty-one days from the date of service of the administrative citation.

(b)     A late payment fee shall be charged in an amount of thirty percent of assessed fine(s) ten days after the due date; an additional fifty percent after twenty days; and an additional one hundred percent after thirty days, if the fine in any administrative citation is not paid within the time prescribed in subsection (a).

(c)     Any administrative citation fine(s) paid pursuant to subsection (a) shall be refunded in accordance with Section 1.09.160, if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person charged in the administrative citation was not responsible for the violation, issued in error or that there was no violation as charged in the administrative citation.

(d)     Payment of any fine(s) under this chapter shall not excuse or discharge any continuation, or repeated occurrence of any violation(s) that is the subject of the administrative citation, nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city.

(e)     The city may use all available legal and equitable remedies to collect any past due fine(s) and any other related costs. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 2008)

 

1.18.100 Request for administrative hearing.
Any person or responsible person to whom an administrative citation was issued may contest the citation no later than twenty-one days from the date of service of the administrative citation by:

(1)     Attaching a written document which shall contain the following information and submitted along with the citation within such prescribed period;

(a)     The citation number;

(b)     The name, address, telephone and any facsimile numbers, of each person contesting the citation;

(c)     A statement of the reason(s) why a citation is being contested;

(d)     The date and signature of each person contesting the citation.

The person requesting the hearing shall be notified by certified mail, return receipt or posting, of the time and place of the hearing at least ten days before the date of the hearing. Any documentation, other than the administrative citation, which the officer or official has submitted or will submit to the hearing officer shall be served on the person requesting the hearing pursuant to Section 1.18.070, at least five days before the date of the hearing. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 2008)

 

1.18.110 Time for administrative hearing.
Only after a request for hearing has been filed shall the city or its agent set the place, date and time for the administrative hearing. The hearing shall be set for a date not less than fifteen days nor more than sixty days after the request for hearing has been filed. The City shall send notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing to the person requesting the hearing by certified mail, return receipt, or posting at least ten days before the date of the hearing. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 2008)

 

1.18.120 Request for continuance of hearing.
The person or responsible person requesting a hearing may request one continuance, but in no event may the hearing begin later than sixty days after the request for hearing form has been filed. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 2008)

 

1.18.130 Appointment of administrative hearing officer.
The city manager, or designee, shall designate the hearing officer for the administrative citation hearing. The hearing officer shall not be a city employee. The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of the hearing officer, if any, shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the amount of administrative citation fine(s) upheld by the hearing officer. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 2008)

 

1.18.140 Procedures at administrative hearing.
(a)     No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a hearing officer shall be held unless and until a request for hearing has been completed.

(b)     A hearing before the hearing officer shall be set for a date that is not less than fifteen days and not more than sixty days from the date that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the date, time and place set for the hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing.

(c)     The hearing officer shall only consider evidence that is relevant to whether the person or responsible person is allowing, causing, committing, continuing, permitting or maintaining a violation of the code or other applicable state code on the date(s) specified in the administrative citation.

(d)     The person contesting the administrative citation shall be given the opportunity to testify and present witnesses and evidence concerning the administrative citation.

(e)     The failure of any recipient of an administrative citation to appear at the administrative citation hearing shall constitute a failure of such person’s rights to exhaust their administrative remedies and may be ordered to pay such fine(s) forthwith.

(f)      The administrative citation and any additional documents submitted by the officer or official shall constitute prima fascia evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents.

(g)     If the officer or official submits an additional written report concerning the administrative citation to the hearing officer for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of this report shall also be provided to the person requesting the hearing at least five days prior to the date of the hearing.

(h)     At least ten days prior to the hearing, the recipient of an administrative citation shall be provided with copies of the citation(s), report(s) and any other document(s) submitted or relied upon by the officer or official. No other discovery is permitted. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply.

(i)      The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the officer or official, and/or or the recipient of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 2008)

 

1.18.150 Failure to attend administrative hearing.
If the person or responsible person fails to attend the scheduled hearing, the hearing will proceed without the person or responsible person, and he or she will be deemed to have waived his or her right to an administrative hearing. Notwithstanding this waiver and the time limits set forth in Section 1.18.110, if service of the administrative citation is made by posting of the citation on real property within the city or state in which the person or responsible person has a legal interest, and the person or responsible person provides verifiable and substantial evidence that removal of the administrative citation from the property by a third party caused the person or responsible person’s failure to attend the scheduled hearing then the such person shall be entitled to an administrative hearing. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 2008)

 

1.18.160 Decision of administrative hearing officer.
No later than ten days after the date on which the administrative hearing concludes, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision to uphold or cancel the administrative citation. The hearing officer shall set forth the reason(s) for the decision. The decision shall be served upon the person or responsible person by the applicable method set forth in Section 1.18.070. If the hearing officer upholds the administrative citation and the fine(s) have not been deposited then the hearing officer shall specify in the decision a payment schedule for which the fine(s) are to be paid to the city or its agent. If such person fails at any point to pay the fine(s) as conditioned by the hearing officers, then the city or its agent may pursue collections of any amount due pursuant to Section 1.18.180. The hearing officer’s written decision is final, and shall notify the person or responsible person of his or her right to appeal as provided in Section 1.18.190. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 2008)

 

1.18.170 Late payment charges.
Any person who fails to pay on or before the due date any administrative fine(s) imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be liable for the payment of any applicable late payment fee set forth in Section 1.18.090(b). (Ord. 1908 § 1, 2008)

 

1.18.180 Collection of administrative fine.
(a)     The city or its agent may collect any past due administrative fine(s) or late payment fees by use of any available legal means.

(1)     The administrative citation process described in this chapter does not preclude the city from recovering any costs incurred by the city in performing its code enforcement efforts pursuant to the city code, including, but not limited to, abatement costs and re-inspection fees.

(2)     The parent or legal guardian of any person who is a minor shall be liable for any fine(s) imposed upon the minor pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Any such fine(s) may be collected from the minor, parent or guardian.

(3)     The city may refuse to issue, extend, or renew any city permit, license, or other city approval to any person, who has unpaid delinquent fine(s), interest, fees, liens or assessments due under this chapter related to the permit, license, or approval. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 2008)

 

1.18.190 Appeal of decision of administrative hearing officer.
(a)     Any person aggrieved by an administrative decision of the hearing officer may seek judicial review of the administrative hearing decision by filing an appeal with a court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with the timelines and provisions set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4. The aggrieved person filing the appeal shall be responsible for paying the statutory filing fee to the Superior Court when the appeal is filed. The person or responsible person shall serve upon the city clerk either in person or by first class mail a copy of the notice of appeal. If the person or responsible person fails to timely file a notice of appeal with the court, the hearing officer’s decision shall be deemed confirmed.

(b)     No appeal is permitted from an administrative decision regarding:

(1)     A request for preliminary administrative citation review;

(2)     An extension of the thirty calendar day correction period for building violations;

(3)     A decision that the responsible person is deemed to have abandoned the contest of the administrative citation or fine(s) due to her or his failure to appear at the administrative hearing or failure to deposit the fine.

(4)     Any appeal to the Superior Court shall require the contesting person to deposit the fine(s) list on the citation with the city or its agent prior appearing at the court hearing.

(c)     The city attorney shall forward to the Superior Court within fifteen calendar days of its request, the pertinent administrative citation documents for any case appealed to that court. If the Superior Court cancels any administrative citation, the city shall refund any fine(s) deposit made within thirty calendar days of its receipt of the court’s decision. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 2008)

 

1.18.200 Failure to pay an administrative fine.
It is unlawful for any person or responsible person to fail to pay an administrative fine in violation of this chapter. The filing of a criminal action does not preclude the city from using any other legal remedies available to gain compliance with the administrative order or provisions contained in this chapter. (Ord. 1908 § 1, 2008)

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL
Chapter 2.08 CITY MANAGER
Chapter 2.09 PERSONNEL SYSTEM
Chapter 2.13 PLANNING DIRECTOR
Chapter 2.16 COMMUNITY SERVICES DEPARTMENT
Chapter 2.18 CITY BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 2.20 DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
Chapter 2.24 BONDS OF OFFICERS
Chapter 2.28 RISK MANAGEMENT
Chapter 2.30 CLAIMS AND ACTIONS BY OTHER PUBLIC ENTITIES
Chapter 2.32 PUBLIC LIBRARY
Chapter 2.36 POLICEMEN AND FIREMEN
Chapter 2.40 PURCHASING SYSTEM
Chapter 2.44 DISPOSITION OF STOLEN OR EMBEZZLED, LOST AND ABANDONED PROPERTY
Chapter 2.48 REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
Chapter 2.50 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS FOR DISABLED INDIVIDUALS
Chapter 2.52 ELECTRONIC FILING OF CAMPAIGN DISCLOSURE
Chapter 2.54 ELECTIONS

Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL
2.04.010 Meetings.
The city council will hold its regular meeting at the hour of seven p.m., on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each month. The meetings will be held in the city council chambers in the City Hall or at such other places within the city limits of the city as the city council may, from time to time, provide. If any regularly scheduled council meeting falls upon a legal holiday, the meeting shall, without further notice, be held upon the Wednesday following the regular meeting date, which shall be the next day, at the hour of seven p.m. at the City Hall. (Ord. 1779, 2003; Ord. 1135 § 1, 1971; prior code § 2.1)

 

2.04.020 Special meetings.
Special meetings may be called at any time by the mayor or a majority of the members of the city council in compliance with the California Open Meeting Laws. (Ord. 1981 § 2, 2014)

 

2.04.030 Purpose of Sections 2.04.040 and 2.04.050.
The ordinance codified in Sections 2.04.030 through 2.04.050 is enacted pursuant to Section 36516 of the government code. (Ord. 1848 § 1, 2006)

 

2.04.040 Salaries.
Commencing April 27, 2007, each member of the council of the city shall receive, as salary, the sum of seven hundred dollars per month, which shall be payable at the same time and in the same manner as the salaries are paid to other officers and employees of the city. The salaries prescribed by this section are exclusive of any other amount payable to a member of the council as reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred by him or her in the performance of his or her official duties. (Ord.1848 § 4, 2006)

 

2.04.050 Reimbursement.
The salaries prescribed in Section 2.04.040 are and shall be exclusive of any amounts payable to each member of the council as reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred by him or her in the performance of official duties for the city. (Ord. 998 § 3, 1966)

 

2.04.060 Application.
The provisions of this code apply to the planning commission, community services commission and to all other commissions and/or citizen advisory boards whose members are appointed by the city council, or by the mayor with consent of the city council. Notwithstanding the fixed terms of office specified in this code, members of the commissions and citizen advisory boards do and shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. Any commissioner and citizen advisory board member may be removed at any time from the commission and/or citizen advisory board by a majority vote of the council. Notwithstanding the expiration date of a term of a member of a commission or citizen advisory board, each commissioner/citizen advisory board member, with or without cause, may be removed as a member of the commission/citizen advisory board by order of the city council. (Ord. 2013 § 1, 2017; Ord. 1960 § 2, 2012; Ord. 1731 § 1, 2001)

 

2.04.070 By-district electoral system.
Pursuant to California Government Code Section 34886, as it may be amended, members of the city council shall be elected on a by-district basis from five single-member council districts. The city’s by-district electoral system shall be conducted in accordance with California Government Code Section 34871, as it may be amended. (Ord. 2022 § 2, 2017)

 

2.04.080 Establishment of city council electoral districts.
(a)     Pursuant to Section 2.04.070 of this chapter, members of the city council shall be elected on a by-district basis, as that term is defined in California Government Code Section 34871, as it may be amended, from the five council districts described as follows, which shall continue in effect until they are amended or repealed in accordance with law:

(1)     Council District 1 shall comprise all that portion of the city reflected on Attachment 1.

(2)     Council District 2 shall comprise all that portion of the city reflected on Attachment 1.

(3)     Council District 3 shall comprise all that portion of the city reflected on Attachment 1.

(4)     Council District 4 shall comprise all that portion of the city reflected on Attachment 1.

(5)     Council District 5 shall comprise all that portion of the city reflected on Attachment 1.

A map showing the districts described in this chapter is attached hereto as Attachment 1 and incorporated herein by reference.

(b)     Members of the city council shall be elected in the electoral districts established by this section and subsequently reapportioned pursuant to applicable state and federal law.

(c)     The member of the city council elected to represent the city must reside in that district and be a registered voter in that district, and any candidate for city council must live in, and be a registered voter in, the district in which he or she seeks election at the time nomination papers are issued, pursuant to California Government Code Section 34882 as it may be amended, and Elections Code Section 10227 as it may be amended. Termination of residency in a district by a member of the city council shall create an immediate vacancy for that council district unless a substitute residence within the district is established within thirty days after the termination of residency.

(d)     Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, and consistent with the requirements of California Government Code Section 36512, the members of the city council in office at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter takes effect shall continue in office until the expiration of the full term to which he or she was elected and until his or her successor is qualified. At the end of the term of each member of the city council, that member of the city council’s successor shall be elected on a by-district basis in the districts established in this section and as provided in Section 2.04.090 of this chapter. (Ord. 2022 § 2, 2017)

 

2.04.090 Commencement of district elections.
Commencing with the general municipal election in March of 2020 and thereafter, the voters in Districts 2, 3 and 5 shall elect members of the city council by district for full four-year terms. At the general municipal election in 2022 and thereafter, the voters in Districts 1 and 4 shall elect members of the city council by district for full four-year terms. (Ord. 2029 § 4, 2018)

 

2.04.100 Adjustment of boundaries.
Pursuant to Elections Code Section 21601, as it may be amended, the city council shall adjust the boundaries of any or all of the districts following each decennial federal census. Using the census as a basis, the city council shall adjust the boundaries so that the districts shall be as nearly equal in population as practicable and in compliance with all applicable provisions of law. Any adjustment of district boundaries shall be made by ordinance adopted by the city council before the first day of November of the year following the year in which each decennial federal census is taken. Prior to the public hearing approving the adjustment of the district boundaries, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed district boundaries as required by Election Code Section 21607 as it may be amended.

At the time of any annexation of territory to the city, the city council shall designate, by resolution adopted by a vote of at least a majority of the city council, the contiguous district to which the annexed territory shall be a part and shall amend the district boundaries if necessary in accordance with Election Code Section 21603, as it may be amended. (Ord. 2022 § 2, 2017)

Chapter 2.08 CITY MANAGER
2.08.010 Office created.
The office of the city manager is created and established. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council wholly on the basis of his or her administrative and executive ability and qualifications, and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the city council. (Ord. 1762 § 2, 2002)

 

2.08.020 Residency.
Residence in the city at the time of appointment of a city manager shall not be required as a condition of the appointment, but, no person shall hold the office of city manager unless such person resides within the regulated response time as prescribed by city council. (Ord. 1762 § 2, 2002)

 

2.08.030 Councilmember eligibility for office.
No person elected as a councilmember of the city shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed after such councilmember shall have ceased to be a member of the city council. (Ord. 1762 § 2, 2002)

 

2.08.040 Surety bond.
The city manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the city council in such sum as may be determined by the city council and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the city manager as herein prescribed. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the city. (Ord. 1762 § 2, 2002)

 

2.08.050 Manager pro tem.
The city manager shall appoint, subject to the approval of the city council, one of the other officers or department heads of the city to serve as manager pro tem during any temporary absence or disability of the city manager. In case of the absence or disability of the city manager, and his or her failure to so appoint a manager pro tem, the city council may designate some qualified city employee to perform the duties of the city manager during the period of absence or disability of the city manager; subject, however, to such person furnishing a corporate surety bond conditioned upon faithful performance of the duties required to be performed, as set forth in Section 2.08.040 hereof. (Ord. 1762 § 2, 2002)

 

2.08.060 Compensation.
Subject to the limitations imposed by Assembly Bill No. 1344, the city manager shall receive such compensation and expense allowances as the city council shall from time to time determine and fix by contract, and such compensation and expenses shall, to the extent not prohibited by Assembly Bill No. 1344, be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the city council shall designate.

Subject to the terms and conditions of any contract of employment, the city manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him or her in the performance of his or her duties or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the city under direction of the city council. Reimbursement shall only be made, however, when a verified itemized claim, setting forth the sums expended for such business for which reimbursement is requested, has been presented to the mayor for approval. (Ord. 2034 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1762 § 2, 2002)

 

2.08.070 Powers and duties.
The city manager is the administrative head of the government of the city, under the direction and control of the city council except as otherwise provided in this chapter. He or she shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his or her control. In addition to his or her general powers as administrative head and, not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his or her duty and he or she shall have all the powers set forth in the following subsections:

(1)     Law Enforcement. It is the duty of the city manager to enforce all laws and ordinances of the city and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully observed;

(2)     Authority Over Employees. It is the duty of the city manager, and he or she shall have the authority to control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under his or her jurisdiction through their department heads;

(3)     Power of Appointment, Etc. It is the duty of the city manager to appoint, remove, promote and demote any and all officers and employees of the city except the city attorney. Appointment of department heads, including the city clerk and city treasurer, shall be subject to ratification by the city council;

(4)     Reorganization of Offices, Etc. It is the duty and responsibility of the city manager to recommend to the city council such reorganization of offices, positions, departments or units under his or her direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city’s business;

(5)     Ordinances. It is the duty of the city manager to recommend to the city council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he or she deems necessary or expedient;

(6)     Attendance at Council Meetings. It is the duty of the city manager to attend all meetings of the city council unless excused therefrom, except when his or her removal is under consideration;

(7)     Financial Reports. It is the duty of the city manager to keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the city;

(8)     Budget. It shall be the duty of the city manager to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the city council for its approval;

(9)     Purchasing Agent. It shall be the duty of the city manager and he or she shall be responsible for the purchase of all supplies for all of the departments or divisions of the city. No expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the city council except on report and approval of the city manager;

(10)   Investigations. It is the duty of the city manager to make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof, and of any contract or of the proper performance of any obligation of the city;

(11)   Public Utilities—Franchises. It is the duty of the city manager to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the city, and to see that all franchise permits granted by the city are faithfully performed and observed;

(12)   Public Buildings. It is the duty of the city manager to exercise control over all public buildings, public parks and all other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the city council;

(13)   Hours of Employment. It is the duty of the city manager to devote his or her entire working time to the duties of his or her office in the interests of the city, except on permission of the city council by action thereof;

(14)   Additional Duties. It is the duty of the city manager to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him or her from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other action of the city council;

(15)   Council-Manager Relations. The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry; and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager. The city manager shall take his or her orders and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly held meeting of the city council, and no individual councilman shall give any orders, or instructions to the city manager. Nothing in this section, however, shall prevent any member of the city council from discussing with the city manager any matter of general public interest or concern relative to the proper operations of the city or of the needs, problems, or projects thereof;

(16)   Departmental Cooperation. It is the duty of all subordinate officers as well as the city treasurer and city attorney to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by law and by the ordinances of the city;

(17)   Attendance at Commission Meetings. The city manager may attend any and all meetings of any commissions, boards or committees created by the city council upon his or her own volition or upon direction of the city council. At such meetings which the city manager attends, he or she shall be heard by such commissions, boards or committees as to all matters upon which he or she wishes to address the members thereof, and he or she shall inform the members as to the status of any matter being considered by the city council, and he or she shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, boards or committees appointed by the city council;

(18)   To prescribe administrative policies and procedures providing direction to city employees for the courteous and efficient operation of all offices of the city under the direction and control of the city manager;

(19)   To prepare the meeting agendas for the council meetings and, in preparing such agendas, to annotate in concise language, each agenda item, which, in the manager’s judgment, is of sufficient importance to warrant additional explanatory material for the purpose of clarification of such item to the council;

(20)   To keep a personnel file on all city employees, avoiding duplication, whenever it is practical to do so. (Ord. 1762 § 2, 2002)

 

2.08.080 Removal from office.
The removal of the city manager shall be only upon a majority vote of the entire city council seated in a regular city council meeting. (Ord. 2034 § 2, 2018; Ord. 1762 § 2, 2002)

Chapter 2.09 PERSONNEL SYSTEM
2.09.010 Purpose and intent.
The intent and purpose of this chapter is to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters, to attract to municipal service the best and most competent persons available, to assure that appointments and promotions of employees will be based on merit and fitness, and to provide a reasonable degree of security for qualified employees, the following system is adopted. (Ord. 1763 § 2, 2002)

 

2.09.020 Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter, the position classification and compensation resolution and personnel rules shall apply to all offices, employments and positions in the city service except the following:

(1)     Elected officials;

(2)     Members of appointive boards, commissions, and committees;

(3)     City manager;

(4)     City attorney;

(5)     Departments heads, including city clerk and city treasurer, appointed after November 1, 2002;

(6)     Employees specifically designated as contract employees in the city’s classification plan;

(7)     Limited service (part-time) personnel;

(8)     Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional or technical services for a definite period of time;

(9)     Volunteer personnel who receive no regular compensation from the city. (Ord. 1763 § 2, 2002)

 

2.09.030 Personnel officer.
The city manager shall be the personnel officer. The city manager may delegate any of the powers and duties conferred upon him or her as personnel officer under this chapter to any other officer or employee as qualified by education and/or experience to perform such duties. The personnel officer, or his or her designee, shall administer the affirmative action plan, position classification and compensation resolution, employer-employee relations resolution, personnel rules, and all other city personnel programs. (Ord. 1763 § 2, 2002)

 

2.09.040 Duties of personnel officer.
The personnel officer shall:

(1)     Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules, regulations, policies and procedures;

(2)     Prepare and recommend to the city council for adoption personnel rules, regulations, policies and procedures and revisions/amendments to such rules, regulations, policies and procedures. Personnel rules shall be adopted by resolution of city council;

(3)     Prepare, or cause to be prepared, a position classification and salary plan governing all positions in the classified service and revisions/amendments thereto. The classifications and salary plan and any revisions thereto shall not be effective until approved by resolution of the city council;

(4)     Serve as municipal employee relations officer to meet and confer in good faith as required by Section 3500 et seq., California Government Code and to perform related employee relations tasks. (Ord. 1763 § 2, 2002)

 

2.09.050 Adoption and amendment of rules.
Rules, regulations, policies and procedures governing the personnel system shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. Such rules, regulations, policies and procedures shall include, but are not limited to:

(1)     Preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of a position classification plan governing all positions in the competitive service, including employment standards and qualifications for each class;

(2)     Preparation, revision and administration of a compensation plan directly correlated with the position classification plan, providing a rate or range of pay for each class;

(3)     The public announcement of vacancies and examinations and the acceptance of applications for employment;

(4)     Preparation and conduct of examinations and the establishment and use of resulting employment lists containing the names of persons eligible for appointment;

(5)     Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists, and the making of provisional and emergency appointments;

(6)     Transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action and layoff of employees in the competitive service;

(7)     Separation of employees from city service;

(8)     Standardization of hours of work, attendance and leave regulations, working conditions, and the development of employee morale, welfare and training;

(9)     The maintenance and use of necessary records and forms. (Ord. 1763 § 2, 2002)

 

2.09.060 Appointing authority.
The appointing authority shall be the city council in the case of appointments to the positions of city manager and city attorney and shall be the city manager or designee for all other positions, including that of city clerk and city treasurer.  Appointment of department heads, including the city clerk and city treasurer, shall be subject to ratification by the city council.

The city manager is hereby authorized to enter into an employment contract defining the wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment with department heads appointed and with those employees specifically designated as contract employees in the city’s classification plan as long as those terms’ and/or conditions’ parameters are consistent with city council-adopted salary and benefit schedules.  Any terms and/or conditions not contained within an already adopted salary and benefit schedule shall require city council approval at a public meeting. (Ord. 1941 § 2, 2010; Ord. 1763 § 2, 2002)

 

2.09.070 Authority to contract for special services.
The city manager may consider and make recommendations to the city council regarding the extent to which the city should contract for the performance of technical services in connection with the establishment or operation of the personnel system. The city council may authorize the city manager to contract with any qualified person or agency for the performance of all or any of the following responsibilities and duties imposed by this chapter:

(1)     The preparation of personnel rules, regulations, policies and procedures and subsequent revisions and amendments thereto;

(2)     The preparation of a position classification plan, and subsequent revisions and amendments thereto;

(3)     The preparation of a plan of compensation, and subsequent revisions and amendments thereto;

(4)     The preparation, conduct and grading of competitive tests;

(5)     Special and technical services of advisory or informational character on matters relating to personnel information;

(6)     Special and technical services of advisory or informational character on matters relating to personnel information, legal consultation concerning personnel matters, personnel litigation or employee relations. (Ord. 1763 § 2, 2002)

 

2.09.080 Criminal conduct.
Except as otherwise hereinafter provided, no person convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude shall be eligible for employment by the city; provided, however, that the appointing authority may disregard such conviction if it finds and determines that mitigating circumstances exist. Mitigating circumstances include, but are not limited to, evidence of rehabilitation, length of time elapsed since conviction, the age of the person at the time of conviction or the fact that the classification applied for is unrelated to such conviction.

The city manager, personnel director, chief of police, heads of other city departments, city attorney and each appointing authority of the city are hereby authorized to have access to the “State Summary Criminal History Information” as provided for in Section 11105, California Penal Code. (Ord. 1763 § 2, 2002)

 

2.09.090 Political activity.
The political activities of city employees shall conform to applicable provisions of state law including Section 3201 et seq., California Government Code and to any local provision adopted pursuant to state law. (Ord. 1763 § 2, 2002)

 

2.09.100 Conflicts.
Whenever the provisions of this chapter are in conflict with any other provisions of this code, this chapter shall prevail. (Ord. 1763 § 2, 2002)

Chapter 2.13 PLANNING DIRECTOR
2.13.010 Appointment of director.
The city manager shall appoint a director of planning to administer the activities of the planning department. Such appointment shall be subject to ratification by the city council. (Ord. 1764, 2002; Ord. 1077 § 1, 1968)

 

2.13.020 Duties.
The director of planning shall:

(1)     Administer the land use and subdivision regulations of the city;

(2)     Serve as secretary to the planning commission;

(3)     Supervise the operations of the planning department;

(4)     Recommend to the city manager the employment of required personnel, and supervise them in the performance of their various duties;

(5)     Cooperate with the city manager, the planning commission, and other officials of the city and other governmental bodies in the conduct of studies and examination of available planning techniques for the benefit of the residents of the city. (Ord. 1077 § 1, 1968)

Chapter 2.16 COMMUNITY SERVICES DEPARTMENT
2.16.010 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply except where the context clearly denotes another meaning:

(a)     “Council” means the city council of Glendora.

(b)     “Commission” means the community services commission of the city, as established in Chapter 2.18.

(c)     “School district” means any public school district, which may contract with the city for recreational services. (Ord. 2036 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1689 § 2, 1998)

 

2.16.020 Appointment of director.
The city manager shall appoint a director of community services to administer the activities of the community services department. Such appointment shall be subject to ratification by the city council. (Ord. 2036 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1765, 2002; Ord. 1689 § 2, 1998)

 

2.16.030 Duties of director.
The director of community services shall:

(a)     Recommend to the city manager the employment of required personnel, such as assistants, supervisors, leaders, clerical and park maintenance employees in accordance with city personnel practices and supervise them in the performance of their various duties;

(b)     Administer, operate and maintain existing recreation, wilderness, human service areas, facilities and public transportation and plan for the acquisition, development and operation of the proposed facilities in accordance with the policies approved by the commission and council;

(c)     Inform the general public of the services and facilities being provided by the community services department;

(d)     Solicit suggestions from the general public to improve or increase the effectiveness of the services;

(e)     Cooperate with governmental and voluntary organizations and agencies in the furtherance of recreation, wilderness, facilities, human service, public transportation opportunities;

(f)      Prepare reports on community services issues;

(g)     Prepare reports on park, golf course, wilderness, tree, public transportation and building maintenance issues;

(h)     Provide, upon request, assistance of a technical nature to community agencies and organizations having concerns relating to recreation, public transportation, human service, trees, wilderness areas, trails, facilities and programs;

(i)      Counsel with officials of public and private organizations and interested groups concerning community recreation and human service activities and assist them in the promotion of community services;

(j)      Conduct studies of local conditions and needs for community services;

(k)     Cooperate with the commission in the development of long range plans embodying the improvement of existing community service areas, and the acquisition and development of additional areas and facilities commensurate with the community needs of the present and the future;

(l)      Serve as ex-officio member of the community services commission, provide a recording secretary to the commission and shall make such reports to the commission or to the council as shall be required;

(m)    Recruit, hire and train recreation, human service, public transportation and park maintenance personnel;

(n)     Supervise the activities of the community services department. (Ord. 2036 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1689 § 2, 1998)

 

2.16.040 Community services fund—Establishment.
There is created a fund to be known as the community services fund into which all funds levied, collected or derived for the purposes of recreation, public transportation, human services, trees, golf course, park maintenance, development and improvement by the city shall be deposited. (Ord. 2036 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1689 § 2, 1998)

 

2.16.050 Expenditures from fund.
(a)     Expenditures shall be made from the community services fund in accordance with the budget and appropriations approved by the council in accordance with legal requirements and rules established thereafter.

(b)     In a jointly sponsored community services program the council shall appropriate such moneys as are required to meet its contracted share of the budget as is determined by joint contractual agreement of the council, and other agencies joining in the program. (Ord. 2036 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1689 § 2, 1998)

 

2.16.060 Department—Establishment.
The city establishes a department of community services. (Ord. 2036 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1689 § 2, 1998)

 

2.16.070 Department functions.
The functions of the community services department shall be:

(a)     To provide opportunities for wholesome year round public recreation and community services for all age groups;

(b)     To develop and maintain attractive and functional park, recreation areas and facilities for the residents of the service area. (Ord. 2036 § 2, 2019; Ord. 1689 § 2, 1998)

Chapter 2.18 CITY BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
2.18.010 Establishment of city boards and commissions.
The following commissions are hereby created and established:

(a)     The planning commission; and

(b)     The community services commission; and

(c)     The water commission; and

(d)     The library board of trustees; and

(e)     Glendora Village Business District advisory board. (Ord. 2036 § 3, 2019)

 

2.18.020 Purpose and duties of each city board and commission.
(a)     Planning Commission.

(1)     A planning commission is necessary to insure and enforce the city’s general plan, zoning code, development guidelines, and other laws, as well as goals and policies for directing and managing future growth and development of real properties located within the city.

(2)     The planning commission, and its members, shall have all of the rights, privileges, powers and duties as specified in the Planning and Zoning Law (Title 7 California Government Code) which is incorporated and made a part hereof as if the same were set forth in full insofar as the same related to general law cities, and all of the rights, privileges, powers and duties provided for herein are granted to the said planning commission, the council, the members thereof and city officials, and all of the duties required to be performed therein shall be so done and performed within the time and as provided for herein. In the event, however, that any of the provisions of this chapter shall be in conflict with provisions of said aforementioned law, in such case the provisions of said law shall prevail.

(b)     Community Services Commission.

(1)     The duties of the community services commission shall be to act in an advisory capacity to the council and the director of community services in all matters pertaining to park maintenance; recreation program; park development; and to cooperate with other governmental agencies and civic groups in the advancement of sound recreation and programming.

(2)     With respect to parks, the community services commission shall:

(A)    Advise in the development of parks and facilities; and

(B)    Recommend the adoption of standards on areas and facilities, programs, and financial support; and

(C)    Advise in long range capital improvements; and

(D)    Advise in the preparation of such written agreements between the council and participating school districts as are necessary to conduct a coordinated recreation service in the community; and

(E)     May advise in planting of all street and parkway trees.

(3)     With respect to recreation, human services, transportation and wilderness areas, the community services commission shall:

(A)    Review, revise and recommend policies on recreation services for approval by the council and all other participating community agencies; and

(B)    Make periodic inventories of recreation services that exist or may be needed, interpret the needs of the public to the director of community services and council; and

(C)    Aid in coordinating the community services with the program of other governmental agencies and voluntary organizations; and

(D)    May advise in the preparation of the annual recreation program and budget.

(c)     Water Commission.

(1)     The purpose of the water commission is to advise the city council on policy matters relating to the operation of the city’s water system, excluding daily operations. The commission shall advise and recommend to the city council policies and programs related to:

(A)    Developing and maintaining a financial plan for the water division;

(B)    Implementing conservation efforts;

(C)    Evaluating the effectiveness of the water system;

(D)    Establishing fees, rates and charges, including, but not limited to, maintaining sufficient funding to pay for all overhead and maintenance, administrative, capital improvement and debt service costs;

(E)     Establishing appropriate criteria used to establish the level of funds needed to maintain the water system, including, but not limited to, maintaining sufficient funding to pay for all overhead and maintenance, administrative, capital improvement and debt service costs;

(F)     Reviewing such other problems and policy matters which may arise from time to time with regard to the operation and maintenance of the water system and the water division as identified by the city council or the city manager.

(2)     The water rate commission shall hold a public hearing on each review of the fees, rates and charges. At least ten calendar days prior to the public hearing, notice of the date, time and place of the public hearing, and a general explanation of the matter to be considered shall be given in the following manner: Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.

(d)     Library Board of Trustees. The library board of trustees shall have the powers and duties prescribed by Section 18900 et seq., of the California Education Code, as may be amended from time to time.

(e)     Glendora Village Business District Advisory Board.

(1)     The Business District advisory board shall be an advisory board to the city council.

(2)     The Business District advisory board may make recommendations to the city council on the operation and extent of the Glendora Village Business District area, as established by Chapter 5.40 of the Glendora Municipal Code, and the methods and ways in which the revenue derived from the charges, assessments, and contributions imposed or authorized by Chapter 5.40 might be used within the scope of the purposes set forth in Section 5.40.020.

(3)     The Business District advisory board shall perform such other duties as the city council may designate. (Ord. 2036 § 3, 2019)

 

2.18.030 Membership.
(a)     Each board and commission established by this chapter shall be comprised of five voting members appointed by the city council, as set forth in Section 2.18.050.

(b)     With respect to the community services commission, each public school district, which may contract with the city for recreational community services, may nominate one ex-officio member in an advisory capacity. Ex-officio members shall not have any vote. (Ord. 2036 § 3, 2019)

 

2.18.040 Eligibility.
(a)     The following requirements for eligibility shall apply to all boards and commissions established by this chapter except as designated below:

(1)     Each member is required to be a resident of the city of Glendora, except for the Business District advisory board; and

(2)     Each member is required to be at least eighteen years old; and

(3)     Each member shall be a registered voter; and

(4)     No person who holds office in the city government or who is employed by the city shall be appointed to any board or commission; and

(5)     During the term of appointment, if such person ceases to reside within the city, the appointment of such person shall be deemed to have been terminated. This provision shall not apply to the Business District advisory board.

(b)     The following additional eligibility requirements shall apply with respect to the following boards and commissions:

(1)     With respect to the water commission, each member shall also be a customer of the city’s water division of the public works department.

(2)     With respect to the Business District advisory board, each member shall also:

(A)    Operate a bona fide business located within the Glendora Village Business District which is subject to charges and assessments imposed by Chapter 5.40 of the Glendora Municipal Code; and

(B)    Be current with the payment of charges and assessments imposed by Chapter 5.40 of the Glendora Municipal Code as a condition of appointment and continued membership on the board; and

(C)    During the term of appointment, if such person ceases to operate a bona fide business located within the Glendora Village Business District, the appointment of such person shall be deemed to have been terminated. (Ord. 2036 § 3, 2019)

 

2.18.050 Appointment.
(a)     Members of each board and commission shall be appointed by a majority vote of the city council and shall serve at the pleasure thereof, except as follows:

(1)     With respect to the library board of trustees, each member shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council as required by state law.

(b)     Pursuant to this code and Government Code Sections 40605, 54974 and 65100 through 65101, the following procedures shall be employed in filling vacancies on the boards and commissions:

(1)     The city clerk shall prepare a list of all regular and ongoing citizen boards and commissions and committees, which are appointed by the city council, on or before December 31st of each year, as provided for in the Maddy Act.

(2)     If vacancies occur otherwise than by expiration of the term, the vacancy shall be filled by appointment to the unexpired term in the same fashion as the original appointment of members.

(3)     Whenever a vacancy occurs, the city clerk shall post notice. Final appointment shall not be made by the city council for at least ten days after the posting of notice.

(c)     Notwithstanding subsection (b) of this section, the city council may, if it finds that an emergency exists, fill the unscheduled vacancy immediately. Such emergency appointments shall be made by the majority of the city council. A person appointed to fill the vacancy shall serve only on an acting basis until the final appointment is made pursuant to this section.

(d)     Members of any board or commission shall notify the city clerk of their declared vacancy pursuant to the provisions of this code or state law. The city clerk shall in turn advise the city council of such notifications.

(e)     The city council may provide by resolution any additional procedures necessary for appointments. (Ord. 2036 § 3, 2019)

 

2.18.060 Conditions of appointment.
(a)     All board and commission members shall comply with the following:

(1)     All members of boards and commissions shall take an oath of office administered by the city clerk.

(2)     All members shall file with the city clerk a statement of economic interest set forth by the Fair Political Practices Commission upon assuming office, leaving office, and on an annual basis to the extent of the Glendora conflict of interest code defined for each board and commission.

(3)     All members shall complete ethics training within sixty days upon assuming office and every two years thereafter as per Government Code Section 53235, as amended.

(b)     If a board member fails to comply with the conditions of appointment set forth in subsection (a) above, the city clerk shall provide written notice of the deficiency to that board member and a time period to achieve compliance. If the board or commission member fails to timely comply with the city clerk’s written notice, the board or commission member shall not be permitted to attend any further meetings as a voting member with said meetings being deemed unexcused absences, as discussed in Section 2.18.100. (Ord. 2036 § 3, 2019)

 

2.18.070 Term of office.
(a)     The following terms of office shall apply:

(1)     For the library board of trustees, each appointment shall be for a term of three years.

(2)     For all other boards and commissions, each appointment shall be for a term of four years.

(b)     Each appointment shall expire June 30th of the year of expiration for the individual term. However, after the expiration of a term, a member may continue to serve until the member’s successor is appointed by the city council and qualifies and, in such case that the successor’s term does not commence on July 1st, the successor shall not be entitled to any additional time to be added to his or her term.

(c)     Staggering of Terms.

(1)     For the library board of trustees, three board member terms which will expire on June 30, 2019, and two terms which will expire on June 30, 2021. The terms scheduled to expire on June 30, 2019 are designated as offices one, four and five. The terms scheduled to expire on June 30, 2021 are designated as offices two and three. Thereafter, the succeeding terms shall be three years for each office.

(2)     For Business Improvement District (BID) advisory board, three commissioner terms will expire on June 30, 2019, and two terms which will expire on June 30, 2021. The terms scheduled to expire on June 30, 2019 are designated as offices one, two and three. The terms scheduled to expire on June 30, 2021 are designated as offices four and five. Thereafter, the succeeding terms shall be four years for each office.

(3)     For community services commission, three commissioner terms will expire on June 30, 2019, and two terms which will expire on June 30, 2021. The terms scheduled to expire on June 30, 2019 are designated as offices three, four and five. The terms scheduled to expire on June 30, 2021 are designated as offices one and two. Thereafter, the succeeding terms shall be four years for each office.

(4)     For planning commission, three commissioner terms will expire on June 30, 2019, and two terms which will expire on June 30, 2021. The terms scheduled to expire on June 30, 2019 are designated as offices one, two and three. The terms scheduled to expire on June 30, 2021 are designated as offices four and five. Thereafter, the succeeding terms shall be four years for each office.

(5)     For water commission, two commissioner terms will expire on June 30, 2019, and three terms which will expire on June 30, 2021. The terms scheduled to expire on June 30, 2019 are designated as offices one and two. The terms scheduled to expire on June 30, 2021 are designated as offices three, four and five. Thereafter, the succeeding terms shall be four years for each office. (Ord. 2036 § 3, 2019)

 

2.18.080 Term limitations.
(a)     No member shall serve more than two consecutive full terms in office, calculated from July 1st of one year through June 30th of the following year, which is the standard full term of office established in Section 2.18.070.

(b)     For the purposes of this section, no portion of a full term that is less than a full term will be counted in calculating the term limitation.

(c)     Any person who is required to vacate office due to the application of a term limitation shall not be eligible to serve again until the expiration of at least two years. The intent of this subsection is to provide at least a two-year break in service on each board or commission.

(d)     The term limitations established by this section shall apply prospectively only to those terms of office which commence on or after July 1, 2019. (Ord. 2036 § 3, 2019)

 

2.18.090 Removal.
Any member of any board or commission may be removed at any time, with or without cause, by a majority vote of the entire city council. No prior notice needs to be given to any commissioner that the city council intends to take such action nor does the city council need to provide any statement of its reasons for taking such action. The city council may remove any commissioner for inadequate attendance in accordance with Section 2.18.100. (Ord. 2036 § 3, 2019)

 

2.18.100 Vacation of position due to multiple absences.
(a)     It shall be the obligation of board and commission members to attend all meetings, whether regular or special, except for good cause such as illness, family emergency, or schedule conflicts.

(b)     Attendance records for each board and commission meeting shall be prepared by the staff liaison for the board or commission and submitted to the city clerk after each meeting.

(c)     If a board or commission member has three consecutive unexcused absences, or three unexcused absences during a calendar year, the position shall automatically be vacated.

(d)     If a board or commission member knows he or she will be unable to attend a meeting of the board or commission, the member must notify the chair of the board or commission or the staff member assigned to the board or commission prior to the time established for commencement of the meeting. The member must explain his or her reasons for being absent. At the beginning of the board or commission meeting, the chair shall inform the commission of the reason for the absence of any commissioner, and the commission shall determine whether such absence stems from good cause and whether such absence is excused or unexcused.

(e)     The following circumstances shall automatically be deemed an unexcused absence:

(1)     Failure by any board or commission member to notify the chair of the board or commission or the staff member assigned to the board or commission prior to the time established for commencement of the meeting of the member’s absence.

(2)     Late arrival shall be deemed an unexcused absence except that, in the event that any board or commission member arrives at a meeting after the board or commission determines that the member’s absence is unexcused, the member may give his or her reasons for being late and the board or commission may then rescind its prior action and find such absence to be excused.

(3)     Failure to satisfy conditions of appointment in accordance with the process set forth in subsection (b) of Section 2.18.060.

(f)      A board or commission member who misses any regular commission meeting due to an unexcused absence, shall not be entitled to receive that portion of their regular monthly salary, if any, for such meeting, except that if any additional regular or special meeting is held that month and the commissioner attends such meeting, then the commissioner shall be entitled to their regular monthly salary, without deduction. (Ord. 2036 § 3, 2019)

 

2.18.110 Officers.
(a)     A chairperson for each board and commission shall be elected by the membership of that board or commission on an annual basis once annual vacancies have been filled, if applicable. A vice-chair may be elected to fill in for the chair when needed.

(b)     A chairperson may serve successive terms.

(c)     Duties of Chairperson.

(1)     The chairperson shall preside at all regular and special meetings of the board or commission.

(2)     The chair shall perform other such duties as established by this chapter, as designated by the majority of the board or commission and as are normally incident to such office.

(3)     The chairperson shall have the power to administer oaths and affirmations to any person appearing during the course of an investigation or hearing. (Ord. 2036 § 3, 2019)

 

2.18.120 Meetings.
The city council, by resolution thereof and which may be amended from time to time, shall establish a standing hour, day of the month, and location for the regular meeting, or meetings, of all boards and commissions. Any meeting scheduled for any time other than the standing date and time shall be considered a special meeting. (Ord. 2036 § 3, 2019)

 

2.18.130 Rules and regulations.
(a)     All commissions established by this chapter are declared to be subject to the provisions of the Ralph M. Brown Act contained in the California Government Code or any amendments thereto, adhering to open meetings with public comment. In so doing:

(1)     All matters are discussed and acted on in an open forum meeting which includes access to the meeting, except as provided for closed session matters.

(2)     All meetings shall allow the public to speak on any agenda item.

(3)     All agendas shall be posted in accordance with the Brown Act, seventy-two hours prior to a regular meeting on the city’s physical bulletin board for the official posting.

(4)     Only items listed on the agenda shall be discussed at the meeting. All new topics identified may be placed on a future agenda.

(b)     Members may adopt by-laws or other such rules and regulations of procedures for conducting its meetings, including setting the term for chairperson, not to be inconsistent with the provisions of the Ralph M. Brown Act.

(c)     A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting the business of the commission.

(d)     Additional rules and regulations may be adopted by resolution of either the city council or any of the respective commissions. (Ord. 2036 § 3, 2019)

 

2.18.140 Staff support.
The city manager shall provide staff support to include the facilitation of meetings, preparation and distribution of the agenda and minutes, for each board and commission to carry out its duties and powers; provided, however, that the commission shall not give additional direction to staff without the approval by the city manager. (Ord. 2036 § 3, 2019)

 

2.18.150 Compensation.
(a)     Members of each board and commission may be paid such compensation that the city council may provide by resolution.

(b)     Any board or commission member who misses any regular commission shall not be entitled to receive that portion of their regular monthly compensation, if any, for such meeting, except that if any additional regular or special meeting is held that month and the commissioner attends such meeting, then the commissioner shall be entitled to their regular monthly salary, without deduction. (Ord. 2036 § 3, 2019)

Chapter 2.20 DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
2.20.010 Creation.
In order to establish a central area for the uniform processing and development of all fiscal and budgetary functions, there is established a department of finance. (Prior code § 2.72)

 

2.20.020 Duties and responsibilities.
The department of finance shall be vested and charged with the following duties and responsibilities:

(1)     Maintain and operate the general accounting system of the city and of each of the respective divisions and services thereof;

(2)     Perform such accounting functions and duties in accordance with the latest and most modern accounting methods as the science of accounting progresses;

(3)     Keep and maintain, or to prescribe and require the keeping and maintaining of inventory records of municipal properties necessary in accordance with modern municipal accounting practices;

(4)     Assume, maintain and perform all functions and duties relating to the administration of taxes, licenses and permit fees levied or charged by the city, and of the collection thereof;

(5)     Assume and perform all municipal functions and duties relating to the preparation, auditing, presenting and disbursement of claims and demands against the city, including payrolls;

(6)     Assist in the purchase of all supplies, goods, wares, merchandise, equipment and material which may be required by the city;

(7)     Assist in the preparation of the annual budget and in the administration thereof. (Prior code § 2.73)

 

2.20.030 Departmental reports.
The department of finance shall prepare and present to the city council in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the city, the following reports:

(1)     A quarterly, or more frequently as may be desired, statement of all receipts, disbursements and balances of the city;

(2)     An annual statement or report of the financial condition of the city;

(3)     Such other financial reports as may be required. (Prior code § 2.74)

 

2.20.040 Additional duties.
The department of finance shall perform such additional duties and functions as may be hereafter prescribed or required by the city council. (Prior code § 2.75)

 

2.20.050 Director—Duties.
The director of finance shall:

(1)     Supervise the department of finance;

(2)     Cooperate with the city treasurer and other officials of the city in establishing and maintaining sufficient and satisfactory procedures and controls over municipal revenues and expenditures in all departments, divisions and services of the city in accordance with modern municipal accounting practice. (Prior code § 2.76)

 

2.20.060 Financial and accounting duties of city clerk transferred.
In accordance with the provisions of Sections 40805.5 and 37209 of the government code, the financial and accounting duties imposed upon the city clerk under Sections 40802 through 40805 of the government code are hereby transferred to the director of finance. (Prior code § 2.77)

 

2.20.070 Appointment of director.
The city manager shall appoint a director of finance to administer the activities of the finance department. Such appointment shall be subject to ratification by the city council. (Ord. 1766, 2002; prior code § 2.78)

Chapter 2.24 BONDS OF OFFICERS
2.24.010 Schedule of bonds.
The following schedule of official bonds is hereby adopted:

 

Schedule of Official Bonds

 

The following officers shall give separate and individual bonds in the amounts hereinafter specified:

 

 

(a)     Director of finance

$10,000.00

(b)     City treasurer

$20,000.00

 

All of the other officers, employees and agents of the city shall be covered by a master official bond or other form of master bond and the amount of the penal sum of such master official bond or other form of master bond shall be the sum of ten thousand dollars as to each loss. (Prior code § 2.3)

 

2.24.020 Form—Payment of premiums.
All of the bonds required by Section 2.24.010 shall be in the manner and form as provided in Sections 36518 to 36521 of the government code of the state and the premiums therefor shall be paid by the city. (Prior code § 2.4)

Chapter 2.28 RISK MANAGEMENT
2.28.010 Adoption of risk management programs.
In order to establish efficient procedures to ensure the safety of the public and city employees and to protect the city from loss and to secure for the city insurance coverage at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, a risk management program is adopted. (Ord. 1590 § 2, 1991)

 

2.28.020 Risk manager designated.
The finance director is designated to be the risk manager; the finance director or the finance director’s designee shall perform the duties and exercise the authority of the risk manager. (Ord. 1590 § 2, 1991)

 

2.28.030 Duties and authority of the risk manager.
The finance director may combine the duties of the risk manager with those of any position in the finance department.

The risk manager shall have the responsibility to:

(1)     Negotiate, process the placement of, contract for, obtain and purchase all broker or agent services and insurance coverages deemed necessary by the risk manager and available to protect the city’s interests, in accordance with procedures developed by the risk manager and approved by the city council. These coverages include but are not limited to liability insurance, workers’ compensation insurance, and property insurance, or if self-insured in one or more areas, then excess coverage of this insurance.

(2)     Execute all applications, broker of record letters and other documents pertaining to the placement of, contracting for, obtaining and purchasing insurance coverages. (Ord. 1590 § 2, 1991)

 

2.28.040 Settlement authority.
The risk manager is authorized to settle all claims and actions against the city in which the settlement amount does not exceed the sum of twenty five thousand dollars. The risk manager is authorized to reject all claims and actions against the city in which the demand does not exceed the sum of twenty five thousand dollars. It shall be the duty of the city council to approve or reject all other claims and settlements presented to the city. (Ord. 1832 § 2, 2006)

 

2.28.050 Hazardous conditions.
The risk manager may establish safety programs deemed necessary or in the best interest of the city in order to avoid or reduce hazardous conditions. (Ord. 1590 § 2, 1991)

 

2.28.060 Presentations by officers and employees.
No city officer or employee shall, except for his or her own service, present any claim, account or demand for allowance against the city or in any way, except in the discharge of his or her official duty, advocate the relief asked in the claim or demand made by any other. (Ord. 1590 § 2, 1991)

Chapter 2.30 CLAIMS AND ACTIONS BY OTHER PUBLIC ENTITIES
2.30.010 Applicability of chapter.
Pursuant to Section 935 of the Government Code, all claims against the city for money, damages, or indemnification by any public entity which is exempted by Section 905(i) of the Government Code from the provisions of Division 3.6 of the Government Code (Section 810 et seq.), including, but not limited to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 900) and Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 910), and is not governed by any other statutes or regulations expressly relating thereto shall be governed by the procedure prescribed in this chapter. All claims against the city for money, damages or indemnification not otherwise governed by the California Tort Claims Act, California Government Code Section 900 et seq., or another state law (hereinafter referred to in this chapter as claim or claims) shall be governed by the procedure prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 1823 § 2, 2005)

 

2.30.020 Presentation of claim as prerequisite to suit.
No suit for money, damages, or indemnification may be brought against the city, including but not limited to, suits filed by any individual, entity, partnership, public entity, corporation, etc., as described in Section 2.30.010 of this chapter, until a written claim therefor has been presented and acted upon, or has been deemed to have been rejected, in accordance with this chapter and Sections 945.4, 945.6 and 946 of the Government Code. (Ord. 1823 § 4, 2005)

 

2.30.030 Time limitation.
Any claim specified in Section 2.30.020 shall be presented in accordance with the time limitations set forth in Government Code Section 911.2. In addition, pursuant to Government Code Section 901, any claim against the city for equitable indemnity or partial equitable indemnity shall be presented not later than six months after the date upon which a defendant is served with the complaint giving rise to the defendant’s claim for a cause of action for equitable indemnity or partial equitable indemnity against the city. (Ord. 1603 § 1, 1992)

 

2.30.040 Late filing.
In accordance with Section 935 of the Government Code, the late filing of claims pursuant to this chapter is regulated by Sections 911.4 and 911.6 through 912.2, inclusive, of the Government Code. (Ord. 1603 § 1, 1992)

 

2.30.050 Presentation and contents.
A signed, written claim shall be presented to the city by mailing or delivering it to the city clerk. The claim shall conform to the requirements of Section 910 of the Government Code or to a form provided by the city, if such form is provided. (Ord. 1603 § 1, 1992)

 

2.30.060 Procedures for consideration.
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the procedure for consideration and action upon all claims filed pursuant to this chapter shall be the same as the procedure provided and required by Section 910.2 through 915.4, inclusive, of the Government Code, except Section 911.2. In accordance with Section 935 of the Government Code, the consideration and action upon claims presented pursuant to Section 2.30.040 of this chapter shall be the same as the procedure provided and required by Section 946.6 of the Government Code. (Ord. 1603 § 1, 1992)

Chapter 2.32 PUBLIC LIBRARY
2.32.010 Established.
A public library is hereby established to be known as the “Glendora Public Library.” The library shall be managed by a board of library trustees, as established in Chapter 2.18, which shall have the powers and duties prescribed by Section 18900 et seq., of the State Education Code. (Ord. 2036 § 4, 2019; Ord. 2005 § 2, 2016)

Chapter 2.36 POLICEMEN AND FIREMEN
2.36.010 Off-duty officer rendering assistance.
Should a compelling situation arise wherein it becomes necessary to immediately act to preserve the safety of persons or property, off-duty police officers may render assistance as reasonable and necessary to resolve the immediate threat. (Ord. 1624 § 1, 1994; prior code § 2.5)

 

2.36.020 Compensation for injuries.
In case any off-duty police officer is injured while rendering such assistance as indicated in Section 2.36.010, the officer will be considered to have acted in the capacity as an employee of the city of Glendora and will be entitled to worker’s compensation as provided by law. (Ord. 1624 § 1, 1994; prior code § 2.6)

 

2.36.030 Election of city to qualify for state aid.
The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state under the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4, of the California Penal Code. (Prior code § 2.6-1)

 

2.36.040 Adherence to standards for recruitment and training.
Pursuant to Sections 13510(a), 13510(c) and 13522 of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4, of the Penal Code, the city while receiving aid from the state pursuant to Chapter 1 will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training for peace officers and public safety dispatchers. (Ord. 1538 § 1, 1989; prior code § 2.6-2)

 

2.36.045 Standards and training for corrections program.
While receiving any state aid pursuant to Article 3 of Chapter 5 of Title 7 of Part 3 of the California Penal Code, commencing with Section 6040, the city will adhere to the standards for selection and training established by the California board of corrections. (Ord. 1510 § 1, 1987)

 

2.36.050 Level I reserve police officers.
Those city reserve police officers who have qualified as level I reserve officers pursuant to Penal Code Section 832.6(a)(1) and, in addition, have completed a minimum of two years of field experience comprising a minimum of two hundred eighty working hours shall have those peace officer powers and duties as provided by Penal Code Section 830.1 in accordance with Penal Code Section 830.6(a). This section is intended to include those reserves who have been issued a level I reserve officer certificate before January 1, 1981, as well as those persons receiving a level I reserve officer certificate on or after January 1, 1981. (Ord. 1367 § 1, 1981)

Chapter 2.40 PURCHASING SYSTEM
2.40.010 Adoption of purchasing system.
(a)     In order to establish an efficient procedure for the purchase of supplies, equipment and services, to secure for the city supplies, equipment and services at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function and to assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing system is adopted.

(b)     The provisions of this chapter shall not cover the expenditure of funds for public works projects which are covered by the provision of Section 20160 et seq., of the Public Contract Code of the state. (Ord. 1688 § 2, 1998)

 

2.40.020 Purchasing officer designated.
The responsibility and authority for the purchasing of supplies, equipment and services is vested in the city manager, or such other person as the city manager may designate, who shall be the purchasing officer of the city. (Ord. 1688 § 2, 1998)

 

2.40.030 Duties and authority of the purchasing officer.
The purchasing officer shall have the authority to:

(1)     Negotiate, process the purchase of, and contract for all supplies, equipment and services needed by any city department or agency which derives its support wholly or in part from the city; provided, however, that any single expenditure in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars shall require city council approval;

(2)     Make procurements in accordance with the purchasing procedures prescribed by this chapter, relevant administrative regulations approved by the city manager, and such rules and regulations as the purchasing officer shall adopt for internal management and operations;

(3)     Act to procure for the city the needed supplies, equipment and services with the necessary quality, capacity, safety performance ability and overall cost, considering labor and maintenance costs and other applicable factors required to meet the service objectives of the using department or agency at the least expense to the city;

(4)     Discourage collusion in bidding and discourage vendor uniform bidding; endeavor to obtain the most open competition possible on all purchases;

(5)     Prepare and recommend administrative regulations, including revisions and amendments thereto, governing the purchase of supplies, equipment and services for the city, which regulations shall be effective upon approval by the city manager or designee;

(6)     Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products;

(7)     Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary for the operation of this chapter and other rules and regulations;

(8)     The purchasing officer or designee is authorized to transfer between departments or divisions with department head approval any unused goods and supplies within any fiscal year;

(9)     The purchasing officer or designee is authorized from time to time to sell or exchange any and all equipment, materials, fixtures and other personal property of the city having a salvage value and which is obsolete or unserviceable, or is surplus to the city, or for which replacement is to be purchased. The purchasing officer or designee may sell the same for the best price obtainable in the open market or, when he or she deems it advisable, to the highest bidder at public sale, or he or she may exchange the same for other property or for credit on other property. In the event the purchasing officer determines that any such obsolete or surplus property has no salvage value, he or she may dispose of it as he or she deems advisable. Any employees involved in declaring property surplus, or in the sale of said property, are excluded from acquiring it in any way;

(10)   Prescribe, design and issue forms needed for the operation of this chapter and other applicable rules and regulations;

(11)   By written authorization, grant authority to any department head to purchase or contract for specified supplies and equipment; but shall require that such purchases or contracts be made in conformity with purchasing procedures established in this ordinance. At the discretion of the purchasing officer, each department head shall perform the duties and exercise the authority of the purchasing officer with a limit on purchases from the same vendor, purchased on the same day, to less than one thousand dollars in value, except to the extent that the city manager reserves the duties and authority to him or herself;

(12)   “Lowest responsible bidder,” as used in this chapter, shall mean the most responsible, trustworthy bidder that can assure reasonable quality and fitness and possess the ability and expertise to satisfactorily perform the required services and when necessary possess the required state or other license.

Whenever goods are subject to sales tax, in-town vendors shall be given a one percent advantage in the bid price. Price alone shall not be the determining factor but shall be considered along with the other factors, including, but not limited to, the ability of the bidder to deliver, prior experience with the bidder and other factors relating to the particular needs of the city for the supplies, equipment or services to be purchased. (Ord. 1688 § 2, 1998)

 

2.40.035 Limitations on expenditures.
The purchasing officer or designee shall not authorize total purchases in excess of the budget that has been approved by the city council for the fiscal year. This limit is by category of supplies and services, capital outlay and capital projects. (Ord. 1688 § 2, 1998)

 

2.40.040 Requisitions.
Each department shall utilize the form of requisition prescribed by the purchasing officer. No purchasing requisitions shall be initiated unless the department has a sufficient unencumbered balance in excess of all unpaid obligations in the division budget where the purchase is to be charged. (Ord. 1688 § 2, 1998)

 

2.40.050 Purchase orders and exceptions.
Sections 2.40.070 and 2.40.080 shall not apply to the purchase of supplies, services or equipment under the following circumstances:

(1)     Emergency purchases as provided in Sections 2.40.060; or

(2)     Purchases from the same vendor, made on the same day, by each department, of an estimated value of less than one thousand dollars.

(3)     Professional Services or Specialized Services. Service of a professional nature or specialized services including, but not limited to, services rendered by architects, attorneys, accountants, auditors, engineers and other professional consultants are exempt. The professional providing the services shall be selected on the basis of demonstrated competence and on the professional qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the services required, negotiated between parties rather than on the basis of cost alone. Therefore, the purchasing officer or the city council is not limited to awarding professional services contracts to the lowest responsible bidder. Contracts of less than twenty-five thousand dollars shall not require city council approval; the city manager is authorized to execute such contract. Award of contracts for twenty-five thousand dollars or more shall be made by the city council.

(4)     Cooperative Agreements. Purchases made at contract prices awarded by federal or state governments or by any political subdivision thereof or pursuant to a cooperative purchasing agreement are exempt.

(5)     Exclusive Item. In those instances in which the city’s requirements can be met solely by a single patented article or process including, but not limited to, upgrades, alterations, additions, deletions to an existing proprietary article or process, or in which a warranty, guarantee or other assurances could be voided.

(6)     City Employees. Any work performed by the city with its own employees. Such work may be subject to provisions of Section 20161, California Public Contracts Code.

(7)     Prison Contracts. Contracts for the purchase of goods from the prison industry authority or any other entity offering for sale items made by and through prison inmate labor are exempt.

(8)     Sole Source Purchases. Purchases of materials, supplies and equipment are exempt from this chapter if they can be obtained from only one manufacturer or vendor. Any sole source purchase shall be made within the expenditure limits set by adopted administrative regulations.

(9)     Open Purchase Order. An open purchase order is exempt from this chapter if issued under one of the following circumstances:

(A)    To ensure efficient and effective control of purchases that are difficult to anticipate;

(B)    For goods and/or services that are required on a recurring basis and are uneconomical to store;

(C)    To facilitate the acquisition of supplies and services needed by various departments in their day-to-day operations;

(D)    To reduce the volume of small value purchase orders.

(10)   Contracting for professional services in which an applicant deposits one hundred percent of the costs of such service and agrees to replenish a deposit account for any additional costs incurred under the professional service agreement. The professional services to be contracted shall be contractually obligated to the city for purposes of oversight and supervision, not the applicant, and no public funds will be a source of any payment to the service provider under that specific contract. The city attorney shall obtain a cntractual termination clause stipulating that should the applicant fail to replenish deposits that the city may terminate the contract for work done to that date in all such professional service related contracts. (Ord. 1898 § 1, 2008; Ord. 1840 § 2, 2006)

 

2.40.060 Emergency purchases.
The purchasing officer or designee may make emergency purchases, not to exceed twenty five thousand dollars, free of the provisions of this chapter upon a showing by any department that the purchase required is for the immediate protection of life, health or property and there is a present, immediate and existing emergency which could not reasonably be foreseen. The city council may authorize emergency purchases, exceeding twenty-five thousand dollars, free of the provisions of this chapter upon a showing that the purchase required is for the immediate protection of life, health or property and there is a present, immediate and existing emergency which could not reasonably be foreseen. (Ord. 1840 § 7, 2006)

 

2.40.070 Informal purchasing procedures.
The purchasing officer or designee may make purchases of supplies, equipment or services with a value of less than twenty-five thousand dollars by following the informal bid procedures provided in this section:

(1)     Purchases of supplies, equipment and services of an estimated value of less than twenty-five thousand dollars may be made by the purchasing officer or designee in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section. The purchasing officer or designee shall solicit informal competitive bids for all such purchases; provided, however, informal competitive bidding shall not be required for any purchase that has an estimated value of less than one thousand dollars. If the purchasing officer finds that such supplies, services or equipment are unique because of the quality, durability, availability or fitness for a particular use or if available from only one source, bidding will not be required.

(2)     Except where competitive bidding is not required, informal bids shall be solicited for purchases of supplies or equipment and awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, as defined in Section 2.40.030 of this chapter, as follows:

(A)    The informal bids may be oral or written;

(B)    Whenever possible, be based on at least three informal bids or quotations, and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder in the best interest of the city;

(C)    The purchasing officer or designee shall solicit informal bids or quotations from prospective responsible vendors by written request, by telephone, by public notice posted on a bulletin board in the City Hall and/or by adjudicated newspaper publication;

(D)    The informal bid purchase shall not require city council approval; the purchasing officer or designee is authorized to execute the contract for any such purchase.

(3)     Contracts for the purchases of supplies, equipment and services may exceed the amount by no more than ten percent. (Ord. 1688 § 2, 1998)

 

2.40.080 Formal contract procedure.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section or in other sections of this chapter, purchases of supplies, equipment and services of an estimated value of twenty-five thousand dollars or more shall be by formal sealed written competitive bids. Awards of such contracts shall be made by the city council to the lowest responsible bidder as defined in Section 2.40.030 of this chapter and executed in accordance with the following provisions:

(1)     Notices Inviting Bids. Notices inviting bids shall include a general description of the supplies, equipment or services to be purchased. Notice shall also state where bid forms and specifications may be secured as well as the time and place for opening bids. Notice inviting bids must be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation throughout the city at least ten calendar days before the date of opening the bids. The notice shall be published twice, not less than five days apart per Public Contract Code Subsection 20164. The notice shall specify that the award shall be made to the lowest responsible bidder as set forth in subsection (1) of this section.

(2)     Bidders’ Security. When considered necessary by the purchasing officer, bidders’ security may be prescribed in the notices inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to the return of bid securities; provided, however, a successful bidder shall forfeit the bid security upon the refusal or failure of the bidder to execute the contract within the time designated in the bid specifications. The council, on the refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, may award the contract to the next lowest responsible bidder.

If the council awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder’s security shall be applied by the city to the contract price differential between the lowest bid and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder.

(3)     Confidentiality of Bids. Any bid received pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be disclosed directly or indirectly to any other bidder until the bidding is closed and further bidding is excluded.

(4)     Bid Opening Procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the city clerk or designee and shall be identified as bids on the sealed envelope. All bids submitted by the deadline shall be opened at the time and place stated in the public notice. All bids received shall be open for public inspection in the city clerk’s office during business hours for thirty days after the bid opening. Bids are to be destroyed after thirty days.

(5)     Rejection of Bids. The city council may, at its discretion, reject any and all bids presented and re-advertise for bids. If no bids are received, the city council may purchase the goods, supplies or services without further complying with this chapter.

(6)     Tie Bids. If two or more bids are received for the same total amount, quality and service being equal, and if public interest will not permit the delay of re-advertising for bids, the city council may accept the one it chooses or accept the lowest bid made by negotiation with the tie bidders.

(7)     Performance Bonds. The purchasing officer or designee shall have the authority to require a performance bond before entering into a contract. The bond will be in an amount reasonably necessary to protect the best interest of the city. If a performance bond is required, the form and amount shall be described in the notice inviting bids.

(8)     Splitting or Separating Purchases or Contract. Contracts for the purchase of supplies, equipment or services may not be split or separated into smaller work orders for the express purpose of circumventing purchasing procedures.

(9)     Returning Retention Withholdings. The purchasing officer or designee shall be required to return the required ten percent retention withholdings in accordance with the original signed contract, or sixty calendar days after a notice of completion has been signed by the authorized department head and the authorized project coordinator; provided, there are no outstanding stop orders or mechanics liens.

(10)   Contracts Exceeding Bid Amount. Contracts for the purchase of supplies, equipment or services may exceed the bid amount by no more than twenty-five percent. (Ord. 1840 § 4, 2006; Ord. 1688 § 2, 1998)

 

2.40.085 Purchase of used equipment.
If opportunities arise to purchase used equipment, such equipment may be purchased without competitive bidding, provided all the following conditions are met:

(1)     The equipment being sold is warrantied or, in the case of an “as is, where-is” purchase, there is an inspection by a qualified party who certifies that the condition of the item is acceptable and adequate for efficient city use;

(2)     The dealer of the equipment is a bona-fide and reputable dealer as verified through reference checks or the equipment is being purchased from another governmental entity;

(3)     The selling price of the equipment is less than twenty-five thousand dollars, including tax, installation, freight, and any other additional acquisition costs;

(4)     If no bids are received from the formal bidding process for the purchase of used equipment with a selling price of over twenty-five thousand dollars, a written request to commence negotiation with a vendor(s) must be submitted to the city manager for approval. Acceptance of the contract is subject to city council approval.

Justification for the sole source purchase of used equipment must be documented and maintained as part of the procurement file.

It is not allowable to purchase used equipment when procedures for the acquisition of new equipment have been circumvented to avoid the competitive bidding process. (Ord. 1688 § 2, 1998)

 

2.40.090 Inspection and testing.
The purchasing officer or designee shall supervise the inspection and testing of supplies and equipment delivered to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the purchase order or contract. The purchasing officer shall have authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries, which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications. Before payment is authorized, the satisfactory receipt of goods shall be established as prescribed in the administrative regulations governing the processing of purchase orders. (Ord. 1688 § 2, 1998)

 

2.40.110 Gratuities.
The offer of any gratuity to an official or employee by any vendor or contractor, or perspective vendor or contractor, shall be cause for declaring such individual or firm to be an irresponsible bidder as provided in Sections 2.40.070 and 2.40.080. (Ord. 1688 § 2, 1998)

 

2.40.120 Petty cash fund.
For the purpose of making purchases where the estimated cost is less than one hundred dollars per day, there is created a purchasing petty cash fund cumulative of one thousand dollars from which the city finance office may make cash payments for approved purchases not exceeding one hundred dollars each. The fund shall be replenished by periodic claims submitted to the city finance director supported by sales slips or invoices for each purchase, and indicating the department for which the purchase is made and the authorized personnel requesting such purchase. (Ord. 1688 § 2, 1998)

 

2.40.130 Joint powers agreements.
Supplies, equipment and services may be purchased from any other governmental agency with which the city has entered into a joint exercise of powers agreement for such purpose, pursuant to the provisions of Section 6502 of the Government Code, provided:

(1)     The sales price of the item to be purchased has been obtained through the competitive bidding process conducted within a previous twelve month period, by the other agency; and

(2)     The purchase can be made by the other governmental agency upon the same terms, conditions, and specifications at a lower price then can be obtained by the city through normal purchasing procedures;

(3)     The city may combine its bidding or its purchases with those of another governmental entity when economically advantageous to do so. (Ord. 1688 § 2, 1998)

 

2.40.150 Recycled materials and products.
It is the intent of the city to set an example in minimizing waste and promoting increased use of recycled materials and products. Certain recycled products such as plastic products, glass containers, motor oil, paper, asphalt pavement and latex paint, which do not compromise quality and effectiveness and are similar to nonrecycled products can and should be purchased at competitive prices. (Ord. 1688 § 2, 1998)

 

2.40.160 Public works contracts.
Public works contracts will abide by the provision of Section 20160 et. seq., of the Public Contract Code of the state. (Ord. 1688 § 2, 1998)

Chapter 2.44 DISPOSITION OF STOLEN OR EMBEZZLED, LOST AND ABANDONED PROPERTY
2.44.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

(1)     “Abandoned property” means:

(A)    Property which the owner, upon notification of its whereabouts, refuses to claim; or

(B)    Property for which the owner refuses, on demand, to pay the reasonable charges for the care and storage thereof pursuant to Section 2080.1(b) of the California Civil Code; or

(C)    Property which the finder refuses to claim pursuant to California Civil Code Section 2080.3.

(2)     “Embezzled property” means property which has been fraudulently appropriated by one to whom it has been entrusted.

(3)     “Lost property” means misplaced property, the whereabouts of which is unknown by its rightful owner or one who has a right to possession of it.

(4)     “Perishable property” means property in danger of perishing or losing the greater part of its value.

(5)     “Police chief” means the chief of police of the Glendora police department or any designee of the chief of police.

(6)     “Stolen property” means property which has been taken and carried away feloniously or the possession of which has been obtained by false or fraudulent representation or pretense. (Ord. 1407 § 2, 1983)

 

2.44.020 Stolen or embezzled property.
(a)     Property in Custody of Police Officer; Disposition Made in Accordance with State Statutes. When property alleged to be stolen or embezzled comes into the custody of a police officer, he or she shall deliver it to the property section of the police department where it shall be disposed of in accordance with Chapter 12 of Title 10 of the California Penal Code, commencing with Section 1407.

(b)     Definitions. Whenever any of the terms defined in this section appear in Chapter 12 of Title 10 of the California Penal Code, commencing with Section 1407, each such term shall be construed to have the meaning ascribed to it in this subsection:

(1)     “Clerk” or “person in charge of the property section” means the police chief.

(2)     “Peace officer” means any employee of the Glendora police department. (Ord. 1407 § 2, 1983)

 

2.44.030 Lost and unclaimed property.
(a)     Duty of the Finder. Any person who finds or saves and takes possession of any money, goods, domestic animals or other personal property shall dispose of such property in accordance with the provisions set forth in Chapter 4 of Title 6 of the California Civil Code, commencing with Section 2080.

(b)     Disposition of Property in Possession of Police Department. Whenever any property described in Section 2.44.010 is turned in to the police department, it shall be disposed of by the police department in accordance with the provisions set forth in Chapter 4 of Title 6 of the California Civil Code, commencing with Section 2080.1, unless:

(1)     The finder of the property does not want title to the property pursuant to California Civil Code Section 2080.3, in which event it shall be disposed of in accordance with Section 2.44.040; or

(2)     The property is determined by the police chief to be perishable, in which event it shall be disposed of in accordance with Section 2.44.050; or

(3)     The property is found in the course of employment by a city employee, in which event it shall be disposed of in accordance with Section 2.44.060. (Ord. 1407 § 2, 1983)

 

2.44.040 Abandoned property.
(a)     Property Other than Money or Perishable Property. Abandoned property, other than money or perishable property, which is in the custody of the police department shall be disposed of by sale at public auction in accordance with Section 2.44.060.

(b)     Abandoned Money. All abandoned money which is in the custody of the police department shall be deposited by the police chief with the city treasurer for deposit into the general fund.

(c)     Perishable Property. All abandoned property determined by the police chief to be perishable shall be disposed of in accordance with Section 2.44.050. (Ord. 1407 § 2, 1983)

 

2.44.050 Perishable property.
Where property, whether lost and unclaimed or abandoned, is determined by the police chief to be perishable and upon reasonable diligence the owner of the property cannot be found, the police chief shall offer such property to the finder thereof. If the finder refuses to accept such property, the police chief shall dispose of it as he or she sees fit. (Ord. 1407 § 2, 1983)

 

2.44.060 Public auction procedure.
All abandoned property or property found within the scope of employment by a city employee, except perishable property, shall be sold by the police chief at public auction to the highest bidder, in accordance with the following procedure, unless such property is determined by the police chief to be needed for a public use, in which case, the property need not be sold and may be retained by the city.

(1)     Notice of Sale. Notice of such public auction sale shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation circulated in the city. The first publication shall be at least five days prior to the time fixed for the auction. Such notice shall contain a statement of the time and place fixed by the police chief for such auction, together with a general statement of the kind of property offered for sale.

(2)     Disposition of Proceeds from Sale. Immediately after the completion of any sale, the police chief shall give to the city treasurer a statement of the proceeds thereof, together with the expense incurred, if any, in conducting such sale. The police chief shall forthwith pay such proceeds to the city treasurer and the city treasurer shall deposit the same in the general fund.

(3)     Procedure When No Bids Offered. If there are no bids for property offered for sale at auction under this section, the property shall again be offered for sale together with other such property at the next auction sale. If such property is not sold at the second auction sale, the police chief may make such disposition thereof in the public interest as he or she shall deem fit. (Ord. 1407 § 2, 1983)

Chapter 2.48 REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
2.48.010 Need—Authority.
It is found and declared, pursuant to Section 33101 of the Community Redevelopment Law, that there is a need for the redevelopment agency created by Section 33100 of said law to function in the city and the agency is authorized to transact business and exercise its powers under the Community Redevelopment Law. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 1972)

 

2.48.020 Designated.
The city council declares itself to be the redevelopment agency to be known as Glendora community redevelopment agency and that all rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities vested by the Community Redevelopment Law in such agency shall be, and are, vested in this body. (Ord. 1162 § 2, 1972)

 

2.48.030 Filing.
The city clerk shall cause a certified copy of the ordinance codified herein to be filed in the office of the Secretary of State. (Ord. 1162 § 3, 1972)

Chapter 2.50 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS FOR DISABLED INDIVIDUALS
2.50.010 Purpose and intent.
California and federal laws, including the Federal Fair Housing Act of 1988, the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act, guarantee individuals with disabilities the civil right to access publicly funded buildings, facilities and programs, or privately funded housing, including single and multiple-family dwelling units, and public accommodations on an equal basis with their fellow citizens who are not disabled. It is the policy of the city to provide people with disabilities with accommodations if reasonable and necessary. The city of Glendora has historically provided such accommodations when persons with special needs have applied for exceptions from stated requirements of local regulations and practices. The purpose of this chapter is to codify this practice and provide a clear and defined process for individuals with disabilities to make requests for reasonable accommodation in regard to the rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of the city. (Ord. 1904 § 1, 2008)

 

2.50.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings set forth in this section:

“Accommodation” means any reasonable, necessary and/or feasible modification from the city’s rules, policies, practices and/or procedures to provide a disabled person an equal opportunity to access publicly funded buildings, facilities and programs, or privately funded housing, including single and multiple-family dwelling units, and public accommodations as those citizens who are not disabled.

“Applicant” means an individual making a request for a reasonable accommodation pursuant to this chapter.

“Code” means the Glendora Municipal Code.

“Department(s)” means the department(s) within the jurisdiction responsible for administering requests for reasonable accommodation pursuant to this chapter.

“Disabled person” means any person who has a medical, physical, or mental condition, disorder or disability as defined in California Government Code Section 12926, that substantially limits one or more major life activities. (Ord. 1904 § 1, 2008)

 

2.50.030 Accommodation for disabled individuals—Policy.
Any disabled person, or his or her representative, may request an accommodation from any of the city’s rules, policies, practices and/or procedures when accommodation is reasonable and necessary to afford such persons equal opportunity to access publicly funded buildings, facilities or programs, or privately funded housing, including single and multiple-family dwelling units, and public accommodations on an equal opportunity basis with citizens who are not disabled. (Ord. 1904 § 1, 2008)

 

2.50.040 Application for accommodation.
(a)     A disabled person (or his or her representative) who desires to request an accommodation may do so by filing an application with the proper department having subject-matter jurisdiction over the decision.

(b)     If an individual needs assistance in making the request for accommodation, each department will endeavor to provide the assistance necessary to ensure that the process is accessible to the applicant or representative.

(c)     The application shall require the following information:

(1)     The applicant’s name, address, and telephone number;

(2)     If not the applicant, the identity of the disabled person(s), and the applicant’s relation to the disabled person(s);

(3)     Identification and description of the disability, as allowed by law, which is the basis for the request for accommodation;

(4)     The rule, policy, practice and/or procedure of the city for which the request for accommodation is being made;

(5)     The type of accommodation sought;

(6)     The reason(s) why the accommodation is reasonable and necessary for the needs of the disabled person(s). Where appropriate, shall include a summary of any potential means and alternatives considered in evaluating the need for the accommodation;

(7)     Copies of memoranda, correspondence, pictures, plans or background information reasonably necessary to reach a decision regarding the need for the accommodation;

(8)     Other supportive information deemed necessary by the affected department to facilitate proper consideration of the request;

(9)     If a zoning related matter, a verification that adjacent property owners have been notified in the manner prescribed by the director of planning. (Ord. 1904 § 1, 2008)

 

2.50.050 Criteria for granting accommodation.
(a)     Findings. The following findings shall be analyzed, made, and adopted before any action is taken to approve, approve with conditions or deny a request for accommodation, and must be incorporated into the record of the proceeding relating to such decision:

(1)     Whether the request for accommodation is reasonable and necessary to afford the applicant with an equal opportunity to access publicly funded buildings, facilities and programs, or privately funded housing, including single and multiple-family dwelling units, and public accommodations on an equal basis with citizens who are not disabled;

(2)     Whether there are feasible alternatives to the requested accommodation that may provide an equivalent level of benefit;

(3)     The physical attributes of and any proposed changes to property and structures;

(4)     Whether the requested accommodation will impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city;

(5)     Whether the requested accommodation will require a fundamental alteration of the city’s rules, policies, practices or procedures;

(6)     If a zoning related issue, whether the requested accommodation would result in a detriment of the residential character of that neighborhood; and

(7)     Any other factor(s) that may have a bearing on the request.

(b)     Conditions of Approval. Any modification granted for an individual with a disability may, at the discretion of the decision maker, be considered as a personal accommodation for the individual applicant and may, at the determination of the decision maker, not run with the land. The conditions of approval may, where deemed appropriate, provide for any or all of the following:

(1)     Inspection of the affected premises periodically, as specified in the conditions, to verify compliance with this section and with any applicable conditions of approval;

(2)     Prior to any transfer of interest in the premises, notice to the transferee of the existence of the modification, the personal status of the modification and the requirement that the transferee apply for a new modification is necessary. Once such transfer takes effect, the modification shall have no further validity;

(3)     Removal of the improvements, where removal would not constitute an unreasonable and unfair financial burden, if the need for which the accommodation was granted no longer exists;

(4)     Time limits and/or expiration of the approval if the need for which the accommodation was granted no longer exists;

(5)     Other necessary conditions deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 1904 § 1, 2008)

 

2.50.060 Process for determination—Nonzoning related applications.
(a)     Receipt of Application. The department head overseeing the department with subject matter jurisdiction over the request for accommodation, or his or her designee, shall investigate the facts bearing on the application, and compile the information necessary for a decision on the application.

(b)     Decision. The department head shall issue a written notice of decision within thirty days of the date of the submittal of a complete application and may grant the accommodation request, deny the request, offer approval of an alternate accommodation, or approve the request with conditions. The written decision is to be based on the contents of the application and a consideration of the factors set forth in Section 2.50.050 of this chapter. The notice of decision shall:

(1)     Contain the factual findings, conclusions and reasons for the decision;

(2)     Give notice of the right to appeal pursuant to Section 2.50.080 of this chapter;

(3)     Be sent to the applicant by mail. (Ord. 1904 § 1, 2008)

 

2.50.070 Process for determination—Zoning related applications.
(a)     Receipt of Application. The director of planning or his or her designee, shall investigate the facts bearing on the application, and compile the information necessary for a decision on the application.

(b)     Review. The director of planning shall conduct a review on the request for reasonable accommodation at which all reasonable evidence and credible testimony shall be considered. The director of planning may, at his or her discretion or upon request of an applicant, continue the matter as deemed necessary if additional information will facilitate more complete consideration of the matter.

(c)     Decision. The director of planning shall issue a written decision and may grant the accommodation request, deny the request, offer approval of an alternate accommodation, or approve the request with conditions. The written decision is to be based on the contents of the application, the staff report, the testimony and evidence presented at the hearing, and a consideration of the factors set forth in Section 2.50.050 of this chapter. The decision shall:

(1)     Contain the factual findings, conclusions and reasons for the decision;

(2)     Give notice of the right to appeal pursuant to Section 2.50.080 of this chapter;

(3)     Be sent to the applicant by mail. (Ord. 1904 § 1, 2008)

 

2.50.080 Appeal.
(a)     Appeal of Notice of Decision. Any person aggrieved or dissatisfied with the decision provided in Section 2.50.060 of this chapter may appeal such decision to the city manager. Such appeal shall be in writing, on a form prescribed by the city manager, and shall be filed with the city clerk within fifteen calendar days of the issuance date of the notice of decision. Any person aggrieved or dissatisfied with the decision provided in Section 2.50.070 of this chapter may appeal such decision to the planning commission. Such appeal shall be in writing, on a form prescribed by the city manager, and shall be filed with the city clerk within fifteen calendar days of the issuance date of the notice of decision.

(b)     Review. The city manager, in the case of an appeal of a decision provided in Section 2.50.060 of this chapter, or the planning commission, in the case of an appeal of a decision provided in Section 2.50.070 of this chapter, shall conduct a de novo review on the request for accommodation at which all reasonable evidence and credible testimony shall be considered. The city manager, in the case of an appeal of a decision provided in Section 2.50.060 of this chapter, or the planning commission, in the case of an appeal of a decision provided in Section 2.50.070 of this chapter, may, at its discretion or upon request of an applicant, continue the matter as deemed necessary if additional information will facilitate more complete consideration of the matter.

(c)     Decision. The city manager, in the case of an appeal of a decision provided in Section 2.50.060 of this chapter, or the planning commission, in the case of an appeal of a decision provided in Section 2.50.070 of this chapter, shall issue a written decision and may grant the accommodation request, deny the request, offer approval of an alternate accommodation, or approve the request with conditions. The written decision is to be based on the contents of the application, the staff report, the testimony and evidence presented at the hearing, and a consideration of the factors set forth in Section 2.50.050 of this chapter. The decision shall:

(1)     Contain the factual findings, conclusions and reasons for the decision;

(2)     Be sent to the applicant by mail;

(3)     Final Decision. The decision of the city manager, in the case of an appeal of a decision provided in Section 2.50.060 of this chapter, or the planning commission, in the case of an appeal of a decision provided in Section 2.50.070 of this chapter, shall be final. (Ord. 1904 § 1, 2008)

 

2.50.090 Representation by counsel.
Applicants are advised that at any time during the application and/or hearing process, they may want to seek the advice of an attorney, and that in lieu of an appeal or after an adverse decision, they may pursue relief in a court of law. (Ord. 1904 § 1, 2008)

Chapter 2.52 ELECTRONIC FILING OF CAMPAIGN DISCLOSURE
2.52.010 General.
Except as stated otherwise herein, any elected officer, candidate, committee or other person required to file specified statements, reports, or other documents with the city clerk as required by Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 84100) of Title 9 of the California Government Code, also known as the Political Reform Act, and that has received contributions or made expenditures of one thousand dollars or more, may electronically file such statement using the city clerk’s online system according to procedures established by the city clerk. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 2014)

 

2.52.020 Electronic filing.
To ensure reporting continuity, once a statement, report or other document is filed electronically on behalf of any elected officer, candidate, or committee as set forth in Section 2.52.010, all future statements, reports and other documents on behalf of that officer, candidate or committee shall be required to be filed electronically using the city clerk system. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 2014)

 

2.52.030 Paper format not required.
Any elected officer, candidate, committee or other person who has electronically filed a statement, report, or other document using the city clerk’s online system is not required to file a copy of that document in paper format with the city clerk. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 2014)

 

2.52.040 Opt-out.
An elected officer, candidate, committee or other person may choose to opt-out of the electronic filing system by filing all original statements, reports or other documents in paper format with the city clerk. Electronic filing is not required until after an elected officer, candidate, committee or other person opts-in by electronically filing a statement, report or other document. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 2014)

 

2.52.050 Filing of copies.
In any instance in which an original statement, report, or other document must be filed with the Secretary of State or Los Angeles County registrar of voters, and a copy of that document is required to be filed with the Glendora city clerk, the filer may electronically file a copy with the Glendora city clerk, the filer may, but is not required to file the copy online or electronically. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 2014)

 

2.52.060 Paper format required when.
If the city clerk’s system is not capable of accepting a particular type of statement, report or other document, an elected officer, candidate, committee or other person shall file that document in paper format with the city clerk. (Ord. 1987 § 1, 2014)

Chapter 2.54 ELECTIONS
2.54.010 Date of general municipal election.
Pursuant to Sections 1000 and 1301 of the California Elections Code, and commencing on January 1, 2019, the date of the general municipal election is moved from the first Tuesday after the first Monday in March of each odd-numbered year to the first Tuesday after the first Monday in March of even-numbered years, to coincide with the statewide primary elections. (Ord. 2029 § 1, 2018)

 

2.54.020 Extension of incumbents’ terms.
In accordance with Sections 1301 and 10403.5 of the California Elections Code, those terms of office that would have expired in March 2019 are hereby extended to the first Tuesday after the first Monday in March 2020, and those terms of office that would have expired in March 2021 are hereby extended to the first Tuesday after the first Monday in March 2022. (Ord. 2029 § 1, 2018)

Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Note
Chapter 3.04 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
Chapter 3.08 WATER FUND
Chapter 3.12 MUSIC, PARKS AND ADVERTISING FUND
Chapter 3.16 SALES AND USE TAX
Chapter 3.20 CITY TAX FUNCTIONS
Chapter 3.24 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
Chapter 3.28 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND
Chapter 3.32 GENERAL FUND
Chapter 3.36 CAPITAL EQUIPMENT FUND
Chapter 3.40 WORKERS’ COMPENSATION SELF-INSURANCE FUND
Chapter 3.44 GENERAL LIABILITY SELF-INSURANCE FUND
Chapter 3.46 WATER CAPITAL PROJECTS FUND
Chapter 3.48 WASTEWATER RECLAMATION FUND
Chapter 3.52 TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX

Note
*       For uniform transient occupancy tax, see Ch. 5.20 of this code.

Chapter 3.04 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
3.04.010 Created.
To comply with the provisions of Section 2113 of the California Streets and Highways Code, and to avail the city of the benefits of Sections 2106 and 2107 of said code, there is hereby created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the special gas tax street improvement fund. (Ord. 1752 § 1, 2002; prior code § 2.66)

 

3.04.020 Fund revenue.
All moneys received by the city of Glendora from the state of California pursuant to applicable provisions of the California Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein for, or for the construction, maintenance, or improvement of streets or highways other than state highways, shall be paid into the special gas tax street improvement fund. (Ord. 1752 § 1, 2002; prior code § 2.67)

 

3.04.030 Expenditures from fund.
All moneys in the special gas tax street improvement fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by and subject to the provisions of the California Streets and Highways Code. (Ord. 1752 § 1, 2002; prior code § 2.68)

 

3.04.040 Interest on fund.
Interest earned on the special gas tax street improvement fund cash balance shall be recorded as revenue to the fund. (Ord. 1752 § 1, 2002)

Chapter 3.08 WATER FUND
3.08.010 Created.
There is hereby created in the treasury of the city of Glendora an enterprise fund to be known as the water fund. (Ord. 1750 § 1(part), 2002; prior code § 2.69)

 

3.08.020 Purpose of fund.
Expenditures from the water fund shall be made only for the administration, operation, and maintenance of the city of Glendora domestic water system and its capacity to serve the users thereof. (Ord. 1750 § 1, 2002)

 

3.08.030 Fund revenue.
All water service charges and miscellaneous water related charges not otherwise designated shall be credited to the water fund. (Ord. 1750 § 1, 2002)

 

3.08.040 Capital equipment reserve.
There is hereby established within the water fund a reserve account for the acquisition and replacement of capital equipment used by the water department in administration, operation and maintenance of the domestic water system. Such expenditures include, but are not limited to, the acquisition and replacement of vehicles, computer systems and communications equipment assigned to the water department.

The capital equipment reserve shall be funded in amounts derived through charging equipment users an annual fee sufficient to recover the depreciation cost of equipment acquired by the fund based on the anticipated useful life of the equipment. (Ord. 1750 § 1, 2002)

 

3.08.050 Expenditures from fund.
Expenditures from the water fund may be authorized by the city council by the adoption of the water fund budget or by supplemental appropriation from the fund. (Ord. 1750 § 1, 2002; prior code § 2.70)

 

3.08.060 Interest on fund.
Interest earned on the water fund cash balance shall be recorded as revenue to the fund. (Ord. 1750 § 1, 2002)

Chapter 3.12 MUSIC, PARKS AND ADVERTISING FUND
3.12.010 Purpose of tax.
There shall be levied and collected by the city for each fiscal year in addition to any other taxes levied and collected by the city, a tax not exceeding fifteen cents on each one hundred dollars of the property in the city taxable for municipal purposes, for the purpose of providing and maintaining parks and music and for advertising purposes.

The tax shall be used for no other purpose than for providing and maintaining parks and music and for advertising purposes and shall be used for, each of such purposes in such amounts, not exceeding in the aggregate the whole sum thereof, as shall be determined by the council.

The tax shall be levied at the time of fixing the general tax levy of the city and in the same manner for such general tax levy provided and shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as the general tax levy is collected.

The amount collected upon such levy shall be placed in a separate fund to be known as the “Music, Parks and Advertising, Fund.” (Prior code § 19.2)

Chapter 3.16 SALES AND USE TAX
3.16.010 Short title.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as, the uniform local sales and use tax ordinance. (Ord. 1199 § 1, 1973)

 

3.16.020 Rate.
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. (Ord. 1199 § 2, 1973)

 

3.16.030 Operative date.
This chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1974. (Ord. 1199 § 3, 1973)

 

3.16.040 Purpose.
The city council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions of this chapter be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

(1)     To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

(2)     To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

(3)     To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California state sales and use taxes;

(4)     To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1199 § 4, 1973)

 

3.16.050 Contract with state.
Prior to the operative date, this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax chapter; provided, that if this city has not contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1199 § 5, 1973)

 

3.16.060 Sales tax.
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.16.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. (Ord. 1199 § 6, 1973)

 

3.16.070 Place of sale.
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 1199 § 7, 1973)

 

3.16.080 Use tax.
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in Section 3.16.020 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 1199 § 8, 1973)

 

3.16.090 Adoption of provisions of state law.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 1199 § 9, 1973)

 

3.16.100 Limitations on adoption of state law.
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “state” is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the state. The substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter. The substitution shall not be made in those sections, including but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remains subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under said provisions of that code. The substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and the substitution shall not be made for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 1199 § 10, 1973)

 

3.16.110 Permit not required.
If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 1199 § 11, 1973)

 

3.16.120 Exclusions and exemptions.
There shall be excluded from the measure of tax:

(1)     The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer;

(2)     The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state;

(3)     The gross receipts from sales to, and the storage, use or other consumption of property purchased by, operators of common carriers and waterborne vessels to be used or consumed in the operation of such common carriers or waterborne vessels principally outside this city;

(4)     The storage or use of tangible personal property in the transportation or transmission of persons, property or communications, or in the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity, or in the manufacture, transmission or distribution of gas in intrastate, interstate or foreign commerce by public utilities which are regulated by the Public Utilities Commission of the state. (Ord. 1199 § 12, 1973)

 

3.16.130 Exclusions and exemptions.
(a)     The text of this subsection is operative January 1, 1984.

(1)     The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer.

(2)     The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

(3)     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

(4)     In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax.

(b)     The text of this subsection is operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the state which amends Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code or which repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202 as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983 (see Section post).

(1)     The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer.

(2)     The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

(3)     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes.

(4)     The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax.

(5)     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

(6)     In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 1432 § 1, 1984; Ord. 1199 § 13, 1973)

 

3.16.140 Application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions.
(a)     Section 3.16.130 shall become operative on January 1st of the year following the year in which the State Board of Equalization adopts an assessment ratio for state-assessed property which is identical to the ratio which is required for local assessments by Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, at which time Section 3.16.120 shall become inoperative.

(b)     In the event that Section 3.16.130 becomes operative and the State Board of Equalization subsequently adopts an assessment ratio for the state-assessed property which is higher than the ratio which is required for local assessments by Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, Section 3.16.120 shall become operative on the first day of the month next following the month in which such higher ratio is adopted, at which time Section 3.16.130 shall be inoperative until the first day of the month following the month in which the board again adopts an assessment ratio for state-assessed property which is identical to the ratio required for local assessments by Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, at which time Section 3.16.130 shall again become operative and Section 3.16.120 shall become inoperative. (Ord. 1199 § 14, 1973)

 

3.16.150 Amendments.
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Ord. 1199 § 15, 1973)

 

3.16.160 Enjoining collection forbidden.
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 1199 § 16, 1973)

 

3.16.170 Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1199 § 17, 1973)

 

3.16.180 Sales and use tax ordinances suspended.
At the time the ordinance codified in this chapter goes into operation, the provisions of Ordinance Numbers 417, 489 and 620 shall be suspended and shall not again be of any force or effect until and unless for any reason the State Board of Equalization ceases to perform the functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax imposed by this chapter; provided, however, that if for any reason it is determined that the city is without power to adopt the ordinance codified herein, or that the State Board of Equalization is without power to perform the functions incident to the administration and operation of the taxes imposed by this chapter, the provisions of Ordinance Numbers 417, 489 and 620 shall not be deemed to have been suspended, but shall be deemed to have been in force and effect at the rate of one percent continuously from and after March 28, 1956. Upon the ceasing of the State Board of Equalization to perform the functions incident to the administration and operation of the taxes imposed by this chapter, the provisions of Ordinance Numbers 417, 489 and 620 shall again be in full force and effect at the rate of one percent. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as relieving any person of the obligation to pay to the city any sales and use tax accrued and owing by reason of the provisions of Ordinance Numbers 417 and 489 in force and effect prior to and including March 27, 1956. (Ord. 1199 § 20, 1973)

Chapter 3.20 CITY TAX FUNCTIONS
3.20.010 Transfer of city tax functions to county.
The council elects to avail itself of the provisions of an act of the Legislature of the state approved March 27, 1895, and entitled, “An Act to provide for the levy and collection of taxes by and for the use of municipal corporations and cities incorporated under the laws of the state of California, except municipal corporations of the first class, and to provide for the consolidation and abolition of certain municipal offices, and to provide that their duties may be performed by certain officers of the county, and fixing the compensation to be allowed for such county officers for the services so rendered to such municipal corporations,” and the amendments thereto.

All assessments and taxes in and for the city shall be made and collected by the assessor and tax collector respectively of the county until the city, by ordinance, elects not to avail itself of the provisions of such act for any longer time. (Prior code § 19.1)

Chapter 3.24 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
3.24.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “real property transfer tax ordinance of the city.” It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. (Ord. 1057 § 1, 1967)

 

3.24.020 Tax imposed.
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements or other realty sold within this city shall be granted, assigned, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his, her or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents for each five hundred dollars or fractional part thereof. (Ord. 1057 § 2, 1967)

 

3.24.030 Paid by whom.
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.24.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Ord. 1057 § 3, 1967)

 

3.24.040 Securing debt exempt.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. (Ord. 1057 § 4, 1967)

 

3.24.050 Government agencies exempt.
The United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia shall not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to which it is a party, but the tax may be collected by assessment from any other party liable therefor. (Ord. 1057 § 5, 1967)

 

3.24.060 Reorganization or adjustment exempt.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment:

(1)     Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

(2)     Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;

(3)     Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

(4)     Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected.

Subsections (1) to (4) inclusive, of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. (Ord. 1057 § 6, 1967)

 

3.24.070 SEC orders exempt.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if:

(1)     The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;

(2)     Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;

(3)     Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (Ord. 1057 § 7, 1967)

 

3.24.080 Realty partnership exempt.
(a)     In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if:

(1)     Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and

(2)     Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

(b)     If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. (Ord. 1057 § 8, 1967)

 

3.24.090 County recorder to administer.
The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 1057 § 9, 1967)

 

3.24.100 Refund claims.
Claims for refund of taxes fin-posed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. (Ord. 1057 § 10, 1967)

 

3.24.110 Operative date.
This chapter shall become operative upon the operative date of any ordinance adopted by the county of Los Angeles, pursuant to Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, or upon the effective date of Ordinance 1057, whichever is the later. (Ord. 1057 § 11, 1967)

 

3.24.120 Filing.
The city clerk shall file two copies of this chapter with the county recorder of Los Angeles County. (Ord. 1057 § 12, 1967)

Chapter 3.28 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND
3.28.010 Created.
Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 53730 through 53737 of the Government Code of the state, and subject to the limitations therein stated, there is hereby created in the city treasury a special fund for capital outlays to be known as the capital improvement fund. (Ord. 1744 § 1, 2002)

 

3.28.020 Purpose.
Expenditures from the capital improvement fund shall be made only for capital improvements within the city, and no money shall be disbursed therefrom except for such purpose.

Capital improvements as used herein shall not include construction, replacement, extension of, or addition to, the city’s domestic water system or the acquisition of capital assets by the city’s domestic water system. (Ord. 1744 § 2, 2002)

 

3.28.030 Levy of taxes and assessments.
Pursuant to applicable provisions of the California Government Code, the city council is hereby empowered and may levy and collect assessments or taxes for the purpose of making capital improvements; provided, however, that no levy for such purpose shall exceed the limitation upon the right of the council to impose taxes as may be prescribed by the general laws of the state of California without the assent of two-thirds of the qualified electors of the city voting at any general or special election at which such proposition may be submitted. (Ord. 1744 § 3, 2002)

 

3.28.040 Transfer of funds.
At any time after the creation of the capital improvement fund, the council may transfer to such fund any unencumbered surplus funds remaining on hand at the end of any fiscal year. (Ord. 1744 § 4, 2002)

Chapter 3.32 GENERAL FUND
3.32.010 Created.
There is hereby created in the treasury of the city a fund to be known as the general fund. (Ord. 1745 § 1, 2002)

 

3.32.020 Purpose.
The general fund shall receive all municipal revenues not specifically restricted for some special purpose or required to be accounted for separately and shall bear all expenditures necessary for the operation of city government except the expenditure of those revenues specifically designated for special purposes or required to be accounted for separately. (Ord. 1745 § 2, 2002)

 

3.32.030 Creation of other funds authorized.
In addition to those fiscal funds established by ordinance of the city council, the finance director, with the concurrence of the city manager, may establish and maintain within the treasury of the city such other fiscal funds as may be required by federal or state law or as may be deemed necessary or desirable to provide for efficient operation, control and accounting of the fiscal affairs of the city. (Ord. 1745 § 3, 2002)

 

3.32.040 Interest.
Except as otherwise stated in this chapter, interest earned on all governmental activity funds cash balances shall be recorded as revenue to the general fund to the extent permitted by generally accepted accounting standards, government auditing standards and any applicable federal and state regulations. (Ord. 1894 § 6, 2008)

Chapter 3.36 CAPITAL EQUIPMENT FUND
3.36.010 Created.
There is hereby created in the treasury of the city a fund to be known as the capital equipment fund. (Ord. 1746 § 1, 2002)

 

3.36.020 Purpose.
Expenditures from the capital equipment fund shall be made only for the acquisition of new or replacement vehicles, computer equipment or communications equipment assigned to various departments and/or functions of the city. (Ord. 1746 § 2, 2002)

 

3.36.030 Revenue.
The capital equipment fund shall be initially funded by transferring to it the existing balance of the general services fund after which it shall be funded in amounts derived through charging equipment users an annual fee sufficient to recover the depreciation cost of equipment acquired by the fund based on the anticipated useful life of the equipment and such through such sums as the council may from time to time appropriate.

The director of finance is hereby authorized to transfer to the capital equipment fund from the general fund or from other funds of the city such amounts as are included in the budget adopted by the city council to reflect the depreciation of vehicles, computer equipment and communications equipment acquired by the fund and used by the various departments and/or functions of the city. (Ord. 1746 § 3, 2002)

 

3.36.040 Expenditures.
Expenditures from the capital equipment fund may be authorized by the city council through adoption of the city’s annual budget or by supplemental appropriation. (Ord. 1746 § 4, 2002)

Chapter 3.40 WORKERS’ COMPENSATION SELF-INSURANCE FUND
3.40.010 Created.
There is hereby created in the treasury of the city a fund to be known as the workers’ compensation self-insurance fund. (Ord. 1747 § 1, 2002)

 

3.40.020 Purpose.
Expenditures from the workers’ compensation self-insurance fund shall be limited to the payment of present and future workers’ compensation claims and costs associated with such claims. Such costs may include, but are not limited to, claims administration costs, safety programs, disability prevention programs, claims investigation fees, legal defense costs, injury prevention programs and other risk management fees related to workers’ compensation claims or the prevention thereof.

Expenses arising from experience based surcharges for workers’ compensation claims shall be payable from the workers’ compensation self-insurance fund. (Ord. 1747 § 1, 2002)

 

3.40.030 Revenue.
The workers’ compensation self-insurance fund shall charge annual insurance premiums to the city’s various operating funds that average the past year’s experience of workers’ compensation claims incurred in the self-insurance fund. Alternatively, such premiums may be charged based on the experience rating of the various job categories in the city.

Rebates accruing to the city from favorable experience in workers’ compensation claims shall be credited as revenue to the workers’ compensation self-insurance fund. (Ord. 1747 § 3, 2002)

 

3.40.040 Actuarial study.
The city manager or a designated representative thereof shall cause an actuarial study of the workers’ compensation self-insurance fund to be performed every two years to quantify the city’s potential liability for claims incurred but not reported. (Ord. 1747 § 4, 2002)

Chapter 3.44 GENERAL LIABILITY SELF-INSURANCE FUND
3.44.010 Created.
There is hereby created in the treasury of the city a fund to be known as the general liability self-insurance fund. (Ord. 1748 § 1, 2002)

 

3.44.020 Purpose.
Expenditures from the general liability self-insurance fund shall be limited to the payment of present and future general and automobile liability claims and claims expenses, claims administration costs, lost control programs, claims investigation fees, legal defense costs, risk management service fees, public safety and injury prevention programs and any other risk management fees related to general liability and automobile liability claims or the prevention thereof.

Expenses arising from experience based surcharges for general and automobile liability claims shall be payable from the general liability self-insurance fund. (Ord. 1748 § 2, 2002)

 

3.44.030 Revenue.
The general liability self-insurance fund shall charge annual insurance premiums to the city’s various operating funds. Premiums may be charged through an approved cost allocation plan consistent with generally accepted accounting principles or, in the alternative, may be based upon the experience rating of the various city departments.

Rebates accruing to the city from favorable experience in liability claims shall be credited as revenue to the general liability self-insurance fund. (Ord. 1748 § 3, 2002)

 

3.44.040 Actuarial study.
The city manager or a designated representative thereof shall cause an actuarial study of the general liability self-insurance fund to be performed every two years to quantify the city’s potential liability for claims incurred but not reported. (Ord. 1748 § 4, 2002)

Chapter 3.46 WATER CAPITAL PROJECTS FUND
3.46.010 Created.
There is hereby created in the treasury of the city of Glendora an enterprise fund to be known as the water capital projects fund. (Ord. 1751 § 1, 2002)

 

3.46.020 Purpose of fund.
The purpose of the water capital projects fund is to pay for capital improvements arising from construction, replacement, extension of and additions to the city’s water system. (Ord. 1751 § 2, 2002)

 

3.46.030 Fund revenue.
A portion of water service charges and miscellaneous water related charges designated for capital improvement if the water system shall be credited to the water capital projects fund. (Ord. 1751 § 3, 2002)

 

3.46.040 Expenditures from fund.
Expenditures from the water fund shall be limited to those capital projects related to construction, replacement, extension of and additions to the city’s water system. Such expenditures may be authorized by the city council by the adoption of the water capital projects fund budget or by supplemental appropriation from the fund. (Ord. 1751 § 4, 2002)

 

3.46.060 Interest on fund.
Interest earned on the water capital projects fund cash balance shall be recorded as revenue to the fund. (Ord. 1751 § 6, 2002)

Chapter 3.48 WASTEWATER RECLAMATION FUND
3.48.010 Wastewater reclamation fund created.
There is created in the treasury of the city of Glendora an enterprise fund to be known as the wastewater reclamation fund. (Ord. 1820 § 1, 2005)

 

3.48.020 Purpose of fund.
Expenditures from the wastewater reclamation fund shall be made only for the administration, operation, and maintenance of the city of Glendora collector sewer system and its capacity to serve the users thereof. (Ord. 1820 § 1, 2005)

 

3.48.030 Fund revenue.
All wastewater reclamation/sewer service charges and miscellaneous sewer-related charges not otherwise designated shall be credited to the wastewater reclamation fund. (Ord. 1820 § 1, 2005)

 

3.48.040 Capital equipment reserve.
(a)     There is established within the wastewater reclamation fund a reserve account for the acquisition and replacement of capital equipment used by the city in administration, operation and maintenance of the wastewater reclamation/sewer system.

(b)     The capital equipment reserve shall be funded in amounts derived through charging equipment users an annual fee sufficient to recover the depreciation cost of equipment acquired by the fund based on the anticipated useful life of the equipment. (Ord. 1820 § 1, 2005)

 

3.48.050 Expenditures from fund.
Expenditures from the wastewater reclamation fund may be authorized by the city council by the adoption of the wastewater reclamation fund budget or by supplemental appropriation from the fund. (Ord. 1820 § 1, 2005)

 

3.48.060 Interest on fund.
Interest earned on the wastewater reclamation fund cash balance shall be recorded as revenue to the fund. (Ord. 1820 § 1, 2005)

Chapter 3.52 TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
3.52.010 Title.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “City of Glendora Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance.” The city of Glendora hereinafter shall be called “city.” This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city. (Ord. 2035 § 1, 2019)

 

3.52.020 Operative date.
“Operative date” means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than one hundred ten days after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the date of such adoption being as set forth below. (Ord. 2035 § 1, 2019)

 

3.52.030 Purpose.
This chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

(a)     To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the city to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose.

(b)     To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

(c)     To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes.

(d)     To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation

Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2035 § 1, 2019)

 

3.52.040 Contract with state.
Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of the transactions and use tax ordinance codified herein; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. (Ord. 2035 § 1, 2019)

 

3.52.050 Transactions tax rate.
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of three quarters of a cent per dollar (0.75%) of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 2035 § 1, 2019)

 

3.52.060 Place of sale.
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration. (Ord. 2035 § 1, 2019)

 

3.52.070 Use tax rate.
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of three quarters of a cent per dollar (0.75%) of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 2035 § 1, 2019)

 

3.52.080 Adoption of provisions of state law.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 2035 § 1, 2019)

 

3.52.090 Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes.
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code:

(a)     Wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when:

(1)     The word “state” is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California;

(2)     The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter.

 

(3)     In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to:

(A)    Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or;

(B)    Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code.

(4)     In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

(b)     The word “city” shall be substituted for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 2035 § 1, 2019)

 

3.52.100 Permit not required.
If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 2035 § 1, 2019)

 

3.52.110 Exemptions and exclusions.
(a)     There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax.

(b)     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from:

(1)     Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

(2)     Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this paragraph, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied:

(A)    With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and

(B)    With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.

(3)     The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(4)     A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(5)     For the purposes of subparagraphs (3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

(c)     There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property:

(1)     The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance.

(2)     Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California.

(3)     If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(4)     If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(5)     For the purposes of subparagraphs (3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

(6)     Except as provided in subparagraph (7), a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer.

(7)     “A retailer engaged in business in the city” shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city.

(d)     Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. (Ord. 2035 § 1, 2019)

 

3.52.120 Amendments.
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified herein to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of said ordinance; provided, however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 2035 § 1, 2019)

 

3.52.130 Enjoining collection forbidden.
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under the ordinance codified in this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 2035 § 1, 2019)

 

3.52.140 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 2035 § 1, 2019)

 

3.52.150 Effective date.
This chapter levying the tax described herein shall be effective ten days after the date on which the city council has declared that the voters of the city of Glendora have approved the ordinance by a vote of no less than a majority of the votes cast by the electors voting on the tax measure set forth in this chapter at that special municipal election held on March 5, 2019. (Ord. 2035 § 1, 2019)

 

3.52.160 Termination date.
The authority to levy the tax imposed by this chapter shall not expire unless terminated by lawful vote of the electorate or as required or authorized by law. (Ord. 2035 § 1, 2019)

Title 4 (RESERVED)

Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.04 LICENSES
Chapter 5.08 LICENSE TAXES
Chapter 5.10 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 5.12 PERMITS
Chapter 5.14 SOLICITATION AND PEDDLING
Chapter 5.16 HANDBILL DISTRIBUTORS
Chapter 5.20 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Chapter 5.22 ADULT BUSINESS LICENSE REGULATIONS ,
Chapter 5.23 MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES
Chapter 5.24 GLENDORA CABLE TELEVISION ORDINANCE
Chapter 5.25 VIDEO FRANCHISE FEES, CUSTOMER SERVICE AND OTHER VIDEO-RELATED MATTERS
Chapter 5.28 AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS
Chapter 5.30 OUTDOOR DISPLAYS
Chapter 5.32 SPECIAL OUTDOOR DISPLAY EVENTS
Chapter 5.34 ALARM SYSTEMS
Chapter 5.36 MOBILEHOME PARK RENT STABILIZATION
Chapter 5.38 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FRANCHISE
Chapter 5.40 GLENDORA VILLAGE BUSINESS DISTRICT

Chapter 5.04 LICENSES
5.04.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section:

(1)     Gender and Persons. In this chapter and Chapter 5.08 of the Glendora Municipal Code—1967, the masculine includes the feminine and the singular includes the plural;

(2)     “Business” means and includes every business, profession, trade, calling, avocation, or other occupation expressly mentioned in this chapter or Chapter 5.08 of the Glendora Municipal Code—1967 for which a license tax is established or required whether conducted for profit or not, and every business, profession, trade, calling, avocation, or other occupation by which a person earns all or part of his or her livelihood or which is conducted for profit;

(3)     Business License. The business license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or Chapter 5.08 constitutes a receipt for the license tax paid, and shall not be construed as a permit or approval from the city for the specific nature or location of any business for which a business license is issued;

(4)     “City” as used in this chapter and in Chapter 5.08 means the city of Glendora, California;

(5)     “Contractor” or “builder” means a person who for either fixed sum, price, fee, percentage, cost and material bases, or compensation other than wages, constructs, alters, repairs, adds to or improves, moves or demolishes any highway, road, excavation, building, project or development or any part thereof;

(6)     “Director of finance” as used in this chapter and in Chapter 5.08 means the director of finance of the city of Glendora;

(7)     “General building contractor” means a contractor whose principal contracting business is in connection with any structure built, being built, or to be built, for the support, shelter and enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind requiring in its construction the use of more than two unrelated building trades or crafts, or to do or superintend the whole or any part thereof;

(8)     “Gross receipts” includes the total amount of the sale price of all sales and the total amount charged or received for the performance of any act or service, of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of material, goods, wares or merchandise. Included in “gross receipts” shall be all receipts, cash, credits, and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever. Excluded from “gross receipts” shall be:

(A)    Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales,

(B)    Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and which property may later be sold,

(C)    Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser,

(D)    Such part of the sale price of property returned by purchasers upon rescission of the contract of sale as is refunded whether in cash or by credit,

(E)     Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as agent or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected, provided the agent or trustee has furnished the collector with the names and address of the others and the amounts paid to them,

(F)     That portion of the receipts of a general building contractor which represent payments to subcontractors, provided that such subcontractors are licensed under the provisions of this chapter and provided the general building contractor furnishes the director of finance with the names and addresses of the subcontractors and the amounts paid each subcontractor;

(9)     “Owner-builder” means a person constructing, reconstructing, erecting or converting a building, dwelling or structure intended for his or her own use and occupancy, and not for the purposes of resale, or as a business venture with the purpose of gain or profit;

(10)   “Person” means all domestic and foreign corporations, joint ventures, associations, partnerships, clubs, fraternal organizations, joint stock companies, estates, business or common law trusts, syndicates, or any other individual, group or combination acting as a unit and engaged in any business in the city other than as an employee;

(11)   “Public utility” means any person who furnishes the public with communication, water, light, gas, heat, power or other public utility or service subject to regulation by the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California;

(12)   “Subcontractor” means a contractor whose operations as such are the performance of construction work requiring special skill and whose principal contracting business involves the use of specialized building trades or crafts. (Ord. 1164 § 1, 1972)

 

5.04.020 For revenue.
This chapter and Chapter 5.08 are enacted for the sole purpose of raising revenue for municipal purposes and are not intended for regulation. (Ord. 1164 § 1, 1972)

 

5.04.030 Effect of this chapter or Chapter 5.08 on past actions and obligations previously accrued.
Neither the adoption of this chapter or Chapter 5.08 nor their superseding of any portion of any other ordinance of the city shall in any manner be construed to affect prosecution for violation of any other ordinance committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or any penal provision applicable to any such violation, nor be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required by any ordinance to be posted, filed, or deposited, and all rights and obligations thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 1164 § 1, 1972)

 

5.04.040 License required.
It is unlawful for any person to transact or carry on any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation in the city without first having procured a license from the city to do so or without complying with any and all applicable provisions of this chapter.

Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1416 § 4, 1983; Ord. 1164 § 1, 1972)

 

5.04.050 Separate license for branch establishments.
A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location where the business is transacted and carried on and for each such separate type of business at the same location, and each license shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license. Warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this section shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. Any individual conducting several businesses at one location, incidental to his principal business, may obtain a license for the principal business and include all others therein, in which event, the license tax will be based on the classification and schedule applicable to the principal business. (Ord. 1164 § 1, 1972)

 

5.04.060 Exemptions.
No license tax shall be required of or from the following:

(1)     Exempt under State and Federal Laws. Those exempt from municipal license taxes by virtue of either the Constitution or the laws of the United States of America, or of the state;

(2)     Educational Institutions. Any educational institution not conducted for profit. As used herein, the term “educational institution” means a public or parochial institution conducting regular academic instruction at the kindergarten, elementary, secondary or collegiate levels including graduate schools, universities and research institutions. Such institutions must either:

(A)    Offer general academic instruction equivalent to the standards prescribed by the State Board of Education, or

(B)    Confer degrees as a college or university of undergraduate or graduate standing, or

(C)    Conduct research;

(3)     Charities. Any enterprise or entertainment conducted or operated for not more than seven days during any calendar year when the receipts derived therefrom are to be appropriated to the sole benefit of any church, school, charitable, welfare, fraternal or patriotic organization, and from which no profit is derived either directly or indirectly, by any private individual or person;

(4)     Resident Farmers, etc. Resident farmers, poultrymen or horticulturists for selling exclusively their own produce, either to stores, or from house to house. This exemption shall not apply to nurseries or to any commercial establishment, or to any person who buys goods for resale as well as selling his or her own goods;

(5)     Nonresident Professions. Any doctor, lawyer, architect, dentist or other professional person not having a fixed place of business within the city who is called upon to render such professional services within the city; provided, however, that he or she does not advertise for or solicit business within the city;

(6)     Ministers. Ministers engaging in their duties as such;

(7)     Employees of Licensees. Any person who is acting solely as an employee or as the direct representative of a business which pays the required license fee to the city and is named as licensee in an unrevoked license;

(8)     Certain Manual Labors. Any person who performs manual labor only, on an hourly or other time basis, and who furnishes only such tools and incidentals as may be required in the performance of such manual labor. This provision shall not apply to any person who also furnishes materials, whether the same are billed separately or not;

(9)     Persons under Court Order. Any person performing only an act required by order of a court of competent jurisdiction for performing such an act;

(10)   Students. Students under nineteen years of age who are engaged in part-time occupations;

(11)   Veterans. Any honorably discharged or honorably relieved soldier, sailor, marine or airman of the United States who claims to be entitled to the benefits set forth in Section 16001 or 16001.5 of the Business and Professions Code of the state shall furnish the director of finance with satisfactory proof that he or she is physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor and that he or she is a voter of this state. Such proof as to such veteran’s inability to obtain a livelihood by manual labor shall be evidenced by a certificate of a duly licensed physician and issued by such physician within three months prior to the veteran’s application for a license. (Ord. 1164 § 1, 1972)

 

5.04.070 Interstate commerce—Filing statement.
Every peddler, solicitor or other person claiming to be entitled to exemption from the payment of any license tax provided for in this chapter or Chapter 5.08 upon the ground that such license tax casts a burden upon his right to engage in commerce with foreign nations or among the several states, or conflicts with the regulations of the United States Congress respecting interstate commerce, shall file a verified statement with the director of finance, disclosing the interstate or other character of his business entitling such exemption. Such statement shall contain:

(1)     The name and location of the company or firm for which the orders are to be solicited or secured;

(2)     The name of the nearest local or state manager, if any, and his or her address;

(3)     The kind of goods, wares or merchandise to be delivered;

(4)     The place from which the same are to be shipped or forwarded;

(5)     The method of solicitation or taking orders;

(6)     The location of any warehouse, factory or plant within the state of California;

(7)     The method of delivery;

(8)     The name and location of the residence of the applicant;

(9)     Any other facts necessary to establish such claim of exemption.

A copy of the order blank, contract form or other papers used by such person in taking orders shall be attached to the affidavit for the information of the director of finance. (Ord. 1164 § 1, 1972)

 

5.04.080 Interstate commerce—Appeal.
None of the license taxes provided for by this chapter or Chapter 5.08 shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce. In any case where a license tax is believed by a licensee or applicant for license to place an undue burden upon such commerce, he or she may apply to the director of finance for an adjustment of the tax so that it shall not be discriminatory or unreasonable as to such commerce. Such application may be made before, at, or within six months after payment of the prescribed license tax. The applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting testimony, show his method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the director of finance may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden on such commerce. The director of finance shall then conduct an investigation, and after having first obtained the written approval of the city attorney, shall fix as the license tax for the applicant, an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory, or if the license tax has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the license tax so fixed. In fixing the license tax to be charged, the director of finance shall have the power to base the license tax upon a percentage of gross receipts or any other measure which will assure that the license tax assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the license tax as prescribed by this chapter or Chapter 5.08. Should the director of finance determine the gross receipts measure of license tax to be the proper basis, he or she may require the applicant to submit, either at the time of termination of applicant’s business in the city of Glendora or at the end of each three-month period, a sworn statement of the gross receipts of the applicant and to pay the amount of license tax therefor, provided that no additional license tax during any one calendar year shall be required after the licensee shall have paid an amount equal to the annual license tax as prescribed in this chapter or Chapter 5.08.

Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this section shall file a verified statement with the director of finance stating the facts upon which exemption is claimed.

The director of finance shall, upon a proper showing contained in the verified statement, issue a license to such person claiming exemption under this section without payment to the city of the license tax required by this chapter or Chapter 5.08.

The director of finance, after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for hearing to a licensee, may revoke any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this section upon information that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided herein. (Ord. 1164 § 1, 1972)

 

5.04.090 Issuance when permit required as prerequisite.
No license shall be issued to engage in any business when the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of this city require a permit to be obtained as a prerequisite to engaging in such business, until such permit is first obtained. Any license issued in violation of this section shall be void. (Ord. 1164 § 1, 1972)

 

5.04. 100 Duty of director of finance—Contents of license.
All licenses shall be prepared and issued by the director of finance or by a person duly appointed to do so by the director of finance. Each license shall state upon its face at least the following:

(1)     The person to whom issued;

(2)     The kind of business licensed thereby;

(3)     The location of such business;

(4)     The effective date of such license;

(5)     The expiration date of such license;

(6)     Such other information as shall be deemed necessary by the director of finance. (Ord. 1164 § 1, 1972)

 

5.04.110 Transferability—Change of location.
No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable or assignable; provided that where a license is issued authorizing a person to transact or carry on a business, a licensee may, upon application therefor and paying a prescribed fee, have the license amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such business under such license at some other location to which the business is to be moved. Any person for which such a license change must be made shall pay a fee established pursuant to resolution of the city council, for the processing of such address change. (Ord. 1536 § 1, 1989; Ord. 1164 § 1, 1972)

 

5.04.120 Posting and exhibition.
Every person having a license under the provisions of this chapter and carrying on a business at a fixed place of business shall keep such license posted and exhibited, while in force, in some conspicuous part such place of business. Every person having such a license and not having a fixed place of business shall carry such license or identification, as provided, with him or her at all times while carrying on the business for which the same was granted. (Ord. 1164 § 1, 1972)

 

5.04.130 Duplicate copies.
A duplicate license may be used by the director of finance to replace any license previously issued under this chapter which has been lost or destroyed upon the licensee filing an affidavit to such fact and paying to the director of finance a fee, established pursuant to a resolution of the city council, for the processing of such duplicate license. (Ord. 1536 § 2, 1989; Ord. 1164 § 1, 1972)

 

5.04.140 License denied to debtor.
No license for any ensuing, current or unexpired license period shall knowingly be issued to any person who, at the time of making application for any license, is indebted to the city for any unpaid license tax required to be paid under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1164 § 1, 1972)

 

5.04.150 Enforcement of title.
The conviction and punishment of any person for engaging in any business without first obtaining a license to conduct such business shall not relieve such person from paying the license tax due and unpaid the time of such conviction, nor shall the payment of any license tax prevent a criminal prosecution for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. All remedies prescribed hereunder shall be cumulative and the use of any one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy, for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1164 § 1, 1972)

 

5.04.160 Administrative rules and regulations.
The director of finance, with the approval of the city council, may promulgate and adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the purpose of administering the provisions of this chapter, which rules so promulgated and adopted shall be in writing and be filed in the office of such director of finance and shall be open to public inspection. (Ord. 1164 § 1, 1972)

 

5.04.170 Powers and duties of director of finance.
The director of finance of the city and his or her duly authorized license inspectors shall have and exercise the power to enter free of charge, at any time, any place of business or premises for which a license is required, and to demand the exhibition of such license for the current term from any person engaged or employed in the transaction of such business. Any information obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be confidential and not be subject to public inspection, except for the disclosure of the name and address of business licensees. (Ord. 1183 § 1, 1973; Ord. 1164 § 1, 1972)

 

5.04.180 Misrepresentation.
No person shall knowingly or intentionally misrepresent to any officer or employee of the city any material fact in procuring the licenses provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 1164 § 1, 1972)

 

5.04.190 Unexpired licenses heretofore issued.
Where a license for revenue purposes has been issued to any business by the city and the tax therefor paid under the provisions of any ordinance heretofore enacted and the term of such license has not expired, then the license tax described for the business by this chapter or Chapter 5.08 shall not be payable until the expiration of the term of such unexpired license. (Ord. 1164 § 1, 1972)

Chapter 5.08 LICENSE TAXES
Note
*       Prior history: Prior code §§ 11.16 through 11.27 and 11.29 through 11.37 and Ords. 954 and 1025.

 

5.08.010 Tax deemed debt.
The amount of any license tax imposed by this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city. Any person carrying on any business covered in this chapter without having lawfully procured a license from the city to do so shall be liable to an action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of the required license tax. Such license tax shall be due and payable once a year, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, and the person or business so assessed shall pay to the city the amount of the tax in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1456 § 1, 1985; Ord. 1164 § 2, 1972)

 

5.08.020 Affidavit—First license.
Upon a person making application for a first license to be issued hereunder or for a newly established business, and in all cases where the amount of license tax to be paid is measured by gross receipts, such person shall furnish to the director of finance for his or her guidance in ascertaining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant, a written statement upon a form provided by the director of finance, sworn to before a person authorized to administer oaths, or sworn to under penalty of perjury, setting forth such information as may be therein required and may be necessary to determine the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant.

If the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant is measured by gross receipts he or she shall estimate the gross receipts for the period to be covered by the license to be issued, and shall report same to the director of finance. Such report shall be used in determining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant; provided, however, the amount of the license tax so determined shall be tentative only, and such person shall within thirty days after the expiration of the period for which such license was issued, furnish the director of finance with a sworn statement, upon a form furnished by the director of finance, showing the gross receipts during the period of such license, and the license tax for such period shall be finally ascertained and paid, after deducting from the payment found to be due, the amount paid at the time such first license was issued. (Ord. 1164 § 2, 1972)

 

5.08.030 Duration.
(a)     Unless otherwise specifically provided, every business license shall be valid for a period of one year, commencing on the day of issuance and expiring as of the first day of the same month twelve months thereafter.

Persons or firms whose license taxes exceed two hundred fifty dollars per year may, upon payment of an additional ten percent of the annual license tax, arrange, through the director of finance, to submit their annual business license tax in equal quarterly installments.

(b)     Upon the request of the business license applicant and the payment of fees as set forth herein, a business license shall be valid for a period of a quarter year, commencing on the day of issuance and expiring on the same day three months thereafter. Such license shall be limited to contractors with one job in the city at a fee of thirty dollars and persons who transact or carry on the business of retail sales and services, as defined in Section 5.08.210, for a period of not more than three months within any twelve-month period at a fee of twenty-five dollars.

(c)     Upon the request of the business license applicant and the payment of a fee of twenty-five dollars per day, a business license shall be valid for a period not to exceed three consecutive days. Such license shall be limited to special events at which retail sales occur. The license shall cover all persons who transact or carry on the business of retail sales at such an event. The application for the license shall be made by the sponsor of the event.

(d)     The renewal of a business license shall be deemed delinquent if the license tax is not paid within thirty days after the expiration of the previously issued business license. (Ord. 1456 § 2, 1985; Ord. 1164 § 2, 1972)

 

5.08.040 Payment required.
(a)     It is unlawful for any person to transact or carry on any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation in the city without first having paid a license fee as specifically enumerated in Sections 5.08.060 through 5.08.260 or without complying with any and all applicable provisions of this chapter.

(b)     Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1416 § 1, 1983; Ord. 1164 § 2, 1972)

 

5.08.050 Failure to pay—Penalty.
For failure to pay any license tax when due, the director of finance shall add a penalty of twenty-five percent of such license tax on the day following the date of delinquency, and a similar penalty one month thereafter. In the event that a license tax is not paid after such penalties have been assessed, a further penalty shall be assessed based upon the actual administrative costs incurred by the city, commencing from the date upon which the final twenty-five percent penalty was imposed. As a result of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the director of finance shall maintain and keep records of all such administrative costs. (Ord. 1456 § 3, 1985; Ord. 1164 § 2, 1972)

 

5.08.060 License tax on signs.
Every person constructing, erecting, installing, maintaining or operating outdoor advertising signs, structures, billboards, signboards or similar devices, other than signs provided for in subsection (3), shall pay an annual license tax as computed in subsections (1) and (2):

(1)     For the first two signs, primarily directional in nature, erected or caused to be erected by and for each residential subdivision which has been issued a business license by this city and has paid business license taxes: at the rate of twenty-five cents per square foot, plus seventy-five cents per square foot in excess of one hundred square feet of area per sign; provided that additional signs of such residential subdivision shall be taxed as specified in subsection (2);

(2)     For all signs other than those excepted by subsection (1): For the calendar year 1967, at the rate of twenty-five cents per square foot per year; for the calendar year 1968, at the rate of fifty cents per square foot per year; for the calendar year 1969, and every year thereafter, at the rate of one dollar per square foot per year, or at the rate of seventy-five dollars per sign, whichever is greater;

(3)     Signs located on the premises of a licensed business, which refer only to such business, and signs located entirely on real estate which is thereby offered for sale, rent or lease, shall not be included in computing the tax imposed by this section. (Ord. 1164 § 2, 1972)

 

5.08.070 Sanitariums, rest homes, etc.
The license tax for conducting or maintaining an infirmary, sanitarium, convalescent home or hospital shall be thirty-five dollars plus two dollars per year for each bed space or accommodation available for any guest, member, patient or customer. The license tax for conducting or maintaining a rest home, home for the aged or retirement home shall be thirty-five dollars plus two dollars per year per resident, member or resident-member, based upon the average number of such residents, members or resident-members residing therein during the three-month period next preceding the application for license. (Ord. 1291 § 1, 1977; Ord. 1164 § 2, 1972)

 

5.08.080 Hotels, motels and auto courts.
The license tax for conducting or maintaining a hotel, motel or auto court shall be thirty-five dollars per year, plus forty cents per each one thousand dollars gross receipts or portion thereof in excess of twenty thousand dollars. (Ord. 1291 § 2, 1977; Ord. 1164 § 2, 1972)

 

5.08.090 Public utilities.
For every person engaged as a public utility or otherwise in the distribution, transportation or transmission of electricity, gas, water or communications, the annual license tax shall be one hundred fifty dollars for those utilities that pay a franchise fee based on gross receipts. The license tax for all other utility firms shall be thirty-two dollars plus three cents per one thousand dollars gross receipts in excess of twenty thousand dollars. (Ord. 1183 § 2, 1973; Ord. 1164 § 2, 1972)

 

5.08.100 Dumps.
The license tax for conducting, maintaining or operating a dump or refuse disposal site in the city shall be the sum of one thousand eight hundred dollars per year. (Ord. 1164 § 2, 1972)

 

5.08.110 Funeral homes, chapels and cemeteries.
The license tax for conducting or maintaining a mortuary and cemetery, or funeral chapel and cemetery, shall be the sum of one hundred dollars per year. The license tax for conducting or maintaining a mortuary or funeral home only shall be fifty dollars per year. (Ord. 1164 § 2, 1972)

 

5.08.120 Garbage and refuse pickup service.
The license tax for conducting or carrying on the business of a garbage and refuse pickup service in the city shall be the sum of forty dollars per year for each vehicle. (Ord. 1164 § 2, 1972)

 

5.08.130 Apartment houses, mobilehome parks, trailer parks and industrial and commercial rentals.
Apartment houses, duplexes, mobilehome parks, trailer parks and industrial and commercial rentals shall pay the following license taxes:

Four or more units, spaces or rooms shall pay thirty-five dollars plus two dollars and fifty cents for each unit, space or room over four. (Ord. 1456 § 4, 1985; Ord. 1291 § 3, 1977; Ord. 1164 § 2, 1972)

 

5.08.150 Bankruptcy and closing-out sales.
(a)     It is unlawful for any person to advertise or conduct any sale of goods, wares or merchandise at retail, that is represented as bankrupt, insolvent, receiver’s, closing-out, fire or water damage sale, or any other sale which is by representation or advertisement intended to lead the public to believe that the person conducting such sale is selling out or closing out the goods of any business for less than the current or going retail price thereof in the city without first filing with the finance director the inventory provided for in subsection (c) and obtaining from him or her a license to do so. The tax for such license shall be, and the same is hereby fixed as follows:

(1)     For a period not to exceed thirty days—twenty-five dollars;

(2)     For a period not to exceed sixty days—fifty dollars;

(3)     For a period not to exceed ninety days—seventy-five dollars;

Provided, that only one such license shall be issued to any one person within a twelve month period, and no license shall be issued for less than thirty days, nor more than ninety days.

(b)     The provisions of this section shall not apply to a bona fide closing out sale of merchandise by a person who has conducted such business in the city for the period of one year immediately preceding such sale.

(c)     Any person desiring to conduct any sale as enumerated in subsection (a) shall submit to the finance director an inventory of all goods, wares and merchandise to be sold at such sale. It is unlawful to sell, offer or expose for sale at any such sale or to list on such inventory any goods, wares or merchandise which are not the regular stock of the store or other place, the business of which is to be closed out by such sale, or to make any replenishments or additions to such stock or the purpose of such sale, or to fail, neglect or refuse to keep records of things sold. (Ord. 1164 § 2, 1972)

 

5.08.160 Circuses, carnivals, etc.
The license tax for the business of exhibiting, conducting, managing or operating a circus, wild west show, carnival, or other exhibition or entertainment, at which feats of horsemanship, acrobatic feats, mechanical amusement devices or trained or wild animals are exhibited or displayed, or any similar show or exhibition shall be seventy-five dollars per day. (Ord. 1164 § 2, 1972)

 

5.08.180 Vending machines.
(a)     Every person engaged in the business of operating, maintaining or letting the use of any vending machine, shall pay a license tax based upon one percent of the gross receipts derived within the city directly attributable to the vending machines located within the city, or, at the licensee’s option, a tax of thirty-five dollars per such machine.

(b)     Definition: “Vending machine,” for the purposes of this section, means any mechanical device the operation of which depends upon the insertion of a coin or other thing representative of value in the denomination of five cents or more and which dispenses or vends a product, service or exchange of equal value, other than telephone service furnished under public utility tariffs. The term shall not be construed to include any equipment used by a financial institution for the purpose of facilitating financial transactions, whether such equipment is located on the premises of the financial institution or at a location remote therefrom.

(c)     Display of Name and Address. Under California Business and Professions Code, Sections 17570 through 17572, every person who owns a vending machine is required to have his or her name and address affixed thereto in a place where it may be seen by anyone using the machine; provided, however, that in the event a person owns more than one vending machine located at the same place, such person may, as an alternative to affixing his or her name and address on each machine, post a clearly readable sign containing his or her name and address in a conspicuous location near the machines. Notwithstanding Section 5.08.040 of this chapter, any person who fails to comply with California Business and Professions Code, Sections 17570 through 17572, shall be cited thereunder.

(d)     Exemptions. No business tax shall be required for the maintenance or operation of:

(1)     Any postage stamp machine;

(2)     Any machine dispensing sanitary or hygienic articles, or drinking cups, towels or medicine, which machine is entirely owned and supplied by the owner or operator of the premises where installed and is maintained solely for the convenience of employees, visitors or customers and not for profit to him or her or to any other person; or

(3)     Any machine which is entirely owned, operated and supplied by the owner or operator of the premises where such machine is installed, and such owner or operator holds a valid business license at that location to engage in a business taxed under the provisions of this chapter and such owner or operator includes the gross receipts from such machine in the measure of the applicable business license tax paid under this chapter.

This subsection shall not be construed as providing an exemption from the requirements of subsection (c) of this section. (Ord. 1456 § 6, 1985; Ord. 1183 § 3, 1973; Ord. 1164 § 2, 1972)

 

5.08.190 Delivery vehicles.
(a)     For every person conducting or carrying on the business of delivering wholesale goods, wares or merchandise in the city, the sum of fifty-three dollars per vehicle per year shall be paid.

(b)     Every person engaging in the business of making retail deliveries house to house over regular routes to regular customers shall pay an annual license tax of fifty-three dollars per vehicle, per year.

(c)     Every person making retail deliveries other than as a street vendor, peddler and other than as specified in subsection (b) hereof shall pay an annual license tax of fifty-three dollars per vehicle. (Ord. 1643 § 2, 1995; Ord. 1291 § 4, 1977; Ord. 1164 § 2, 1972)

 

5.08.200 Street and sidewalk vendors.
(a)     Any person operating as a sole proprietor or who either employs or contracts with one or more individuals to have such individuals solicit the retail sale of any goods, wares, merchandise, services or other things of value for future delivery or to sell, vend or peddle such goods, wares and merchandise on the street, who operates in the city and who does not have a regularly established place of business within the city, may obtain a principal’s street vendor or a street vendor license or sidewalk vendor license and pay an annual license fee of fifty dollars, plus twenty dollars annually for each individual street vendor or sidewalk vendor who operates as a sole proprietor or who is employed by such a person for said services, or with whom such a person has a contract for said services.

(b)     In the alternative any bona fide resident of the city applying for an individual’s solicitor or peddler license to operate in the city shall pay an annual license tax of seven dollars and fifty cents each in advance.

(c)     Other persons not maintaining a fixed place of business in the city, but who regularly render personal or other services or products either by appointment, call, referral or otherwise, from place to place or house to house in the city, are subject to the provisions of this section.

(d)     Any person maintaining a fixed place of business in the city, provided that a license tax is specifically required under any other section of this chapter, shall not be required to pay any further license tax under the provisions of this section but shall be required to obtain the necessary solicitor’s permits for each employee so engaged according to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2046 § 2, 2020; Ord. 1643 § 3, 1995; Ord. 1183 § 4, 1973; Ord. 1164 § 2, 1972)

 

5.08.210 Retailers.
Every person engaged in the business of selling to the general public at retail, goods, wares, merchandise or commodities, including restaurants and other food dispensers, unless otherwise expressly provided for in this chapter, shall pay an annual license tax computed as follows:

Thirty-five dollars for the first twenty thousand dollars gross receipts or portion thereof, plus an amount as below specified for each one thousand dollars gross receipts or portion thereof in excess of twenty thousand dollars.

Class A—Automotive dealers, gasoline service stations, grocery stores, meat, fish, fruit and vegetable markets: Thirty-five dollars plus three cents per one thousand dollars gross receipts in excess of twenty thousand dollars;

Class B—Building materials, hardware, farm and garden supply, and except as provided for elsewhere, public utility firms: Thirty-five dollars plus seven and one-half cents per one thousand dollars gross receipts in excess of twenty thousand dollars;

Class C—Apparel and accessories, restaurants, night clubs, furniture and home furnishings, home appliances, general merchandise, liquor stores, department stores, tires, batteries and accessories, variety stores, trailer sales, miscellaneous goods retail—Thirty-five dollars plus ten cents per one thousand dollars gross receipts in excess of twenty thousand dollars;

Class D—Drugstores, dry goods, jewelers, laundry and dry cleaners—Thirty-five dollars plus twelve and one-half cents per one thousand dollars gross receipts in excess of twenty thousand dollars;

Class E—Automotive repair, printing shops, newspapers and other miscellaneous retail firms—Thirty-five dollars plus fifteen cents per one thousand dollars gross receipts in excess of twenty thousand dollars;

Class F—Barber, beauty shops, and other service firms—Thirty-five dollars plus thirty cents per one thousand dollars gross receipts in excess of twenty thousand dollars. (Ord. 1291 § 5, 1977; Ord. 1164 § 2,1972)

 

5.08.220 General building contractors and subcontractors.
General building contractors shall pay forty-three dollars plus ten cents per one thousand dollars gross receipts in excess of forty thousand dollars; electrical, plumbing and heating and air conditioning contractors shall pay forty-three dollars plus fifteen cents per one thousand dollars gross receipts in excess of forty thousand dollars; all other contractors shall pay forty-three dollars plus twenty cents per one thousand dollars gross receipts in excess of forty thousand dollars. (Ord. 1291 § 6, 1977; Ord. 1164 § 2, 1972)

 

5.08.230 Wholesalers and manufacturers.
Every person engaged in the business of selling goods, wares or merchandise at wholesale at a fixed place of business within the city, and every person engaged in the business of manufacturing, processing or fabricating goods, wares or merchandise, shall pay an annual license tax of fifty-three dollars plus three cents per one thousand dollars gross receipts in excess of twenty thousand dollars. (Ord. 1291 § 7, 1977; Ord. 1164 § 2, 1972)

 

5.08.240 Medical, dental and related health services.
Every person engaged in medical, dental and related health services in a professional, semi-professional and connected business as hereinafter in this section enumerated, or any combination thereof, shall pay an annual license fee according to the following schedule:

Class A—Dental hygienists, physical therapists, therapist, oculists—Fifty-eight dollars;

Class B—Dentists and dental specialists, chiropractors, physicians, psychologists, podiatrists, optometrists, pharmacists, and other medical and surgical specialists—Eighty-eight dollars.

Where two or more medical, dental or allied professionals are part of a professional corporation or partnership, the license fee shall be not less than the aggregate fee that would be payable if the professional persons practiced as individuals.

Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person engaged in any of the professions, services or occupations enumerated in this section solely as an employee of any person licensed hereunder to engage in the aforesaid business. (Ord. 1291 § 8, 1977; Ord. 1184 § 5, 1973; Ord. 1164 § 2, 1972)

 

5.08.245 Other professionals, etc.
Every person engaged in professional, semi-professional and connected business or services as hereinafter in this section enumerated, or any combination thereof, shall pay an annual license fee according to the following schedule:

Class A—Collection agencies, cosmetologists, insurance adjusters, physical training schools, social workers, and tree surgeons—Forty-eight dollars;

Class B—Appraisers, bookkeepers, brokers, business consultants, communications services, escrow agents, labor consultants, private investigators, recordkeeping services, sales representatives, tax consultants, and taxidermists—Sixty-three dollars;

Class C—Accountants, public accountants, certified public accountants, architects, civil engineers, geologists, physicists and lawyers—Eighty-eight dollars.

Where two or more professionals are part of a professional corporation or partnership, the license fee shall be not less than the aggregate fee that would be payable if the professional persons practiced as individuals.

Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person engaged in any of the professions, services, or occupations enumerated in this section solely as an employee of any person licensed hereunder to engage in the aforesaid business. (Ord. 1291 § 9, 1977; Ord. 1183 § 6, 1973)

 

5.08.250 Motion picture production and television production.
No person shall use any public street, public park or public property of the city for the taking of motion pictures or television pictures for profit without first obtaining a permit from the director of finance and paying a fee of seven hundred and fifty dollars. (Ord. 1291 § 20, 1977; Ord. 1164 § 2, 1972)

 

5.08.260 Persons not otherwise provided for.
Any person conducting a business in the city not otherwise provided for in the foregoing sections shall pay an annual license tax as follows: Thirty-five dollars for the first twenty thousand dollars gross receipts or portion thereof plus ten cents per one thousand dollars gross receipts in excess of twenty thousand dollars. (Ord. 1291 § 11, 1977; Ord. 1164 § 2, 1972)

 

5.08.270 Effective date of business license tax rate amendments.
All business license tax rate amendments as set forth in this chapter and ordained in Ordinance 1291 of the city council of the city of Glendora, county of Los Angeles, state of California, shall be in full effect from and including January 1, 1978. (Ord. 1291 § 12, 1977)

Chapter 5.10 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
5.10.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the words, terms and phrases set forth in this section shall have the meanings herein set forth unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.

(1)     “Director” means the director of planning or his or her designee.

(2)     “License” means the license to operate a massage establishment as required by this chapter.

(3)     “Massage establishment” means any establishment having a fixed place of business where any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, joint venture or combination of individuals engaged in, conducts, carries on or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on for consideration, massages, baths, or health treatments involving massages, or baths as regular functions.

(4)     “Massage” means any method of pressure on, or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating the external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus, or other appliances or devices, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil, powder, cream, lotion, ointment or other similar preparations. “Massage” includes, but is not limited to acupuncture, acupressure (shiatsu), reflexology, foot massage, Reiki, and other similar energy healing treatments. This definition exempts massage of the hands or feet of a seated customer or client when conducted solely for the purposes of administering manicures or pedicures and conducted by California licensed manicurists, pedicurists, beauticians, cosmetologists, or aestheticians. Also exempted is massage above the neck of a seated customer or client when conducted solely for the purposes of administering hair cutting, hair styling, facial hair removal, or non-permanent make-up application to the face when conducted by California licensed barbers, hairdressers, beauticians, or cosmetologists.

(5)     “Massage technician” means any person who administers massages, baths, or health treatments involving massages or baths as the principal functions to another person for any consideration whatsoever.

(6)     “Massage practitioner” means a nonmedical health care practitioner who uses a massage specialty and health enhancement approach in caring for clients.

(7)     “Permit” means the permit to engage in the activities of a massage required by this chapter.

(8)     “Person” means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, joint venture or combination of individuals.

(9)     “Person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct” means a person who:

(A)    Within five years immediately preceding the date of filing of the application in question or, in the case of revocation or suspension proceedings, within five years of the date of notice of hearing pursuant to Section 5.10.250, has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of:

(i)      Any misdemeanor or felony offense which relates directly to the operation of a massage establishment, whether as a massage establishment owner or operator, or as a massage technician or massage practitioner, or

(ii)     Any felony the commission of which occurred on the premises of a massage establishment; or

(B)    Within five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application in question or, in the case of revocation or suspension proceedings, within five years of the date of notice of revocation or suspension hearing, whichever is applicable, has had any massage establishment, operator, technician, practitioner or trainee license or permit issued by any state, county or city revoked; or

(C)    Within five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, or in the case of revocation or suspension proceedings, within five years of the date of notice of revocation or suspension hearing, whichever is applicable, has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of:

(i)      Any violation of Sections 266(h), 266(i), 315, 316, 318 or subdivision (b) of Section 674 of the California Penal Code, or

(ii)     Conspiracy of attempt to commit any such offense, or

(iii)   Any offense in a jurisdiction outside the state of California which is the equivalent of any of the aforesaid offenses, or

(iv)    Any felony offense involving the sale of a controlled substance specified in Sections 11054, 11055, 11057 or 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code; or

(D)    Is required to register under the provisions of Section 290 of the California Penal Code; or

(E)     Has been subjected to a permanent injunction against the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to Sections 11225 through 11235 of the California Penal Code or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the state of California.

(10)   “Recognized school of massage” means any school or institution of learning which teaches the theory, ethics, practice, profession and work of massage, which school or institution of learning requires a residence course of study of not fewer than one hundred hours to be given in not more than three calendar months before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school or institution of learning following the successful completion of such course of study or learning, and which school has been approved pursuant to California Education Code Section 94311 or, if said school is not located in California, has complied with standards commensurate with those required by this section and has obtained certification under any similar state certification program, if such exists. Any school or institution of learning offering or allowing correspondence course credit not requiring actual attendance at class, or courses of a massage technician not approved by the California Department of Education shall not be deemed a “recognized school of massage.”

(11)   “State or national organization devoted to the massage specialty and therapeutic approach” means an organization which the director determines meets each of the following requirements:

(A)    Has tax exempt status under Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code;

(B)    The organization or association requires that its members meet minimum educational requirements. The educational requirements must include at least five hundred classroom hours or its equivalent in anatomy, physiology, hygiene, sanitation, massage practice and ethics of massage practice;

(C)    The organization or association requires participation in continuing education programs as a condition of continuing membership;

(D)    The organization or association has established rules of ethics and has enforcement procedures for the suspension and revocation of membership of persons violating the rules of ethics;

(E)     The organization is open to members of the general public meeting the requirements for membership on either a statewide or national basis and, in fact, maintains a membership which reflects substantial statewide or national participation by persons engaged in the business of therapeutic massage.

(12)   “Massage therapy” is the practice of massage under the direction of a California licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor, acupuncturist, osteopath, nurse or registered physical therapist or the practice of massage by a California licensed massage therapist or massage technician as an ancillary use to a beauty/health spa or gym as defined by Title 21 of the Glendora Municipal Code. (Ord. 1924 §§ 2, 3, 2009; Ord. 1850 § 1, 2006; Ord. 1636 § 1, 1995)

 

5.10.020 Massage establishment license required.
It is unlawful for any person as owner or operator to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city the operation of a massage establishment without a massage establishment license obtained from the director as required by this chapter unless it can be determined by the director that the massage establishment is exempt from the requirements of this chapter pursuant to Division 2, Chapter 10.5 (Massage Therapists) of the California Business and Professions Code. A separate license shall be obtained for each separate massage establishment operated by such person. Upon payment of the appropriate license application fee, a massage establishment license shall be issued to any person who has complied with the requirements of this chapter, and all other applicable provisions of the code, unless grounds for denial of such license are found to exist. Nothing in this section shall be construed to waive or eliminate the requirement for any other license which may be required by this code. (Ord. 1924 § 4, 2009; Ord. 1636 § 1, 1995)

 

5.10.030 Massage establishment license application fee.
Any application for a license to operate a massage establishment shall be accomplished by a nonrefundable fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. The application fee shall be used to defray the costs of investigation and report. A license to operate a massage establishment shall be renewed annually. The licensee shall pay a renewal fee for such renewal, in an amount established by city council resolution. (Ord. 1636 § 1, 1995)

 

5.10.040 Application for massage establishment license.
(a)     No person shall operate any massage establishment prior to having obtained a massage establishment license pursuant to this chapter. Any application for a massage establishment license shall be made with the director.

(b)     The application shall set forth the exact nature of the massage, bath or health treatments to be administered, the proposed place of business and facilities therefor, and the name and address of the applicant. The applicant must furnish fingerprints for purposes of establishing identification. The applicant shall also furnish the following information:

(1)     The previous addresses of applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each;

(2)     Written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age;

(3)     The history of the applicant as to the operation of any massage establishment or similar business or occupation within five years immediately preceding the filing of the application. Such information shall include, but shall not be limited to, a statement as to whether or not such person, in previously operating a massage establishment under a permit or license, has had such permit or license revoked or suspended and the reasons thereto; and the business, activity or occupation the license applicant engaged in subsequent to such action of revocation or suspension;

(4)     All criminal convictions or offenses described in Section 5.10.010; whether the applicant is required to register under the provisions of Section 290 of California Penal Code; whether the applicant, including a corporation or partnership, or a former employer of the applicant while so employed, or a building in which the applicant was so employed or a business conducted, was ever subjected to an abatement proceeding under Sections 11225 through 11235 of the California Penal Code or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the state of California;

(5)     Applicant’s height, weight, and color of eyes and hair;

(6)     Two prints of a recent passport-size photograph of applicant;

(7)     Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the application;

(8)     If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation, together with the names and residence addresses of each of its officers, directors and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock of the corporation, along with the amount of stock held. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and residence addresses of each of the partners, including limited partners. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to a corporate applicant shall apply;

(9)     The names and residence addresses of all persons currently employed or intended to be employed in the massage establishment, regardless of the nature of the employment, including the names and addresses of any person licensed pursuant to Sections 5.10.140 and 5.10.170 along with the proposed or actual nature of the work performed or to be performed, and recent passport-sized photographs, suitable for the director to process the application of each such employee. The director shall require such employees to furnish fingerprints for the purpose of establishing identification. Any applicant or licensee shall notify the city in writing of the names, addresses and nature of the work, or any new employees, within five days of such employment, and supply the photographs described in this subsection. Such new employees shall allow fingerprints to be taken for the purpose of identification upon request. “Employee” includes every owner, partner, manager, supervisor and worker, whether paid or not, who renders personal services of any nature in the operation of a massage establishment;

(10)   Such other information as may reasonably be deemed necessary by the director;

(11)   A statement in writing by the applicant that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct, said statement being duly dated;

(12)   Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the application for the license. (Ord. 1636 § 1, 1995)

 

5.10.050 Approval or denial of massage establishment license.
(a)     Within sixty working days following receipt of a completed application, the director shall either issue the license or mail a written statement of the reasons for denial thereof.

(b)     The director shall deny a license to the license applicant where any of the following conditions exist:

(1)     The applicant has made one or more material misstatements in the application for a license; or

(2)     The applicant, if an individual; or the stockholders holding more than five percent of the stock of the corporation; the officers and directors and each of them if the applicant be a corporation, or the partners, including limited partners, and each of them, if the applicant be a partnership; and the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business, or any such individuals, is a person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct in the past five years, as described in subsection (9) of Section 5.10.010; or

(3)     The massage establishment, as proposed by the license applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all the applicable laws, including, but not limited to, all the city’s building, fire, zoning, and health regulations; or

(4)     The applicant is lacking in the background and qualifications to conduct a bona fide massage establishment; or

(5)     Any persons to be employed by applicant are persons who have engaged in disqualifying conduct as described in Section 5.10.010 (9); or

(6)     The applicant has violated any provision of this chapter, or any similar ordinance, law, rule or regulation of any other public agency which regulates the operation of massage establishments; or

(7)     The applicant is less than eighteen years of age. (Ord. 1636 § 2, 1995)

 

5.10.060 Massage establishment facilities and operations requirements.
All massage establishments shall comply with the following facilities and operations requirements:

(1)     Massage establishments shall comply with all applicable code requirements.

(2)     A minimum of one toilet and wash basin shall be provided in every massage establishment.

(3)     Cabinets or other covered space shall be provided for the storage of clean linen. Approved receptacles shall be provided for the storage of all soiled linen and paper towels.

(4)     Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the applicable building codes of the city. To allow for adequate ventilation in cubicles, rooms and areas provided for patrons’ use, which are not serviced directly by required windows or mechanical systems of ventilation, partitions shall be constructed so that the height of partition does not exceed the greater of seventy-five percent of the floor-to-ceiling height of the area in which they are located or sixty inches.

(5)     All plumbing and electrical installations shall be installed under permit and inspection of the buildings inspection department and such installations shall be installed in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Uniform Building Code, Uniform Plumbing Code and other applicable codes.

(6)     The walls in all rooms where water or steam baths are given shall have a washable, mold-resistant surface.

(7)     All lavatories or wash basins shall be provided with hot and cold running water, soap and single service towels in wall-mounted dispensers.

(8)     All massage establishments shall be provided with clean and sanitary towels, sheets and linens in sufficient quantity. Towels, sheets and linens shall not be used by more than one person. Reuse of such linen is prohibited unless the same has first been laundered. Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets; provided that such paper is used once for each person and then discarded into a sanitary receptacle.

(9)     All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all other physical facilities including appliances and apparatuses of the establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected after each use.

(10)   Disinfecting agents and sterilizing equipment shall be provided for any instruments used in performing any massage and said instruments shall be disinfected and sterilized after each use.

(11)   Pads used on massage tables shall be covered with durable, washable plastic or other acceptable waterproof material.

(12)   To assure patrons’ health, safety, sanitation and comfort, all employees, massage technicians and massage practitioners shall be clean and dressed appropriately when performing services upon the premises. All patrons shall be appropriately draped while receiving such services.

(13)   Each service offered, the price thereof and the minimum length of time such service shall be performed shall be posted in a conspicuous public location in each massage establishment. All letters and numbers shall be capitals not less than one inch in height. No services shall be performed and no sums shall be charged for such services other than those posted. All arrangements for services to be performed shall be made in a room in the massage establishment which is not used for administration of massages, baths or health treatments, unless no other room exists in the establishment. No massage technician or practitioner shall, after the commencement of any service for any patron, advise, suggest or otherwise indicate to such patron that any additional service is available, or ask or inquire of such patron whether such patron desires any additional service to be performed. No massage technician or practitioner shall perform any service for any patron which was not ordered by such patron prior to the commencement of performance of any service rendered.

(14)   No massage establishment shall be kept open for business between the hours of nine p.m. and seven a.m.

(15)   No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, furnished, kept or possessed on the premises of any massage establishment.

(16)   No communication devices shall be installed or used in any manner on the premises so as to interfere with or hinder inspections by law enforcement officers or city officials.

(17)   Residing in massage establishments prohibited. No person or persons shall be allowed to live, reside or dwell inside the massage establishment at any time.

(18)   Doors. All front, reception, hallway or front exterior doors (except back or rear exterior doors used for employee entrance to and exit from the massage establishment) shall be kept unlocked during business hours. No massage may be given within any cubicle, room, booth or any area within a massage establishment which is fitted with a door capable of being locked, unless the only door is an exterior door.

(19)   Notices. The chief of police may require that the following notice be posted in the event that any person or employee of the massage establishment or any person who has been aided and abetted by an employee of the massage establishment has been found, after full hearing by administrative proceeding or court conviction, to have violated any of the provisions listed in this chapter.

 

NOTICE TO ALL PATRONS

 

THIS MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT AND THE MASSAGE ROOMS DO NOT PROVIDE COMPLETE PRIVACY AND ARE SUBJECT TO INSPECTION BY THE GLENDORA POLICE DEPARTMENT OR CITY OFFICIALS AT ANYTIME WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE.

 

(A)    The notice set forth above shall be prepared and issued by the chief of police.

(B)    The notice shall be conspicuously posted in a location within the massage establishment that is easily visible to any person entering the premises and in each massage room. The notice shall be posted for twelve months following the administrative determination of any such violation, or date of conviction, of any of the offenses set forth in this chapter.

(C)    The requirement for posting the notice described in this subsection is cumulative and in addition to all other civil and criminal remedies and penalties set forth in this chapter, or in the ordinance, laws, rules or regulations of the city of Glendora, and the state of California. (Ord. 1840 §§ 2—5, 2006; Ord. 1636 § 2, 1995)

 

5.10.070 Application to existing establishment.
Each owner or operator of a massage establishment legally doing business on the effective date of this chapter shall apply for a massage establishment license not later than ninety days therefrom, and shall comply with all requirements which are prerequisites for issuance of a license before such a license will issue. (Ord. 1636 § 2, 1995)

 

5.10.080 Inspection by officials.
Any and all investigating officials of the city shall have the right to enter massage establishments from time to time during regular business hours to make reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with building, fire, electrical, plumbing or health regulations, and to ascertain whether there is compliance with the provisions of this chapter. A person who operates a massage establishment or his or her agents or employee commits a violation of this chapter if he or she refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by an official of the city pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1840 § 7, 2006)

 

5.10.090 Issuance of notice of violation.
Whenever the director makes an inspection of a massage establishment and finds that any provision of this chapter has been violated, the director shall give notice of such violation by means of an inspection report or other written notice. In any such notification, the director shall:

(1)     Set forth the specific violation or violations found;

(2)     Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for the correction of the violation or violations. If the director determines that the violation or violations are minor in nature, the director may issue a warning to the licensee or permittee that any further violation of this chapter may result in the filing of a complaint for revocation or suspension of the license or permit;

(3)     State that failure to comply with any notice issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter may result in the director filing a complaint for revocation or suspension of the license or permit. (Ord. 1636 § 2, 1995)

 

5.10.100 Business name.
No person licensed to operate a massage establishment shall operate under any name or conduct business under any designation not specified in the license. (Ord. 1636 § 2, 1995)

 

5.10.110 Business location change.
Upon a change of location of a massage establishment, an application to the director shall be made, and such application shall be granted, provided all applicable provisions of this chapter and this code, including without limitation the zoning code, are complied with, and a change of location fee in an amount established by city council resolution to defray the costs of investigation and report has been paid to the city. (Ord. 1636 § 2, 1995)

 

5.10.120 Sale or transfer of massage establishment interest.
A sale or transfer of any interest in a massage establishment, which interest would be reported as required in this chapter upon application for a massage establishment license, shall be reported to the director within ten days of such sale or transfer. The director shall investigate any person receiving any interest in a massage establishment as a result of such sale or transfer, and if such person satisfies the requirements relating to massage establishment license applicants, the existing license shall be endorsed to include such person. A fee as set forth by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the city for the investigation by the director necessitated by each such sale or transfer. (Ord. 1636 § 2, 1995)

 

5.10.130 Display of permits, licenses.
The owner or operator of a massage establishment shall display the massage establishment license and the permit of each and every massage technician or practitioner employed in the establishment in an open and conspicuous place on the premises. Passport-size photographs of the licensee and permittee shall be affixed to the respective license and permits on display pursuant to this section. Massage establishment owners or operators and massage technicians, or massage practitioners employed at the massage establishment who hold and maintain current valid certification by the state of California massage therapy organization must display their certification in an open and conspicuous place on the premises. (Ord. 1924 § 7, 2009; Ord. 1636 § 2, 1995)

 

5.10.140 Massage technician permit required.
(a)     It is unlawful for any person to act as a massage technician unless such person holds a valid permit issued by the director.

(b)     A massage technician permit shall be issued to any person who has fulfilled the requirements of Section 5.10.160, and all other applicable provisions of this chapter, unless grounds for denial of such permit are found to exist. The director may deny a permit to the permit applicant if:

(1)     The applicant made a material misstatement in the application for a license; or

(2)     The applicant is a person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct, as described in Section 5.10.010(9); or

(3)     The applicant has violated any provision of this chapter, or of any similar ordinance, law, rule or regulation of another public agency which regulates the operation of massage technicians; or

(4)     The applicant has failed to meet the training requirements described in Section 5.10.160; or

(5)     The applicant has failed to furnish an appropriate medical doctor’s certificate as required by Section 5.10.160.

(c)     Exception. To the extent that a massage technician can produce documentation that he or she holds and maintains current valid certification by the state of California massage therapy organization (MTO) pursuant to Division 2, Chapter 10.5 (Massage Therapists) of the California Business and Professions Code, a massage technician with current valid MTO certification shall not be required to comply with massage technician permitting requirements described in Sections 5.10.140(a)(b), 5.10.150 and 5.10.160 of the Glendora Municipal Code. A massage technician with a current valid MTO certificate is still subject to the zoning code requirements for massage and must still obtain and maintain a current city business license. (Ord. 1924 § 5, 2009; Ord. 1636 § 2, 1995)

 

5.10.150 Massage technician application fee and renewals.
Any application for a massage technician permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee. A massage technician permit shall be renewed annually and a renewal fee shall be paid. The massage technician permit fee and the renewal permit shall be in amounts as deemed by city council resolution. Any person who applies for a massage establishment license and who desires to act as a massage technician within said establishment shall not be required to pay the fee required by this section but shall be required to furnish the materials and information set forth in Section 5.10.040, and to show qualifications for and to obtain a necessary permit. (Ord. 1636 § 2, 1995)

 

5.10.160 Application for massage technician permit.
(a)     Any application for a massage technician permit shall be made with the director.

(b)     Within sixty working days following receipt of a completed application, the director shall either issue the permit or mail a written statement of the reasons for denial thereof. The director shall require that the applicant furnish fingerprints for the purpose of establishing identification. The applicant shall furnish the information required under Section 5.10.040(b)(1), (2), (4), (5), (6), (7), (10), (12) and the following additional information:

(1)     Social Security number and driver’s license number, if any;

(2)     The name and address of the establishment where the applicant is to be employed or engage in the practice of massage if self-employed and the name of the owner or operator of the same. Any massage technician granted a permit pursuant to this section must report any change in massage establishment employment within five days of said change;

(3)     The name and address of the recognized school of massage attended, the dates attended, and a copy of the diploma or certificate of graduation awarded the applicant showing the applicant has completed no fewer than one hundred hours of instruction. All applicants may be required to furnish additional evidence of enrollment and attendance of the required class hours and are subject to an oral interview by the director to establish the bona fide completion of educational requirements;

(4)     Certificate from a medical doctor stating that the applicant has, within thirty days immediately prior to the filing of the approved, been examined and found to be free from any contagious or communicable disease capable of being transmitted to the public or to fellow employees by the type of conduct and interaction with fellow employees and the public involved in the performance of the job of massage technician; and

(5)     A statement in writing by the applicant made under penalty of perjury that the information furnished is true and correct, said statement being duly dated. (Ord. 1636 § 2, 1995)

 

5.10.170 Massage practitioner permit required.
(a)     It is unlawful for any person to act as a massage practitioner unless such person holds a valid permit issued by the director.

(b)     A massage practitioner permit shall be issued to any person who has fulfilled the requirements of Section 5.10.190 and all other applicable provisions of this chapter unless grounds for denial of such permit are found to exist. The director may deny a permit to the permit applicant if:

(1)     The applicant made a material misstatement in the application for a license; or

(2)     The applicant is a person who has engaged in establishing conduct as described in Section 5.10.010(9); or

(3)     The applicant has violated any provision of this chapter or of any similar ordinance, law, rule or regulation of another public agency which regulates the operation of massage practitioners; or

(4)     The applicant has failed to meet the training requirements described in Section 5.10.190; or

(5)     The applicant has failed to furnish an appropriate medical doctor’s certificate as required by Section 5.10.190.

(c)     Exception. To the extent that a massage practitioner can produce documentation that he or she holds and maintains current valid certification by the state of California massage therapy organization (MTO) pursuant to Division 2, Chapter 10.5 (Massage Therapists) of the California Business and Professions Code, a massage practitioner issued a current valid with current valid MTO certification shall not be required to comply with massage practitioner permitting requirements described in Sections 5.10.170(a) and (b), 5.10.180 and 5.10.190 of the Glendora Municipal Code. A massage practitioner with current valid MTO certification is still subject to the zoning code requirements for massage and must still obtain and maintain a current city business license. (Ord. 1924 § 6, 2009; Ord. 1636 § 2, 1995)

 

5.10.180 Massage practitioner application fee and renewal.
Any application for a massage practitioner permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee. A massage practitioner permit shall be renewed annually and a renewal fee shall be paid. The massage practitioner permit fee and the renewal permit fee shall be in amounts as determined by city council resolution. Any person who applies for a massage establishment license and who desires to act as a massage practitioner within said establishment shall not be required to pay the fee required by this section but shall be required to furnish the materials and information set forth in Section 5.10.040, and to show qualifications for and obtain a massage practitioner permit. (Ord. 1636 § 2, 1995)

 

5.10.190 Application for massage practitioner permit.
(a)     Any application for a massage practitioner permit shall be made with the director.

(b)     Within sixty working days following receipt of a completed application, the director shall either issue the permit or mail a written statement of the reasons for denial thereof. The director shall require that the applicant furnish fingerprints for the purpose of establishing identification. The applicant shall furnish the information required under Section 5.10.040(b)(1), (2), (4), (5), (6), (7), (10) and (12), and the following additional information:

(1)     Social Security number and driver’s license number, if any;

(2)     The name and address of the establishment where the applicant is to be employed or engage in the practice of massage if self-employed; and the name of the owner operator of the same. Any massage practitioner granted a permit pursuant to this section must report any change in massage establishment employment within five days of said change;

(3)     The applicant shall present to the director proof of membership in good standing of a state or national organization devoted to the massage specialty and health enhancement approach or has completed any one of the following requirements:

(i)      Five hundred hours of instruction in the massage specialty and health enhancement approach at a recognized school of massage with a state approved curriculum and can submit a sworn affidavit of code of ethics to which they will adhere. This code can be from an association or comparable organization as approved by the city attorney; or

(ii)     Two hundred fifty hours of such instruction as required under (i) above, and, in addition, five hundred hours of practical experience in the massage specialty and health enhancement therapeutic approach in the form of paid employment as documented by Internal Revenue Service (IRS) tax returns or other affidavit and submission of a sworn affidavit of code of ethics as in (i) above; or,

(iii)   One hundred hours of such instruction as required under (i) above, and proof of four hundred hours additional instruction in any one of the following:

(A)    Continuing educational classes (“CE”) in the massage field and related classes offered by approved schools, or

(B)    Classes and workshops as in subsection (A) approved for nursing CE credit, or

(C)    Programs as in subsection (A) approved and certified by qualifying professional associations, or

(D)    Adult education classes in massage and related topics offered through state approved colleges and universities; or

(iv)  Has passed an independently prepared and administered national certification exam which has been recognized by objective standards to fairly evaluate professional levels of skill, safety and competence;

(4)     Certificate from a medical doctor stating that the applicant has, within thirty days immediately prior to the filing of the application, been examined and found to be free from any contagious or communicable disease capable of being transmitted to the public or to fellow employees by the type of conduct and interaction with fellow employees and the public involved in the performance of the job of massage practitioner;

(5)     Statement written by the applicant made under penalty of perjury that the information furnished is true and correct, said statement being duly dated. (Ord. 1636 § 2, 1995)

 

5.10.200 Appeals.
All appeals from a denial of a massage establishment license or permit for massage technician or practitioner shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.10.250 of this code. (Ord. 1636 § 2, 1995)

 

5.10.210 Exemptions.
(a)     This chapter shall not apply to the following classes of individuals while engaged in the performance of the duties of their respective professions:

(1)     Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, acupuncturists, or osteopaths who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the state of California, while performing activities encompassed by such professional licenses;

(2)     Nurses or physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their professions in the state of California, while performing activities encompassed by such professional licenses;

(3)     Persons with a valid certification from the state of California massage therapy organization pursuant to Division 2, Chapter 10.5 (Massage Therapists) of the California Business and Professions Code;

(4)     Exemptions from the requirements of this chapter provided to individuals holding certain occupational licenses from the state of California described in this subsection are not extended to employees, contractors, or any other personnel conducting massage or massage therapy, unless they also possess occupational licenses exempt from the requirements of this chapter, or where otherwise specifically exempted under Section 5.10.210;

(5)     Manicurists, pedicurists, beauticians, cosmetologists, or aestheticians who are duly licensed by the state of California only when administering manicures or pedicures to seated customers or clients. Exempts massage of the hands or feet of a seated customer or client when conducted solely for the purposes of administering manicures or pedicures;

(6)     Barbers, hairdressers, beauticians, or cosmetologists who are duly licensed by the state of California only when administering hair cutting services, hair styling services, facial hair removal services, or applying facial make-up (non-permanent). Exempts massage above the neck of a seated customer or client when conducted solely for the purposes of administering hair cutting, hair styling, facial hair removal, or non-permanent make-up application to the face;

(7)     Individuals administering massages or health treatment involving massage to persons participating in road races, track meets, triathlons and similar single occurrence athletic or recreational events; provided, that all of the following conditions are met:

(A)    The massage services are made equally available to all participants in the event,

(B)    The event is open to participation by the general public or a significant segment of the public such as employees of sponsoring or participating corporations,

(C)    The massage services are provided at the site of the event and either during, immediately preceding or immediately following the event,

(D)    The sponsors of the event have been advised of and have approved the provision of massage services,

(E)     The persons providing the massage services are not the primary sponsors of the event.

(b)     This chapter shall not apply to the following medical facilities or institutions duly licensed by the state of California:

(1)     Hospitals, community care facilities, nursing homes, or sanatoriums duly licensed by the state of California, as defined by the California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 1924 § 8, 2009; Ord. 1636 § 2, 1995)

 

5.10.220 Massage establishment in athletic club.
A massage establishment may be permitted in an athletic club or similar establishment provided such massage operations are incidental to the cooperation of such bona fide athletic club and such athletic club has a valid conditional use permit approved by the planning commission which identified the massage establishment. (Ord. 1636 § 2, 1995)

 

5.10.230 Massage establishment license suspension or revocation.
(a)     After an investigation, notice and hearing, any license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or suspended by the director where any of the following is found:

(1)     The licensee has violated any provisions of this chapter; or

(2)     The licensee is a person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct as described in subsection (9) of Section 5.10.010; or

(3)     The licensee has failed to comply with one or more of the facilities and operations requirements of Section 5.10.060; or

(4)     The licensee has engaged in fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in conducting the massage establishment; or

(5)     The licensee has continued to operate the massage establishment after the license has been suspended; or

(6)     The licensee has allowed a person to work as a massage technician or practitioner who:

(A)    Does not have a valid permit, or

(B)    Has engaged in conduct or has been convicted of an offense described in subsection (9) of Section 5.10.010 when the licensee has actual or constructive knowledge of such conduct or conviction. (Ord. 1636 § 2, 1995)

 

5.10.240 Revocation or suspension of massage technician or practitioner permit.
After an investigation, notice and hearing, any massage technician or practitioner permit may be revoked or suspended by the director where it is found that:

(1)     The permittee has violated any provision of this chapter; or

(2)     The permittee is a person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct as described in subsection (9) of Section 5.10.010; or

(3)     The permittee has continued to function as a massage technician or practitioner after the permit has been suspended; or

(4)     The permittee has failed to comply with the requirements of either Section 5.10.160 or 5.10.190, whichever is applicable; or

(5)     The permittee has made a material misstatement in the application for a permit. (Ord. 1636 § 2, 1995)

 

5.10.250 Appeals—Hearings on denial, revocation or suspension of massage establishment license, massage technician or massage practitioner permit.
(a)     Upon determining that grounds for (1) denial of an application for a license or permit, or (2) revocation or suspension as set forth in Sections 5.10.230 and/or 5.10.240, exist, the director shall furnish written notice of the proposed denial, revocation or suspension to the licensee. For purposes of this section only, “licensee” shall include a person holding a massage establishment license, a massage technician permit or massage practitioner permit. Such notice shall summarize the principal reasons for the proposed revocation or suspension; shall state that the licensee may request a hearing within ten calendar days of the postmarked date on the notice; and shall be delivered both by posting the notice at the location of the massage establishment and by sending notice, by certified mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the licensee as the licensee’s name and address appear on the application denied or the license or permit revoked or suspended.

(b)     If the director determines that any grounds for (1) denial of an application for a license or a permit, or (2) revocation or suspension as provided in Sections 5.10.230 and/or 5.10.240 of this chapter, exist, and if no written request for hearing by the planning commission is filed as permitted in subsection (c) below, the denial of an application for a license or permit shall be effective immediately and the director shall immediately revoke or suspend the appropriate then-existing license(s). In the absence of a written request for hearing by the planning commission, the decision of the director shall be final.

(c)     Within ten calendar days after the later of the mailing or posting of the notice, the licensee may file with the director a written request for hearing by the planning commission. If the written request for a hearing is filed within ten calendar days of the later of the postmark on the mailed notice or the posting of the notice referred to in subsection (b) above, the director shall immediately send the request to the planning commission, and the hearing shall be provided. A timely filed request for hearing by the planning commission shall vacate the decision of the director.

(d)     Upon receipt of a written request for a hearing, the planning commission shall conduct a hearing within forty-five calendar days of the filing of such written request by the licensee. Notice of time and place of the hearing shall be given to the licensee by personal service or via certified mail postage prepaid, at least fifteen calendar days in advance of the date set for the public hearing. At the hearing, the licensee and the city shall be entitled to present relevant evidence, testify under oath and call witnesses who shall testify under oath. The planning commission shall not be bound by the statutory rules of evidence in the hearing, except that hearsay evidence may not be the sole basis for the determination of the planning commission.

(e)     At the conclusion of the hearing, the planning commission shall decide whether the grounds for revocation or suspension exist and shall, within five calendar days submit a written report to the director and file said written report with the city clerk. Such written report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and shall state findings, conclusions and directives to the director regarding whether an application for a permit or license is to be denied or a license is to be revoked or suspended. All such written reports shall be public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail, postage prepaid, to the licensee within two days of the day it is filed with the city clerk. The decision of the planning commission, in the absence of a timely appeal as hereinafter provided, shall be final. If the planning commission determines that any grounds exist for (1) denial of an application for a permit or license, or (2) revocation or suspension of license as provided in Sections 5.10.230 and/or 5.10.240 of this chapter, and if no written appeal to the city council is filed as permitted in subsection (f) below, the denial of the license shall be effective immediately or the director, based upon the written report of the planning commission, shall immediately revoke or suspend the then-existing appropriate license(s).

(f)      The decision of the planning commission shall be appealable to the city council by the filing of a written appeal with the city clerk within ten calendar days following the day of mailing of notice of the planning commission’s decision. A timely filed appeal shall vacate the decision of the planning commission. Any such appeal shall be a de novo public hearing held within forty-five days of the filing of the written appeal with the city clerk. Notice of time and place of the hearing shall be given to the licensee by personal service or via certified mail postage prepaid, at least fifteen calendar days in advance of the date set for the public hearing. At the hearing, the licensee and the city shall be entitled to present relevant evidence, testify under oath and call witnesses who shall testify under oath. The city council shall not be bound by the statutory rules of evidence in the hearing, except that hearsay evidence may not be the sole basis for the determination of the city council. The decision of the city council upon appeal shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 1636 § 2, 1995)

 

5.10.260 Reapplication after denial.
An applicant for either a license or a permit under this chapter whose application for such license or permit has been denied may not reapply for such license or permit for a period of one year from the date such notice of denial was deposited in the mail or received by the applicant, whichever occurs first. However a reapplication prior to the termination of one year may be made if accompanied by evidence that the ground or grounds for denial of the application no longer exist. (Ord. 1636 § 2, 1995)

 

5.10.270 No refund of fee.
No refund or rebate of a license or permit shall be allowed by the reason of the fact that the licensee or permittee discontinues an activity for which a license or permit is required pursuant to this chapter, or that the license or permit is suspended or revoked. (Ord. 1636 § 2, 1995)

 

5.10.280 Return of license or permit.
In the event that a license or permit is cancelled, suspended, revoked or invalidated, the licensee or permittee shall forward it to the officer who issued it not later than the end of the third business day after notification of the cancellation, suspension, revocation or invalidation. (Ord. 1636 § 2, 1995)

 

5.10.290 Conflicting ordinances repealed.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances, or regulation, in conflict with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed. (Ord. 1636 § 2, 1995)

 

5.10.300 Prohibited practices and unprofessional conduct.
(a)     It is a violation of this chapter for any person or person holding a massage establishment license or massage technician or practitioner permit to commit, and the director may deny, suspend or revoke any license or permit or application for, any of the following:

(1)     It is unlawful for any person to massage any other person, or give or administer any bath or baths, or to give or administer any of the procedures or services set forth in this chapter for immoral purposes, or in a manner intended to arouse, appeal to or gratify the lust or passions or sexual desires of such person.

(2)     Violating or attempting to violate, directly or indirectly, or assist in or abetting the violation of, or conspiring to violate, any provisions or terms of this chapter or any rule or law of this state.

(3)     Conviction of any felony, or conviction of a misdemeanor that is substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of a massage establishment license or massage technician or practitioner permit holder, in which event the record of the conviction shall be conclusive evidence of the crime.

(4)     Impersonating an applicant or acting as a proxy for a massage establishment licensee or massage technician or practitioner permit holder, or permitting or allowing an unqualified person to use such license or permit in an unlawful manner.

(5)     Committing any fraudulent, dishonest, or corrupt act that is substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of a license or permit holder.

(6)     Committing any act punishable as a sexually related crime.

(7)     Prohibited Off-Premises Massage Services or Therapy. No off-premises massage services or therapy is allowed to be offered or administered for money or other consideration at a location other than a licensed massage establishment in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 1840 § 8, 2006)

Chapter 5.12 PERMITS
5.12.010 Compliance with chapter.
(a)     It is unlawful for any person to carry on or conduct any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation in the city for which a permit is required by this chapter without first having procured such permit or without complying with any and all applicable provisions of this chapter.

          Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b).

(b)     Compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the issuance of a permit hereunder shall not preclude the necessity of obtaining any permit required by any other provisions of this code or ordinance of the city or other applicable law or the payment of a license fee as required by Chapter 5.08. (Ord. 1416 § 1, 1983; Ord. 953 § 1, 1964; prior code § 11.38)

 

5.12.020 Permit required before getting business license.
Whenever by this chapter any permit is required, such permit shall be obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter before any business license is issued under the provisions of this title. (Ord. 953 § 1, 1964; prior code § 11.39)

 

5.12.030 Application.
Before any permit is issued pursuant to this chapter, an application for such permit, accompanied by a fee, established pursuant to resolution of the city council, shall be filed with the chief of police, or his deputy, shall be signed and verified by the applicant and shall set forth the following:

(1)     The name and address of the applicant:

(2)     The name and address of the person by whom employed, if any;

(3)     The nature of the business for which a permit is requested;

(4)     The place where such business is to be conducted;

(5)     A brief description of the nature and amount of equipment to be used in such business;

(6)     A personal description of the applicant:

(7)     Evidence of the identity of the applicant of such character as the chief of police or his or her deputy may require;

(8)     Finger prints and thumb prints of applicant. (Ord. 36 § 3, 1989; Ord. 953 § 1. 1964; prior code § 11.40)

 

5.12.040 Issuance—Refusal.
The chief of police or his or her deputy, within a reasonable time after the filing of an application, shall conduct such investigation as he or she may deem necessary concerning the application and the business proposed to be conducted to determine whether the applicant is of good moral character and proposes to engage in an enterprise in a manner which shall not be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the city or its inhabitants, either by reason of the character of the applicant, the nature of the business or the manner in which the business is proposed to be conducted. If, after such investigation, the chief police, or his or her deputy, determines that the applicant is of good moral character and proposes to engage in an enterprise which will not be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the city or its inhabitants either by the reason of the character of the applicant, the nature of the business or the manner in which the business is proposed to be conducted, then the chief of police, or his or her deputy, shall issue such permit upon such terms and conditions and restrictions, regulating the operation and conduct of such business, not in conflict with any paramount law as such terms and conditions may be necessary or expedient to protect the public peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the city or its inhabitants. (Ord. 953 § 1, 1964; prior code § 1141)

 

5.12.050 Appeal.
In the event the chief of police, or his or her deputy, denies such a permit the applicant may appeal to the city council by filing with the city council a written notice of appeal within ten days from the date of such denial. If such an appeal is filed, the city council within a reasonable time shall review the matter and after such hearing thereon as the council may require it shall have the right to refuse such permit if it determines that the proposed enterprise would be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the city or its inhabitants, either by reason of the moral character of the applicant, the nature of the business or the manner in which the proposed business is to be operated. (Ord. 953 § 1, 1964; prior code § 11.42)

 

5.12.060 Posting—Exhibiting.
Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be posted on the premises where the business for which such permit is issued is conducted and shall remain so posted during the period the permit shall be in force.

Any permit issued to any person who goes from place to place in the city for the purpose of carrying on the business permitted shall carry such permit at all times he or she is conducting such business and shall exhibit the same worn upon an outer garment in a conspicuous place. (Ord. 953 § 1, 1964; prior code § 11.43)

 

5.12.070 Duration of permit.
Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be of the same duration as the business license issued to such person or business pursuant to this title. Any permit issued hereunder may be renewed upon the filing of an application for the renewal with the chief of police, or his or her deputy. Such application for renewal shall be in the same form as any application for an original permit and shall be issued or denied in a like manner as the original permit. (Ord. 953 § 1, 1964; prior code § 11.44)

 

5.12.080 Fees.
The fee for issuing any permit hereunder shall be as established pursuant to resolution of the city council. The fees provided for herein, shall be for the processing of the permit required herein and shall be in addition to any license tax provided for in Chapter 5.08. (Ord. 1536 § 4, 1989; Ord. 953 § 1, 1964; prior code § 11.45)

 

5.12.090 Revocation.
When any permit is issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter, such permit may be revoked at any time thereafter by the chief of police or his or her deputy, if the chief of police, or his or her deputy, is satisfied that the conduct of such business does or will endanger in any manner the public welfare or the peace, health or safety of the city or its inhabitants or that the same has been conducted in an illegal, improper or disorderly manner or when the proprietor or person in charge of such business violates or permits any infraction of any law of the state or city.

Such revocation shall be by delivering a notice of revocation with the reasons therefor to the applicant in person or by mailing the same to the address of the applicant as set forth in his or her application. Such revocation shall be effective within five days following the date of delivery, or the date of mailing, unless within such period of time the applicant files with the chief of police or his or her deputy and the city clerk a demand for a hearing.

If such a demand for hearing is filed, the city council shall set for hearing the revocation of such permit, and at the conclusion of such hearing may uphold such revocation or may reinstate the permit. The action of the city council shall be final and conclusive and there shall be no right of appeal therefrom. (Ord. 953 § 1, 1964;; prior code § 11.46)

 

5.12.200 Public dance hall defined.
A public dance hall is any place of business where two or more persons dance or are permitted, whether for profit or not for profit, and to which the public is admitted or permitted to dance with or without charge. (Ord. 953 § 1, 1964; prior code § 11.57)

 

5.12.210 Public dance defined.
A public dance is any dance where two or more persons dance in or upon any premises to which the public is admitted, either with or without charge, and whether such dancing is done or permitted either as the main purpose or as incident to some other purpose, except where such two or more persons dancing together are putting on a show, exhibition or other form of entertainment in which the audience or public does not participate. (Ord. 953 § 1, 1964; prior code § 11.58)

 

5.12.220 Cafe entertainment defined.
“Cafe entertainment” means and includes any activity planned or engaged in or permitted to occur for the purpose of or resulting in attracting, amusing, diverting or retaining the attention of or participation of patrons or customers at any public place, whether or not food or beverages are sold, offered for sale, or given away, and shall specifically include, but not be limited to, any act, play, performance, show, exhibition, public dancing, concert, multi-media or telecommunication entertainment, contest or similar activity. However, the term “cafe entertainment” shall not include entertainment provided under the supervision of school authorities, the city or any nonprofit organization. (Ord. 1406 § 1, 1983; Ord. 953 § 1, 1964; prior code § 11.59)

 

5.12.230 Dancing club defined.
A “dancing club” is any club or association of persons which conducts dances, other than public dances, for its members or bona fide guests more than once per month and for the attendance at or participation in which a dance fee is charged, or at which dance any collection or donation of money is made or received or in which club or association the amount of dues paid by each member is dependent upon or related to the attendance at such dances. (Ord. 953 § 1, 1964; prior code § 11.60)

 

5.12.240 Civic dance defined.
A “civic dance” is any casual event held by any bona fide memorial, fraternal, or civic association, or held under the auspices of a school, public recreation or community service organization. (Ord. 953 § 1, 1964; prior code § 11.61)

 

5.12.250 Dance permit required.
No person shall conduct or carry on any act defined in Sections 5.12.200 through 5.12.240 of this chapter unless he or she has received a permit from the chief of police or his or her deputy authorizing the conduct or operation of such activity. (Ord. 953 § 1, 1964; prior code § 11.62)

Chapter 5.14 SOLICITATION AND PEDDLING
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ords. 1514, 1578.

 

5.14.010 Definitions.
(a)     The following words, terms, and phrases, and their derivations, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

“Charitable” means and includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, social service, health, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, cultural or fraternal, either actual or purported.

“Contributions” means and includes the words alms, money, subscription, property or any donations under the guise of a loan or money or property.

“Department” means the police department.

“Hearing officer” means the city manager or the designee thereof, provided that the designee shall not be the permit authority or the police chief.

“Noncommercial purposes” means the purpose of any nonprofit organization which has obtained recognized state or federal tax exempt status.

“Peddler” means any person who goes upon the premises of any private property in the city, not having been invited by the occupant thereof, carrying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any nature and offering the same for sale. This definition also includes any person who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as part of the scheme to evade the provisions of this chapter.

“Peddling” means and includes all activities ordinarily performed by a peddler as indicated under “peddler” as defined in this section.

“Permit holder” means the person on whose behalf the solicitation will be conducted.

“Permitting authority” means the city finance department.

“Person” means a natural person or any firm, corporation, association, club, society or other organization.

“Police chief” means the chief of police of the city, or his or her authorized representative.

“Principal” means the sponsoring company, organization or other entity which employs, authorizes or sponsors the solicitor(s) or peddler(s), whether as employees, agents or independent contractors.

“Purchase” means the buying of, offering to buy or the giving of an order for anything of value, including, but not limited to, goods, wares, merchandise, services, tickets, publications and subscriptions to publications.

“Solicitation” includes all activities ordinarily performed by a solicitor as indicated under “solicitor” as defined in this Section.

“Solicitor” means any person who goes upon any private property in the city, not having been invited by the occupant thereof, for the purpose of taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, merchandise, wares, or other personal property of any nature for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the future. This definition also includes any person who, without invitation, goes upon private property, to request contribution of funds or anything of value, or sell goods or services for political, charitable, religious, or other noncommercial purposes.

“Sponsor” has the same meaning as the definition of principal. (Ord. 1711§ 2, 2000)

 

5.14.020 Permit requirements and exemptions.
(a)     It is unlawful for any individual, within the city, to solicit or engage in any solicitation, unless the person on whose behalf the solicitation is being made holds a valid city business license issued by the permitting authority.

(b)     It is unlawful for any person eighteen years of age or older to engage in peddling or solicitation activities within the city without first obtaining a solicitor’s permit issued by the police chief; provided, however, that the following are exempted from the provisions of this section:

(1)     Any solicitation made upon premises owned or occupied by an organization upon whose behalf the solicitation is made;

(2)     Any communication by an organization soliciting contributions solely from persons who are members of the organization at the time of such solicitation;

(3)     Any solicitation in the form of a collection at a regular meeting, assembly or service of a charitable person; or

(4)     Any solicitation for the relief of any individual specified by name at the time of the solicitation where the solicitor represents in each case that the entire amount collected shall be turned over to the named beneficiary. (Ord. 1711 § 2, 2000)

 

5.14.030 Permit for sponsoring juvenile peddlers.
(a)     No person under the age of eighteen shall be permitted to engage in peddling except as follows:

(1)     A city business license shall be obtained by a sponsoring person, company or organization for the conduct of any peddling or solicitation activities involving, in whole or in part, a sales force of one or more persons under eighteen years of age.

(2)     The sponsor shall be responsible for supervising and controlling the conduct of all persons, including juveniles, peddling under the sponsor’s solicitor’s business license.

(3)     Each person under the age of eighteen shall first obtain a permit issued by the police chief.

(4)     The sponsor shall be responsible for ensuring that each individual in its sales force has obtained a permit which identifies the name of the sponsor and the name of the individual. The sponsor shall require all individuals in its sales force to carry such permit at all times when the individuals are peddling or soliciting.

(5)     The sponsor shall comply with all laws of this state. (Ord. 1711§ 2, 2000)

 

5.14.040 Permit application.
(a)     Every person subject to the provisions of this chapter shall file with the permitting authority an application in writing on a form to be furnished by the permitting authority, which shall provide the following information:

(1)     Proof of age, address and identification of the applicant, to be provided through the applicant’s driver’s license, articles of incorporation (for sponsors), or other legally recognized form of identification;

(2)     A brief description of the business or activity to be conducted;

(3)     The hours and location for which the right to peddle or solicit is desired;

(4)     If employed, the name, address, telephone number and city business license number of the employer; or if acting as an agent, the name, address, telephone number and city business license number of the principal who is being represented, with credentials in written form establishing the relationship and the authority of the employee or agent to act for the employer or principal, as the case may be;

(5)     A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violation (other than traffic violations), the nature of the offense or violation, the penalty or punishment imposed, the date when and place where such offense occurred, and other pertinent details thereof;

(6)     Proof of possession of any license or permit which, under federal, state or local laws or regulations, the applicant is required to have in order to conduct the proposed business, or which, under any such law or regulation, would exempt the applicant from the licensing requirements of this chapter; and

(7)     Two photographs of the applicant which shall have been taken within sixty days immediately prior to the date of filing of the application. The photographs shall measure two inches by three inches and show the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. One two inch by three inch photo will appear on the permit. (Ord. 1711 § 2, 2000)

 

5.14.050 Fees.
At the time the solicitor’s or peddler’s application is filed with the permitting authority, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable fee to cover the cost to the city of processing the application and investigating the facts stated therein. The application fee for each solicitor or peddler permit shall be adopted and amended from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1711 § 2, 2000)

 

5.14.060 Application review and permit issuance.
(a)     Upon receipt of an application, the police chief shall review the application as deemed necessary to ensure the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare.

(b)     If the police chief finds the application to be satisfactory, the police chief shall endorse his or her approval on the application and shall authorize the issuance of the permit.

(c)     The permit shall show the name, address and photograph of the permittee, the kind of goods or services to be sold or delivered, the date of issuance, and the length of time that the permit shall be in effect. The permit shall also show the city business license number for which the permit is issued.

(d)     All records of issued solicitor’s permits shall be maintained by the department for a period of two years. (Ord. 1711 § 2, 2000)

 

5.14.070 Denial of permit.
(a)     Upon review of the application, the police chief may refuse to issue a permit to the applicant under this chapter for any of the following reasons:

(1)     The location and time of solicitation or peddling would endanger the safety and welfare of the solicitor(s), peddler(s) or their customer(s);

(2)     An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information on the application;

(3)     The applicant has been convicted of a felony in this state or any other state within the five years preceding the date of application;

(4)     The applicant has been convicted of a misdemeanor or ordinance violation in this state or any other state involving a sex offense or any violent acts against persons or property, within the five years preceding the date of application;

(5)     The applicant is required to register as a serious or high risk sex offender pursuant to Sections 290 and 290.4 of the California Penal Code;

(6)     The applicant is a person against whom a judgment based upon, or conviction for, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation has been entered within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application;

(7)     There is no proof as to the authority of the applicant to serve as an agent to the principal; or

(8)     The applicant has been denied a permit under this chapter within the immediate past year, unless the applicant can and does show to the satisfaction of the police chief that the reasons for such earlier denial no longer exist.

(b)     If the permit is disapproved, the reasons therefor shall be noted on the application, and the applicant and principal shall be notified that a permit will not be issued. Notice shall be mailed by the permitting authority to the applicant at the address shown on the application form, or at the applicant’s last known address and to the principal at the address shown on the principal’s business license.

(c)     Nothing set forth in this chapter shall be construed as granting to the permit authority, police chief, or city council any discretion to grant, deny, suspend, or revoke any solicitation permit by reason of approval or disapproval of the philosophy, opinion, or belief of the applicant or permit holder.

(d)     Nothing set forth in this chapter shall be construed to disqualify a principal from obtaining a city business license solely on the basis of the denial of a permit to a particular agent, employee, member or applicant. (Ord. 1711 § 2, 2000)

 

5.14.080 Permit expiration.
All permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire one year from the date of issuance, unless an earlier expiration date is noted on the permit. However, the term of the sponsor’s city business license shall be controlling as to all agent/employee permits. (Ord. 1711 § 2, 2000)

 

5.14.090 Permit exhibition.
Every person required to obtain a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall exhibit the permit when requested to do so by any prospective customer or city employee. (Ord. 1711 § 2, 2000)

 

5.14.100 Transfer prohibited.
(a)     It is unlawful for any person other than the permittee to use any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter.

(b)     It is unlawful for any permittee to transfer or authorize the use of his or her permit by any other person. (Ord. 1711 § 2, 2000)

 

5.14.110 Entry upon signed premises unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person, whether licensed or unlicensed, while conducting the business of a peddler or solicitor, to enter upon any residential premises in the city where the owner, occupant or person legally in charge of the premises has posted, at the entry to the premises, or at the entry to the principal building on the premises, a sign bearing the words “No Peddlers,” “No Solicitors,” or words of similar import. (Ord. 1711 § 2, 2000)

 

5.14.120 Hours of solicitation.
No person, while conducting the activities of a peddler or solicitor, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall enter upon any private property, knock on doors or otherwise disturb persons in their residences between the hours of nine p.m. and nine a.m. (Ord. 1711 § 2, 2000)

 

5.14.130 Permit revocation.
(a)     Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the city, after notice and hearing, for any of the following reasons:

(1)     Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for a permit;

(2)     Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made by the permittee in the course of conducting solicitation or peddling activities;

(3)     Conducting peddling or solicitation activities contrary to the provisions contained in the permit;

(4)     Any conviction or matter arising under subsections 5.14.070(a)(3) through (a)(6) of this chapter subsequent to the issuance of a permit; or

(5)     Conducting peddling or solicitation activities in such a manner as to create a public nuisance, constitute a breach of the peace or endanger the health, safety or general welfare of the public. (Ord. 1711 § 2, 2000)

 

5.14.140 Notice and hearing.
(a)     Notice of a hearing for revocation of a permit issued under this chapter shall be provided in writing and shall set forth specifically the grounds for the proposed revocation and the time and place of the hearing, which time shall not be sooner than five business days after the notice is mailed to the person’s address as shown on the permit application form, or to the last known address.

(b)     At the time of the hearing, the hearing officer shall hear all relevant evidence and, after the close of the hearing, shall render a decision as to whether or not the permit shall be revoked or, alternatively, suspended. Said decision shall be in writing, shall state specific reasons thereof, and that the decision to revoke or suspend shall become effective on the eleventh business day after the decision is mailed to the person’s address as shown on the permit application form, or to the last known address, unless appealed. A decision to revoke or suspend a permit shall state that the permit holder has ten business days to appeal by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk, pursuant to Section 5.14.150 of this chapter. (Ord. 1711§ 2, 2000)

 

5.14.150 Appeals.
(a)     Any person aggrieved by the action or decision of the police chief to deny, or of the hearing officer to suspend or revoke, a permit applied for or held under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal such action or decision to the city council.

(b)     An appeal shall be taken by filing with the city clerk within ten business days after the notice of the action or decision has been mailed to the person’s address as shown on the permit application form, or to the last known address, a written statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal. The filing of a timely appeal shall stay a revocation or suspension.

(c)     The appeal shall be heard de novo at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting held at least five business days after the appeal is filed. At the time of the hearing, the city council shall hear all relevant evidence and, after the close of the hearing, shall decide whether or not to issue the permit or to suspend or revoke the permit. Said decision shall be in writing, state reasons thereof, and shall be mailed to the person’s address as shown on the permit application form, or to the last known address.

(d)     The decision of the city council on the appeal shall be final and binding on all parties concerned.

(e)     If the applicant or permit holder does not file a timely notice of appeal pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, the permit holder shall have waived all rights to administrative or judicial remedy. (Ord. 1711 § 2, 2000)

 

5.14.160 Claims of exemption.
Any person claiming to be legally exempt from the regulations set forth in this chapter, or from the payment of a permit fee, shall cite to the police chief the statute or other legal authority under which exemption is claimed and shall present to the police chief proof of qualification for such exemption. (Ord. 1711 § 2, 2000)

 

5.14.170 Violations and penalty.
(a)     Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be treated as an infraction, and shall, upon conviction, be punishable as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 1.01 of this code.

(b)     In addition to any criminal enforcement, the city or any individual may pursue any available civil remedies deemed appropriate and necessary. (Ord. 1711 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 5.16 HANDBILL DISTRIBUTORS
5.16.010 Definitions.
(a)     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

“Commercial handbill” means and includes any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature:

(1)     Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing;

(2)     Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interests thereof by sales;

(3)     Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but, the terms of this subsection shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided, that nothing contained in this subsection shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind without a license where such license is or may be required by any law of this state, or under any ordinance of this city; or

(4)     Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.

“Handbill distributor” means and includes any persons engaging or engaged in the business for hire or gain of distributing commercial or noncommercial handbills, other than newspapers distributed to subscribers thereof, and any persons receiving compensation, directly or indirectly, for the distribution of such handbills.

“Newspaper” means and includes any newspaper:

(1)     Which has for its principal purpose the dissemination of local or telegraphic news and intelligence of a general character;

(2)     Which is printed and published at regular intervals;

(3)     Which is a bona fide subscription list of paying subscribers within the city and is principally distributed only to paying subscribers;

(4)     Which is not distributed or circulated primarily for advertising purposes;

          And in addition thereto, means and includes any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public.

“Noncommercial handbill” means and includes any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature not included in the definition of a “commercial handbill” or a “newspaper.”

“Person” means and includes any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.

“Private premises” means and includes any dwelling, house, building or other structure, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule, hallway or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure and any vacant lot or other private property.

“Public place” means and includes any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, plazas, grounds and buildings.

(b)     Words singular in form may include the plural; any words plural in form may include the singular; and words in the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter genders. (Prior code § 3.1)

 

5.16.020 Purposes of chapter.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the people against the nuisance of and incident to the promiscuous distribution of handbills and circulars, particularly commercial handbills as defined in Section 5.16.010 of this chapter, with the resulting detriment and danger to public health and safety, the public interest, convenience and necessity which requires the regulation thereof and to that end the purposes of this chapter are specifically declared to be as follows:

(1)     To protect the people against the unlawful activities or operations of dissolute persons of criminal habits or tendencies, representing themselves as handbill distributors, by requiring the registration of all such handbill distributors, together with the names of their employers, and by regulating the business of handbill and advertising distribution through the imposition of reasonable license fees;

(2)     To protect local residents against trespassing by handbill distributors upon the private property of such residents if they do not wish to be solicited by such persons or do not desire to receive handbills or advertising matter;

(3)     To protect the people against the health and safety menace and the expense incident to the littering of the streets and public places by the promiscuous and uncontrolled distribution of advertising matter and commercial handbills;

(4)     To protect the people against the menace to their property during their absence therefrom due to the unlawful activities or operation of dissolute persons of criminal habits or tendencies made aware of the absence of the people from their premises by the accumulation of advertising matter and handbills during such absence;

(5)     To preserve to the people their constitutional right to receive and disseminate information not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency and good morals and public order, by distinguishing between the nuisance created by the promiscuous distribution of advertising and commercial circulars and the right to deliver commercial and noncommercial handbills to all who are willing to receive the same. (Prior code § 3.1-1)

 

5.16.030 Throwing handbills in public places.
It is unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any public place within this city; and it is also unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it is not unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill in any public place to any person willing to accept such noncommercial handbill. Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1416 § 4, 1983; prior code § 3.1-2)

 

5.16.040 Putting handbills in vehicles.
It is unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any automobile or other vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handing, transmitting or distributing of any noncommercial handbill to the owner or other occupant of any automobile or other vehicle who is willing to accept the same. Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1416 § 4, 1983; prior code § 3.1-3)

 

5.16.050 Throwing on unoccupied private premises.
It is unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1416 § 4, 1983; prior code § 3.1-4)

 

5.16.060 Distribution on private premises without consent prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw or scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private premises without having first obtained the written consent of the owner, or of an adult resident or occupant thereof, except that the same may be personally delivered to anyone present on the premises who is willing to accept the same; provided, however, that if any such handbill is placed or deposited in or upon such premises pursuant to such written consent, it shall only be so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or elsewhere. Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1416 § 4, 1983; prior code § 3.1-5)

 

5.16.070 Maintenance and inspection of records.
Every handbill distributor shall maintain on file the written consent of each person within the city who has consented to the distribution of handbills in or upon the premises owned by him or her, or of which he or she is a resident or occupant, and shall make such records available for the inspection thereof by the license inspector or his or her representative at a convenient place within the city, at any reasonable hour, upon the request of such license inspector or his or her representative. Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1416 § 4, 1983; prior code § 3.1-7)

 

5.16.080 Distributor license required.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of handbill distributor for hire or for any person to distribute commercial or noncommercial handbills without first having procured a license from the city to do so or without complying with any and all applicable provisions of this chapter and of all other relevant laws and regulations; provided, that nothing contained herein shall apply to any person advertising his or her business or activity upon his or her own premises, if such business or activity is regularly established at a definite location in the city, and also if a license has been obtained therefor, if such license be required under the terms of any applicable law or ordinance.

Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1416 § 1, 1983; prior code § 3.1-8)

 

5.16.090 Application—Contents.
Any person desiring to engage, as principal in the business of distributing commercial or noncommercial handbills for hire, shall make application to and receive from the license inspector a license in the manner and for the period prescribed by the terms of this chapter and by all relevant provisions of the municipal code and ordinances. Such applicant shall make written application to the license inspector upon a form provided for such purposes by the license inspector. Such form shall contain, among other things that may be required, the name, the business address and a brief description of the nature of the business to be conducted by the applicant, the probable number of agents and employees so to be engaged, together with a request for a license for the period for which this applicant seeks to engage in such business.

The application shall be accompanied by the fee provided in Section 5.16.120. (Prior code § 3.1-9)

 

5.16.100 Revocation.
Without excluding other just grounds for revocation, the city council or city manager may revoke any license obtained under an application containing a false or fraudulent statement knowingly made by the applicant with intent to obtain a license by means of false or fraudulent representations, or for violation of this chapter, or any other grounds specified by law. (Prior code § 3.1-10)

 

5.16.110 Nontransferability.
No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable; and if any such license shall be surrendered by the licensee therein named, or shall be revoked for cause, neither the licensee named in such license, nor any other person, shall be entitled to any refund of any part of such fee. (Prior code § 3.1-11)

 

5.16.120 Fees.
License fees under the terms of this chapter used for any such purpose, shall be established pursuant to resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1536 § 5, 1989; prior code 3.1-12)

 

5.16.130 Application of chapter.
(a)     The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to apply to the distribution of mail by the United States nor to newspapers as defined in Section 5.16.010.

(b)     This chapter shall not be deemed to repeal, amend or modify any ordinance ever ordained, either prohibiting, regulating or licensing solicitors, canvassers, hawkers, peddlers, transient merchants, or any person using the public streets or places for any private business or enterprise, or for commercial sales, not covered in this chapter. (Prior code § 3.1-13 and 3.1-14)

 

5.16.140 Posting bills—Consent of property owner.
No person either as principal or as agent or employee within the corporate limits of the city shall paint, post, put up or display, on or in any public property or on any wall, fence, post or tree, any bill, poster, picture, lithograph, map, plan, sign or other device or advertisement, or throw upon, paint, post, put up or display upon any private property in the city, without the express consent of the owner of the property, any bill, poster, picture, lithograph, map, plan, sample, sign or other device or advertisement. Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1416 § 4, 1983; prior code § 3.2)

Chapter 5.20 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
5.20.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the uniform transient occupancy tax ordinance of the city. (Ord. 965 § 1, 1965)

 

5.20.020 Definitions.
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter:

(1)     “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit;

(2)     “Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobilehome or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof;

(3)     “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes;

(4)     “Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered;

(5)     “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever;

(6)     “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this ordinance and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both;

(7)     “Tax administrator” means the director of finance. (Ord. 965 § 2, 1965)

 

5.20.030 Tax imposed.
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of six percent of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the tax administrator. (Ord. 1290 § 1, 1977; Ord. 1124 § 1, 1970; Ord. 965 § 3, 1965)

 

5.20.040 Exemptions.
No tax shall be imposed upon:

(1)     Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided;

(2)     Any federal or state officer or employee when on official business;

(3)     Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.

No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. (Ord. 965 § 4, 1965)

 

5.20.050 Operator’s duties.
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this ordinance to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. (Ord. 965 § 5, 1965)

 

5.20.060 Registration.
Within thirty days after the effective date of this chapter, or within thirty days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register the hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from him or her a “Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate” to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. The certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

(1)     The name of the operator;

(2)     The address of the hotel;

(3)     The date upon which the certificate was issued;

(4)     “This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this City. This certificate does not constitute a permit.” (Ord. 965 § 6, 1965)

 

5.20.070 Reporting—Remitting.
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by him or her, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he or she deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and he or she may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. (Ord. 965 § 7, 1965)

 

5.20.080 Penalties—Interest.
(a)     Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this ordinance within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.

(b)     Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed.

(c)     Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections (a) and (b).

(d)     Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this ordinance shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

(e)     Penalties Merged With Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. (Ord. 965 § 8, 1965)

 

5.20.090 Failure to collect and report.
If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he or she may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his or her estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator shall procure such facts and information as he or she is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he or she shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his or her last known place of address. Such operator may within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in said notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 5.20.100. (Ord. 965 § 9, 1965)

 

5.20.100 Appeal.
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his or her last known place of address. The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Ord. 965 § 10, 1965)

 

5.20.110 Records.
It is the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. 965 § 11, 1965)

 

5.20.120 Refunds.
(a)     Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter it may be refunded as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, providing a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator.

(b)     An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or receive when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.

(c)     A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection (a) of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

(d)     No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. (Ord. 965 § 12, 1965)

 

5.20.130 Debtor deemed liable to collection.
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city of Glendora, for the recovery of such amount. (Ord. 965 § 13, 1965)

 

5.20.140 Violation.
(a)     It is unlawful for any transient to fail or refuse to pay the transient occupancy tax required by this chapter.

(b)     It is unlawful for any operator or other person to fail or refuse to register as required by this chapter, to fail or refuse to furnish any return, supplemental return or other data required by this chapter or by the tax administrator pursuant to this chapter, or to render a false or fraudulent return or claim.

(c)     It is unlawful for any operator or other person to make, render, sign or verify any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due or required by this chapter.

(d)     Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b) of this code. (Ord. 1416 § 1, 1983; Ord. 965 § 14, 1965)

Chapter 5.22 ADULT BUSINESS LICENSE REGULATIONS ,
Note
*       Prior ordinance history; Ord. 1714.

**    See also Title 9, Chapter 9.50 of this code.

 

5.22.010 Legislative purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including adult materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to adult materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of adult entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. (Ord. 1716 § 6, 2000)

 

5.22.020 Definitions.
The following words and phrases as used in this chapter are in addition to the words and phrases defined in Title 9, Chapter 9.50 of this code or Section 9.50.010 thereof, and shall have the meanings and significance attached to them in this chapter, unless otherwise clearly apparent from the context:

“Adult business operator or operator” means a person who supervises, manages, inspects, directs, organizes, controls or in any other way is responsible for or in charge of the premises of an adult business or the conduct or activities occurring on the premises thereof.

“Applicant” means a person who is required to file an application for a license under this chapter, including an individual owner, manager, employee, or agent of an adult business or an entertainer of an adult business.

“City manager” means the city manager or the city manager’s authorized representative.

“Independent contractor” means any person or individual who works, dances, entertains and/or provides any services in association with the activity of, or for, an adult business establishment permitted in the city that is not an employee of such an establishment.

“Licensee” means the person to whom an adult business license or adult business entertainer’s license is issued.

“Notice address” means the address designated by the licensee for the mailing of all notices, legal mail, and other written communications from the city to the licensee.

“Person” means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust or combination of individuals or persons.

“Planning director” means the director of planning and redevelopment or the authorized representative(s) thereof.

“Police chief” means the police chief of the city or the authorized representative(s) thereof. (Ord. 1716 § 6, 2000)

 

5.22.030 Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to:

(1)     Any treatment administered in good faith in the course of the practice of any healing art or profession by any person holding a valid license or certificate issued by the state to practice any such art or profession under the provisions of the Business and Professions Code of California or of any other law of this state.

(2)     Massage administered at a massage parlor or by a massage practitioner holding a valid current license issued pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 5.10 of this title. (Ord. 1716 § 6, 2000)

 

5.22.040 Zoning requirements.
In addition to the requirements of this chapter, all adult businesses subject to this chapter shall comply with the requirements set forth in Title 9, Chapter 9.50 of this code, and the city’s zoning ordinance. (Ord. 1716 § 6, 2000)

 

5.22.050 License required.
(a)     It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city, the activities of a regulated adult business without a valid license issued for the specific activity pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for each and every such regulated adult business.

(b)     It is unlawful for any person to engage in or participate in any live performance depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas and/or involving specified sexual activities in an adult business unless the person first obtains and continues in force and effect an adult business entertainer license from the city as herein required. (Ord. 1716 § 6 2000)

 

5.22.060 License required for each location—Display of license.
A separate adult business license is required for each location within the boundaries of the city at which a regulated adult business is to be established. The requirements of this chapter for an adult business license are separate and in addition to a business license required under Chapter 5.04 of this title. Every regulated adult business shall display its adult business license prominently in an area open to the public at each such location at all times when the location is open for business. Every regulated adult business and every person subject to the licensing requirements of this chapter shall make available upon request by the city the adult business entertainer license required by Section 5.22.130 of this chapter for each regulated employee of the adult business. (Ord. 1716 § 6, 2000)

 

5.22.070 Transfer of ownership or control.
(a)     It is a violation of this chapter to operate an adult business under the authority of an adult business license at any place other than the address of the adult business stated in the application upon which the license was issued.

(b)     Upon the transfer of ownership or control of an adult business, the adult business license shall immediately be null and void. In order for the adult business to continue operating, a new application and license is required.

(c)     Any attempt to transfer an adult business license either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is void, and the license shall be deemed revoked. (Ord. 1716 § 6, 2000)

 

5.22.080 Change of location or name.
(a)     Upon the change of location of the premises where an adult business is conducted, the adult business license shall immediately be null and void. In order for the adult business to continue operating, a new application and license is required.

(b)     No licensee shall operate a regulated adult business under any name or designation not specified in the license. Upon a change of name of the adult business, the adult business license shall immediately be null and void. In order for the adult business to continue operating, a new application and license is required. (Ord. 1716 § 6, 2000)

 

5.22.090 Term and expiration of license.
An approved adult business license shall be valid for one year, and shall be renewed on an annual basis on the anniversary date of the original application. Application for renewal of an unrevoked adult business license shall be made pursuant to Section 5.22.100 of this chapter, at least thirty days prior to the expiration date of the current, valid license. (Ord. 1716 § 6, 2000)

 

5.22.100 Application for license.
(a)     An applicant requesting issuance or renewal of an adult business license shall file a written, signed and verified application or renewal application in a form provided by the police chief. Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee for filing or renewal in an amount determined by resolution of the city council, which fees will be used to defray the costs of investigation, inspection and processing of such application. Such fee shall not exceed the reasonable cost of investigation, inspection and processing of such application. License fees required under this chapter shall be in addition to any license, permit or fee required under any other chapter or title of this code.

(b)     An application for an adult business license shall contain the following information:

(1)     If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name, including any aliases, address, and submit satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least eighteen years of age.

(2)     If the applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state the partnership’s complete name, address, the names of all partners, dates of birth, and all aliases used by all of the partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any.

(3)     If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall provide its complete corporate name, the date and state of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of California, the legal names, dates of birth, all aliases used, and the capacity of all officers and directors and principal stockholders (i.e., all stockholders with ten percent or more of all outstanding shares of stock), and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process.

(c)     The application must list whether, preceding the date of application, the applicant or any of the individuals listed pursuant to subsection (b) of this section has:

(1)     Had a previous permit under this chapter revoked, as well as the date of such revocation;

(2)     Whether the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation whose permit under this chapter has been revoked, as well as the date of the revocation;

(3)     Whether the applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers or general partners, if a corporation or partnership, have been found guilty or pleaded nolo contendere within the past four years of a misdemeanor or a felony classified by the state as a sex or sex-related offense, and if so the date and place of the conviction;

(4)     Whether the applicant has had a license pursuant to this chapter or other similar regulations of another city or county denied, suspended, or revoked, including the name and location of the adult business for which the license was denied, suspended, or revoked as well as the date of the denial, suspension, revocation, and whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to this section has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is licensed under this section whose license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the adult business for which the license was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation;

(5)     Whether the applicant or any other individual listed pursuant to this section holds any other permits and/or licenses under this chapter or other similar adult business ordinance in another city or county and if so, the names and location of such other permitted and/or licensed business(es) and the permitting jurisdiction; and

(6)     A recent photograph of the applicant, and the applicant’s driver’s license number, Social Security number, and/or his, her or its state or federally issued tax identification number.

(d)     The application shall include the applicant’s mailing address, name and phone number of the person who is responsible for providing access to the proposed use for inspection purposes, and the notice address to which notice of action on the application is to be mailed (if different).

(e)     If the applicant is an individual, he or she shall sign the application. If the applicant is other than an individual, an officer of the business entity or an individual with a ten percent or greater interest in the business entity shall sign the application. If the application is signed by the property owner’s agent, proof of status is required.

(f)      If the applicant intends to operate the adult business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall file the fictitious name of the adult business and show proof of registration of the fictitious name.

(g)     A detailed description of the type of adult business and proposed use for which the license is requested, including reference to definitions in this chapter and Section 9.50.010 of this code, and the proposed address and assessor’s parcel number of the site where the adult business will operate, plus the names and addresses of the owners and lessors of the adult business site.

(h)     The names of all employees, independent contractors, and other persons who will perform at the adult business, who are required by Section 5.22.130 of this chapter to obtain an adult business entertainer license.

(i)      Applicants for a license under this chapter shall have a continuing duty to promptly supplement application information required by this section in the event that said information changes in any way from what is stated on the application. The failure to comply with said continuing duty within thirty days from the date of such change, by supplementing the application on file with the police chief shall be grounds for suspension of a license.

(j)      A sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration of the premises, including a statement of the total floor area occupied by the adult business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.

(k)     A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within thirty days prior to application depicting the building and the portion thereof to be occupied by the adult business, and the location of all “sensitive uses” and other adult businesses in a manner which clearly establishes compliance with Title 9, Chapter 9.50 of this code, and Sections 9.50.040 and 9.50.050 thereof.

(l)      A blueline print showing all four elevations of any proposed structures and signage and listing proposed exterior building materials. Elevation prints shall be colored or a materials board shall be submitted. In the case of existing buildings where a change of use is proposed and no structural changes or exterior modifications are proposed, photographs may be accepted in lieu of elevation drawings if they show a front and rear elevation of the structure.

(m)    A diagram of the off-street parking areas and premises entries of the adult business showing the location of the lighting system required by Section 5.22.170 of this chapter.

(n)     The police chief shall be responsible for the granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending, and canceling adult business licenses for proposed or existing adult businesses. The police chief shall also be responsible for ascertaining whether a proposed adult business for which a license is being considered complies with all applicable zoning laws and/or regulations. In connection with this review and determination, if the police chief determines that the applicant has completed the application improperly, the police chief shall, within ten business days of the filing of the application, notify the applicant of such fact, and on request of the applicant, grant the applicant an extension of time of ten business days or less to complete the application properly. In addition, the applicant may request an extension, not to exceed ten business days, of the time for the police chief to act on the application. The time period for granting or denying a license shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time.

(o)     In the event that the police chief determines or learns, prior to issuing the permit or while the application for a permit is pending, that the applicant has improperly completed the application for a proposed adult business, he or she shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and allow the applicant ten business days to properly complete the application. The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an opportunity to properly complete the application.

(p)     The fact that an applicant possesses other types of state or city permits or licenses does not exempt the applicant from the requirement of obtaining an adult business license as set forth herein.

(q)     The applicant for the license must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with health, fire and building codes, regulations and laws.

(r)      Prior to obtaining a permit and license to operate any adult business defined in this chapter, and as part of any application for a permit under this section, the applicant shall obtain from the police chief, a certificate that the proposed location of such business complies with the location requirements of Title 9, Chapter 9.50 of this code.

(s)     By applying for a license under this section the applicant shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this chapter, and to the exercise of their authority by the police chief, the planning director and all other city employees and agencies charged with enforcing the laws, ordinances, and codes applicable in the city of their respective responsibilities. (Ord. 1716 § 6, 2000)

 

5.22.110 Investigation of application.
(a)     Upon receipt of an application properly filed and upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the police chief shall immediately stamp the application received and shall immediately thereafter send photocopies of the application to the planning director, fire chief and any other city departments or other agencies responsible for enforcement of health, fire and building codes and laws. Each department or agency shall promptly conduct an investigation of the applicant, application and the proposed adult business in accordance with its responsibilities under law and as set forth this chapter. At the conclusion of its investigation, each department or agency shall indicate on the photocopy of the application its approval or disapproval of the application, date it, sign it, and in the event it disapproved, state the reasons therefor.

(b)     A department or agency shall disapprove an application if it finds that the proposed adult business will be in violation of any provision of any statute, code, ordinance, regulation or other law in effect in the city. After its indication of approval or disapproval, each department or agency shall immediately return the photocopy of the application to the police chief.

(c)     Within twenty business days of receipt of the completed application, the police chief shall complete the investigation, grant or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this section, and so notify the applicant as follows:

(1)     The police chief shall write or stamp “Granted” or “Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation.

(2)     If the application is denied, the police chief shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial.

(3)     If the application is granted, the police chief shall attach to the application an adult business license.

(4)     The application as granted or denied and the license, if any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the notice address stated in the application.

(d)     The police chief shall grant the application and issue the adult business license upon findings that the proposed business meets the locational criteria of Title 9, Chapter 9.50 of this code; and that the applicant has met all of the development and performance standards and requirements of this chapter, unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set forth in Section 5.22.120 of this chapter.

(e)     The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of the adult business. The license shall also indicate that the adult business is subject to prohibitions against public nudity and indecency pursuant to the United States Supreme Court decision in Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc. (1991) 501 U.S. 560 and any applicable local, state or federal law. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult business establishment so that it can be easily read at any time.

(f)      If the police chief neither grants nor denies the application within twenty business days after it is stamped a received (except as provided in subsection 5.22.100(o) of this chapter), the application shall be forwarded to the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting for consideration in strict conformance with the provisions of subsection (d) of this section.

(g)     If the police chief denies renewal of the license, the applicant shall not be issued a license pursuant to this chapter for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the police chief finds that the basis for denial of the renewal of the permit has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a permit if at least ninety days have elapsed since the date the denial became final.

(h)     After any final denial of a license authorized by this chapter, the applicant or licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such decision in a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law, pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 et seq., and pursuant to the expedited judicial review set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. (Ord. 1716 § 6, 2000)

 

5.22.120 Denial of application.
The police chief shall deny the application for any of the following reasons:

(1)     That the building, structure, equipment and/or location used by the business for which a license is required herein does not comply with the requirements and standards of the health, zoning, fire and safety laws of the state and of the city.

(2)     An applicant or the applicant’s adult business is in violation of, or is not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this code related to the establishment or maintenance of an adult business.

(3)     That the applicant his or her employee, agent partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a license or in any report or record required to be filed with the city in connection with the application.

(4)     That the applicant has had any type of adult business license suspended or revoked by any public entity within two years of the date of the application.

(5)     Within five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application for a license under this chapter, the applicant has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor which offense is classified by the state as an offense involving sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape, kidnapping, distribution of obscene material or material harmful to minors, prostitution or pandering, including, but not necessarily limited to, the violation of any crime requiring registration under California Penal Code Section 290, or any violation of Penal Code Sections 243.4, 261, 261.5, 264.1, 266, 266a through 266k, inclusive, 267, 286, 286.5, 288, 288a, 311 through 311.10, inclusive, 314, 316, or 647. The fact that a conviction is being appealed will have no effect on disqualification of the applicant.

(6)     That on the date that business, for which a license is required, herein commences, and thereafter, there will be no responsible adult on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open.

(7)     That an applicant is under eighteen years of age.

(8)     That an applicant, manager or any agent or employee of the applicant or manager has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any crime in conjunction with or as a result of the operation of an adult business prior to the filing of the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed will have no effect on disqualification of the applicant.

(9)     The required application or license fees have not been paid.

(10)   The granting of the license would violate a statute, ordinance, or court order. (Ord. 1716 § 6, 2000)

 

5.22.130 Entertainer license.
(a)     No person shall engage in or participate in any live performance involving, depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas and/or involving specified sexual activities in an adult business, without a valid adult business entertainer license issued by the city. All persons who have been issued an adult business license shall promptly supplement the information provided as part of the application for the license required by Section 5.22.100 of this chapter, with the names of all entertainers required to obtain an adult business entertainer license, within thirty days of any change in the information originally submitted. Failure to submit such changes shall be grounds for suspension of the adult business license.

(b)     The police chief shall grant, deny and renew adult business entertainer licenses.

(c)     The application for a license shall be made on a form provided by the police chief. An original and two copies of the completed and sworn license application shall be filed with the police chief.

(d)     The completed application shall contain the following information and be accompanied by the following documents:

(1)     The applicant’s legal name and any other names (including “stage names” and aliases) used by the applicant;

(2)     Age, date and place of birth;

(3)     Height, weight, hair and eye color, tattoo descriptions and locations;

(4)     Present residence address and telephone number;

(5)     Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of:

(A)    Any of the offenses set forth in Sections 315, 316, 266a, 266b, 266c, 266e, 266g, 266h, 266i, 647(b) and 647(d) of the California Penal Code as those sections now exist or may hereafter be amended or renumbered;

(B)    The equivalent of the aforesaid offenses outside the state;

(6)     Whether such person is or has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other jurisdiction to engage in prostitution in such other jurisdiction. If any person mentioned in this subsection has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other state to engage in prostitution, a statement shall be submitted giving the place of such registration, licensing or legal authorization, and the inclusive dates during which such person was so licensed, registered or authorized to engage in prostitution;

(7)     State driver’s license, Social Security number or identification number;

(8)     Satisfactory written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age;

(9)     The applicant’s fingerprints on a form provided by the police department, and a color photograph clearly showing the applicant’s face, taken within the last six months of the date of the permit application. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant; and

(10)   If the application is made for the purpose of renewing a license, the applicant shall attach a copy of the license to be renewed.

(e)     The completed application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee. The amount of the application fee shall be set by resolution of the city council.

(f)      Upon receipt of an application and payment of the application fees, the police chief shall immediately stamp the application as received and promptly investigate the application.

(g)     If the police chief determines that the applicant has completed the application improperly, or that the application is otherwise invalid, the police chief shall, within ten business days of the filing of the application, notify the applicant of such fact and grant the applicant an extension of time of not more than ten business days to complete the application properly. In addition, the applicant may request an extension, not to exceed ten business days, of the time for the police chief to act on the application. The time period for granting or denying a license shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time. (Ord. 1716 § 6, 2000)

 

5.22.140 Investigation and action on entertainer license application.
(a)     Within five business days after receipt of the properly completed application, the police chief shall grant or deny the application and so notify the applicant as follows:

(1)     The police chief shall write or stamp “Granted” or “Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation.

(2)     If the application is denied, the police chief shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial.

(3)     If the application is granted, the police chief shall attach to the application an adult business entertainer license.

(4)     The application as granted or denied and the license, if any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the residence address stated in the application.

(b)     The police chief shall grant the application and issue the license unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set forth in subsection (d) of this section.

(c)     If the police chief neither grants nor denies the application within five business days after it is stamped as received (except as provided in subsection 5.22.130(g) of this chapter), the application shall be forwarded to the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting for consideration in strict conformance with the provisions of this chapter.

(d)     The police chief, or in the case of the police chief not acting within the time period under this section, the city council shall deny the application for any of the following reasons:

(1)     The applicant has knowingly made any false misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a license or in any report or document required to be filed with the application;

(2)     The applicant is under eighteen years of age;

(3)     The adult business entertainer license is to be used for performing in a business prohibited by state or city law;

(4)     The applicant has been registered in any state as a prostitute;

(5)     The applicant has been convicted of any of the offenses enumerated in subsection 5.22.130(d)(5) of this chapter or convicted of an offense outside the state that would have constituted any of the described offenses if committed within the state. A license may be issued to any person convicted of the described crimes if the conviction occurred more than five years prior to the date of the application.

(e)     Each adult business entertainer license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by filing with the police chief a written request for renewal, accompanied by the application fee and a copy of the license to be renewed. The request for renewal shall be made at least thirty days before the expiration date of the license. When made less than thirty days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided herein for applications for licenses.

(f)      The city deems confidential license applications required pursuant to this section and all information contained therein. Absent an order from a court of competent jurisdiction, the city shall not disclose for public review the applications or the information contained therein. (Ord. 1716 § 6, 2000)

 

5.22.150 Suspension or revocation of licenses.
An adult business license or adult business entertainer license may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section.

(1)     On determining that grounds for license revocation exist, the police chief shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to the licensee. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing, and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent code sections and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the licensee, or shall be delivered to the licensee personally, at least ten business days prior to the hearing date. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the police chief, but at a minimum shall include the following:

(A)    All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; may be represented by counsel; and shall have the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness. The police chief’s decision may be appealed to the city council in accordance with Section 5.22.160 of this chapter.

(2)     A licensee may be subject to suspension or revocation of his, her or its license, or be subject to other appropriate disciplinary action, for any of the following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the licensee, or an employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder or manager of an adult business:

(A)    The licensee has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material facts in the application for a license, or in any report or record required to be filed with the city.

(B)    The licensee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder or manager of an adult business has knowingly allowed or permitted, and has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of any of the following on the premises of the adult business, or in the case of an adult business entertainer, the licensee has engaged in one of the activities described below while on the premises of an adult business:

(i)      Giving false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process that tended to enhance the applicant’s opportunity for obtaining an adult business license or adult business entertainer license.

(ii)     Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation.

(iii)   Use of the establishment as a place where unlawful solicitation for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation openly occur.

(iv)    Any conduct constituting a criminal offense which requires registration under Section 290 of the California Penal Code.

(v)     The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation or prostitution, including any conduct constituting violations of Sections 315, 316, 318 or subdivision (b) of Section 547 of the California Penal Code.

(vi)    Any act constituting a violation of provisions in the California Penal Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors, including, but not limited to, Sections 311 through 313.4.

(vii)  Refused to allow an inspection of adult business premises as authorized by this chapter.

(viii) An employee or permittee who allowed or knew or should have known of gambling by any person on the adult business premises.

(ix)    An employee or permittee who allowed or knew or should have known of such activity, has allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises.

(x)     Operated the adult business in violation of a building, fire, health, or zoning statute, code, ordinance or regulation whether federal, state or local, said determination being based on investigation by the division, department or agency charged with enforcing said rules or laws. In the event of such statute violation, the police chief shall promptly notify the permittee of the violation and shall allow a seven consecutive day period in which to correct the violation. If the permittee fails to correct the violation before the expiration of the seven consecutive day period, the police chief shall forthwith suspend the permit and shall notify the permittee of the suspension.

(xi)    Operated the adult business in violation of the hours of operation as set forth in this chapter.

(xii)  Been convicted of an act for which initial denial of a license would have been required pursuant to this chapter.

(xiii) Any conduct prohibited by this chapter.

(C)    Failure to abide by any disciplinary action previously imposed by an appropriate city official.

(3)     After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this section, if the police chief finds and determines that there are grounds for disciplinary action, based upon the severity of the violation, the police chief shall impose one of the following:

(A)    A warning;

(B)    Suspension of the license for a specified period not to exceed six months; or

(C)    Revocation of the license.

(4)     When the city revokes an adult business license, the revocation shall continue for one year from the date of revocation and the permittee shall not be issued an adult business license for one year from the date revocation became effective.

(5)     If the adult business license was revoked under this section for reasons that the establishment is in noncompliance with the requirements of Title 9, Chapter 9.50 of this code, and if the police chief finds that the basis for revocation under this section has been corrected, the applicant shall be granted a license if at least ninety days have elapsed since the date revocation became effective.

(6)     If the adult business entertainer license issued to an individual and/or employee was revoked under this section, an applicant may not be granted another license until the number of years required under this section have elapsed. (Ord. 1716 § 6, 2000)

 

5.22.160 Appeal of denial, revocation or suspension.
(a)     Appeal of Denial of Initial License.

(1)     Any decision of the police chief to issue or deny a license may be appealed to the city council. Any appeal shall be filed in writing within ten business days following notice of issuance or denial, and shall state the grounds upon which review is sought. The appeal hearing will be scheduled for hearing and the city council will render a decision all within fifteen business days of the filing of the appeal with the city clerk. At the hearing, all parties shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary and other tangible evidence on the issues; may be represented by legal counsel, and shall have the right to examine and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely on in the conduct of serious matters may be admitted.

(2)     All decisions made by the city council regarding the issuance or denial of a license subject to this chapter shall become final five days after mailing of the notice of determination. After any final denial of a license authorized by this chapter, the applicant, licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such decision in a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law, pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 et seq., and pursuant to the expedited judicial review set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8.

(b)     Appeal of Renewal, Suspension or Revocation of License.

(1)     Any decision of the police chief to renew or to deny renewal, to suspend or revoke a license may be appealed to the city council. Any appeal shall be filed in writing within ten business days following notice of renewal, nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of a license, and shall state the grounds upon which review is sought. The appeal hearing will be scheduled for hearing and the city council will render a decision all within fifteen business days of the filing of the appeal with the city clerk. At the hearing, all parties shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary and other tangible evidence on the issues; may be represented by legal counsel; and shall have the right to examine and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely on in the conduct of serious matters may be admitted.

(2)     If the police chief denies the renewal of a license, or if a license has been suspended or revoked, and the aggrieved applicant/licensee timely commences an appeal to review the validity of the denial, suspension or revocation, upon written request of the applicant/licensee, the city shall issue a temporary permit pending the final determination on the appeal. The temporary permit shall remain in effect throughout the administrative appeal process and for ninety days following the date the administrative determination is final. In the event the applicant/licensee fails or refuses to seek judicial review within such ninety days, the temporary permit shall thereon expire without further notice and the applicant/licensee shall cease all operations thereunder. Any temporary permit issued pursuant to this section shall not grant any vested rights to the holder of the temporary permit.

(3)     All decisions made by the city council regarding the renewal, nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of a license subject to this chapter shall become final five days after mailing of the notice of determination. After any final denial of a license authorized by this chapter, the applicant/licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such decision in a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law, pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 et seq., and pursuant to the expedited judicial review set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. (Ord. 1716 § 6, 2000)

 

5.22.170 Development and performance standards.
The following development and performance standards shall be satisfied by an adult business and included in any approved adult business license:

(1)     The establishment of an adult business shall comply with all applicable city site development standards of the zone, district, or area in which the adult business is located, the building and construction codes, maximum occupancy loads, fire codes, and the health and safety regulations in effect in the city.

(2)     An adult business shall comply with the applicable city permit and inspection procedures.

(3)     Each adult business shall have a business entrance separate from any other nonadult business located in the same building.

(4)     No adult business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities, specified anatomical areas or instruments, devices or paraphernalia designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities from any public way or from any location outside the building or area of such establishment. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening.

(5)     All building openings, entries, and windows shall be located, covered, or screened to prevent viewing of the interior from any exterior area.

(6)     All exterior areas of adult businesses, including buildings, landscaping, and parking areas, shall be maintained in a clean and orderly manner free of trash, weeds, and debris.

(7)     Parking lot lighting shall be provided to illuminate all off-street parking areas serving such use for the purpose of increasing the personal safety of patrons and employees and reducing the incidents of vandalism and theft. The lighting shall provide a level of illumination not less than one foot-candle, measured at the surface of the pavement, at all areas of the parking lot. The lighting shall be shown on the required plot plans and shall be reviewed and approved by the building and safety department.

(8)     A parking plan shall be submitted to the city engineer for review and approved providing for adequate contiguous on-site parking.

(9)     Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, fire lanes and fire suppression equipment shall be regulated, designed and provided in accordance with the regulations and standards of the fire department and the city’s building standards.

(10)   The premises within which the adult business is located shall provide sufficient sound-absorbing insulation so that noise generated inside said premises shall not be audible anywhere on any adjacent property or public right-of-way or within any other building or other separate unit within the same building. No loudspeaker or sound equipment audible to persons in any public exterior area shall be used in connection with an adult business, and the business shall be so conducted that sounds associated with the business are not emitted into any public exterior area.

(11)   An adult business shall be open or operating for business only between the hours of eleven a.m. and twelve a.m. on any particular day. It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter to cause an adult business to be operated or to allow such business to remain open for business, or to permit any employee and/or independent contractor to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale or solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service, between the hours of twelve a.m. and eleven a.m. of any particular day.

(12)   The building entrance to an adult business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under eighteen years of age are precluded from entering the premises. Said notice shall be constructed and posted to the satisfaction of the planning director. No person under the age of eighteen years shall be permitted within the premises at any time. It is unlawful for any employee, owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager or permittee of an adult business to allow any person below the age of eighteen years upon the premises or within the confines of any adult business if no liquor is served, or under the age of twenty-one if liquor is served.

(13)   Each adult business shall be provided with a manager’s station for the purpose of monitoring and supervising activities within the business. A manager shall be on duty on the premises during all times that the adult business is open to the public. All indoor areas of the adult business within which patrons are permitted, or within which viewing is permitted by patrons or the public except restrooms, shall be open to view by the manager at all times.

(14)   An on-site security program shall be prepared and implemented including the following items:

(A)    All interior areas of the adult business shall be illuminated at a minimum of the following foot-candles, minimally maintained and evenly distributed at ground level:

 

 

Area

Foot-Candles

Adult bookstores, video stores and novelty stores

20

Adult theaters and cabarets

5 (except during performances, at which times lighting shall be at least 1.25 foot-candles)

Adult motion picture theaters

7.5

Adult motels/hotels

20 (in public areas)

Nude modeling studios

20

 

(B)    All off-street parking areas and building entries serving the sexually oriented business shall be illuminated during all hours of operation with a lighting system designed to provide an average maintained horizontal illumination of four foot-candles of light on the parking surface and/or walkway. This required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the sexually oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and theft. A lighting plan, prepared by a licensed lighting engineer, shall be shown on the required site or plot plan and shall be subject to review by the building official and the police department.

(C)    Adult businesses shall employ security guards in order to maintain the public peace and safety, based upon the following standards:

(i)      Adult businesses such as adult motion picture theaters, adult video stores, nude modeling studios, sexual encounter establishments, adult theaters and adult cabarets, or any adult business which features entertainment (live or motion picture viewed from booths) whose dominant or predominant character and theme is the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons, shall provide at least one guard for every fifty occupants permitted by the city’s building code, at all times while the business is open, and in no case shall there be less than two guards. One guard shall be stationed outside during all business hours. For businesses where the maximum building fire capacity is fifty or less, video monitoring of the parking lot may be approved by the police chief, subject to the submission and approval of a video security monitoring plan.

(ii)     Security guards for other adult businesses may be required if it is determined by the police chief that their presence is necessary in order to prevent any of the conduct listed in subsection 5.22.150(2)(B) of this chapter.

(iii)   Security guards shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing compliance by patrons of the requirements of these regulations. Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be duly licensed by the state as security guards. No security guard required pursuant to this subsection shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person or sole occupant of the manager’s station while acting as a security guard.

(D)    A video camera surveillance system shall be installed and operational during business hours, providing continuous coverage and recordation of both the interior of the building and the parking lot areas. Location of the surveillance cameras shall be approved by the police chief.

(E)     An annual review for adequacy of security will be conducted to ascertain if there has been an increase in calls for emergency services.

(15)   It is unlawful to sell, serve or permit the consumption of alcohol in any portion of a structure occupied by an adult business unless a license has been issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (“ABC”) for such sale, service and consumption.

(16)   The adult business shall provide and maintain separate restroom facilities for male patrons and employees, and female patrons and employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for females, and female patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for males, except to carry out duties of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the restroom facilities. The restrooms shall be free from any material depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities (“adult material”). Restrooms shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction equipment. The foregoing provisions of this subsection shall not apply to an adult business which deals exclusively with sale or rental of adult materials which is not used or consumed on the premises, such as an adult bookstore or adult video store, and which does not provide restroom facilities to its patrons or the general public.

(17)   Every adult business shall display at all times during business hours the license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for such adult business in a conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by all persons entering the adult business.

(18)   An adult business entertainer shall have his or her license available for inspection at all times during which such person is on the premises of the adult business.

Failure to comply with each and all of the foregoing development and performance standards shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the adult business license and/or adult entertainer’s license. (Ord. 1716 § 6, 2000)

 

5.22.180 Development and performance standards specific to adult motion picture theaters.
In addition to the performance standards set forth in Section 5.22.170 of this chapter, the following development and performance standards shall apply to any adult business which is also an adult motion picture theater or which includes video viewing booths which feature specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons:

(1)     The application for the adult business license shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof and specifying the location of one or more managers’ stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures, and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons shall not be permitted.

(2)     The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more managers’ stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the managers’ stations. The view required in this subsection must be direct line of sight from the manager’s station.

(3)     No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s station shall be made without the prior written approval of the planning director.

(4)     It shall be the duty of the permittee and/or licensee and any employees present on the premises to ensure that the view area remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons shall not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to this chapter. Signs prohibiting loitering shall be posted and maintained in prominent places in and near video booths.

(5)     The following additional requirements shall apply to adult motion picture theaters:

(A)    If the theater contains a hall or auditorium area, the area shall comply with each of the following provisions:

(i)      Have individual, separate seats (not couches, benches or the like) to accommodate the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium area;

(ii)     Have a continuous main aisle alongside the seating area(s) in order that each person seated in the hall or auditorium area shall be visible from the aisle at all times; and

(iii)   Have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each entrance to the hall or auditorium area which lists the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium area, which number shall not exceed the number of seats within the hall or auditorium area.

(B)    If the theater is designed to permit outdoor viewing by patrons seated in automobiles, it shall have the motion picture screen so situated, or the perimeter of the establishment so fenced, that the material to be seen by those patrons may not be seen from any public right-of-way child daycare facility, public park, school, or religious institution or any residentially zoned property occupied with a residence.

(6)     The following additional requirements shall apply to adult motion picture theaters and adult businesses where motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other visual representations which feature specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons in video viewing booths or viewing rooms:

(A)    Video viewing booths/viewing rooms shall remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, furniture or fixtures, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times. No patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted.

(B)    No video viewing booth/viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any one time.

(C)    The walls or partitions between video viewing booths/viewing rooms shall be maintained in good repair at all times, with no holes between any two such rooms such as would allow viewing from one booth or room into another or such as to allow physical contact of any kind between the occupants of any two such booths or rooms.

(D)    Customers, patrons or visitors shall not be allowed to stand idly by in the vicinity of any such viewing room/booth, or to remain in the common area of such business, other than the restrooms who are not actively engaged in shopping for or reviewing the products available on display for purchaser viewing. Signs prohibiting loitering shall be posted in prominent places in and near the viewing rooms/booths.

(E)     The floors, seats, walls and other interior portions of all video viewing booths/rooms shall be maintained clean and free from waste and bodily secretions. Presence of human excrement, urine, semen or saliva in any such booths or rooms shall be evidence of improper maintenance and inadequate sanitary controls; repeated instances of such conditions may justify suspension or revocation of the adult business license.

(7)     This section shall also apply to any adult business, other than an adult motel or hotel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room or booth of less than one hundred fifty square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

(8)     The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access and an illumination of not less than seven and one-half foot-candle power as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the owners, operators, their agents and employees present on the premises to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times any patron is present on the premises. (Ord. 1716 § 6, 2000)

 

5.22.190 Development and performance standards specific to live entertainment.
In addition to the performance standards set forth in Section 5.22.170 of this chapter, the following development and performance standards shall apply to adult businesses providing live entertainment involving, depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas and/or involving specified sexual activities:

(1)     No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of an adult business except upon a stage at least eighteen inches above the level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least ten feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons and surrounded with a stationary rail, which rail must be at least thirty inches in height, establishing the separations between entertainers and patrons. No patron shall be permitted within the area of the stage established by the rail while the stage is occupied by an entertainer. “Live entertainment” means the performance of every form of live entertainment involving specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas, including, but not limited to, a performance accompanied by music, band or orchestra, act, play, burlesque, revue, pantomime, scene, song or dance participated in by one or more persons. “Entertainer” or “live entertainer” shall mean any person who is an employee or independent contractor of the adult business, or any person who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs live entertainment for patrons of an adult business.

(2)     If the adult business is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, the licensee shall abide by the rules and regulations established by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (“ABC”) and the regulations provided in this chapter, unless any regulation of this chapter is preempted by the ABC, in which case the ABC’s regulations shall apply.

(3)     For live entertainment involving specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas, the following provisions shall apply:

(A)    No live entertainer, either before, during or after performances, shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any entertainer either before, during or after performances by such entertainer. In addition, while on the premises, no entertainer shall have physical contact with a patron and no patron shall have physical contact with an entertainer, which physical contact involves the touching of the clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, cleft of the buttocks, perineum, anal region, or female breast with any part or area of any other person’s body either before or after any adult live entertainment by such entertainer. When patrons are present at the establishment, they shall not be allowed to, and shall not, directly touch, fondle or caress (as those terms are defined in Kev Inc. v. Kitsap County (9th Cir., 1986) 793 F.2d 1053) the entertainers while they are performing. This subsection shall only apply to physical contact on the premises of the adult business. This prohibition does not extend to incidental touching. Patrons shall be advised of the separation and no-touching requirements by signs placed on the barrier between entertainers and patrons, and if necessary by employees of the establishment.

(B)    Live entertainers shall be restricted to performing in accordance with subsection (1) of this section.

(C)    Each live entertainer for an adult business shall be required to obtain an adult entertainer license pursuant to this chapter.

(4)     The adult business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for entertainers which are exclusively dedicated to the entertainers’ use. No patron is permitted access to the dressing room facilities. The dressing room facilities shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction equipment.

(5)     The adult business shall provide access for entertainers between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the adult business shall provide a minimum three foot wide walk aisle for entertainers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers capable of (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and entertainers.

(6)     No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any entertainer and no entertainer shall solicit or accept any pay or gratuity from any patron. If patrons wish to tip entertainers, tips shall be placed in receptacles which shall be located at least ten feet from the permanently fixed stage. Patrons shall not throw tips to entertainers, hand tips directly to entertainers or place tips in the entertainers’ costumes.

(7)     No owner or other person with managerial control over an adult business shall permit any person on the premises of the adult business to engage in exposure of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque coverage, and/or the female breast with less than a fully opaque coverage over any part of the nipple or areola and/or covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. This provision may not be complied with by applying an opaque covering simulating the appearance of the specified anatomical part required to be covered.

(8)     No operator, entertainer or employee of an adult business shall encourage or permit a patron upon the premises to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals of any entertainer or employee of the adult business. The adult business shall not conduct any massage, acupuncture, body wrapping, tattooing, acupressure or escort services on the premises.

(9)     Every licensee of an adult business which provides live entertainment depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities must maintain a register of all persons so performing on the premises and their license numbers. Such register shall be available for inspection during regular business hours by any police officer or health officer of the city.

(10)   The adult business shall provide a security system that visually records and monitors all parking lot areas, at all times that the business is open and occupied for business.

(11)   User parking areas and doorways of an adult business shall be unobstructed so as to allow visibility of these areas from the public right-of-way. (Ord. 1716 § 6, 2000)

 

5.22.200 Display of license and identification cards.
(a)     Every adult business shall display at all times during business hours the license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for such adult business in a conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by all persons entering the adult business.

(b)     The police chief shall provide each adult business entertainer required to have a license pursuant to this chapter, with an identification card containing the name, address, photograph and license number of such entertainer.

(c)     An adult business entertainer shall have such card available for inspection at all times during which such person is on the premises of the adult business. (Ord. 17 16 § 6 2000)

 

5.22.210 Prohibitions regarding minors.
(a)     It is a violation of this chapter for any person to operate, or cause to be operated an adult business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this section, and knowingly, or with reasonable cause to know, permit, suffer, or allow:

(1)     Admittance of a person under eighteen years of age to the business premises;

(2)     A person under eighteen years of age to remain at the business premises;

(3)     A person under eighteen years of age to purchase goods or services at the business premises; or

(4)     A person who is under eighteen years of age to work at the adult business premises as an employee, or an independent contractor; or

(5)     The interior of the premises to be visible to a minor, wherein any matter harmful to minors is displayed or visible, unless all such materials so visible to minors are covered or obscured as required by city ordinance.

(b)     A sign shall be conspicuously posted on all entrances restricting entrance of minors. (Ord. 1716 § 6, 2000)

 

5.22.220 Inspection.
An applicant for an establishment or licensee shall permit authorized representatives of the planning department, the county health department, the police department, the fire department, or other city departments or agencies to inspect the premises of an adult business or the premises at which a licensee is permitted to work, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law and the development and performance standards applicable to adult businesses, at any time it is occupied or open for business. A person who operates an adult business or his or her agent or employee is in violation of the provisions of this section if he or she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business. Such inspections shall be conducted in a reasonable manner. (Ord. 1716 § 6, 2000)

 

5.22.230 Regulations nonexclusive.
The provisions of this chapter regulating adult businesses are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the operation of businesses as adopted by the city. (Ord. 1716 § 6, 2000)

 

5.22.240 Employment of persons without permits unlawful.
It is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager or licensee in charge of or in control of an adult business which provides live entertainment depicting, describing or relating to specified anatomical areas and/or involving specified sexual activities to allow any person to perform such entertainment who is not in possession of a valid, unrevoked adult business entertainer license. (Ord. 1716 § 6, 2000)

 

5.22.250 Violations, penalties.
Any person, whether as principal, employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or trustee or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and any conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day during which such violation is permitted, committed or continued. (Ord. 1716 § 6, 2000)

 

5.22.260 Public nuisance.
In addition to the penalties set forth above, any adult business which is operating in violation of this chapter or any provision thereof is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and, as such, may be abated or enjoined from further operation. All costs to abate such public nuisance, including attorney fees and court costs, shall be paid by the licensee of the adult business, or the property owner of record, pursuant to Title 9, Chapter 9.36 of this code. (Ord. 1716 § 6, 2000)

Chapter 5.23 MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES
5.23.010 Findings.
The city council adopts this Chapter 5.23, Section 21.03.110 of this code and the definition for “marijuana dispensary” set forth under Section 21.01.020(C) of this code based on the testimony, reports and/or other supporting materials presented to the city council during the first and/or second reading of the ordinance adopting those provisions. The city council also makes the following findings in support of its decision to adopt this Chapter 5.23, Section 21.03.110 of this code and the definition for “marijuana dispensary” set forth under Section 21.01.020(C).

(a)     The voters of the state of California approved Proposition 215 (codified as Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq., and entitled “The Compassionate Use Act of 1996”).

(b)     The intent of Proposition 215 was to enable persons who are in need of marijuana for medical purposes to be able to obtain and use marijuana without fear of state criminal prosecution under limited, specified circumstances.

(c)     The California legislature enacted S.B. 420 in the year 2004 in an effort to clarify the scope of the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 and to assist cities and other governing bodies in the adopting and enforcement of rules and regulations consistent with S.B. 420.

(d)     Neither Proposition 215 nor S.B. 420 expressly authorize “medical marijuana dispensaries” as defined under this chapter.

(e)     The Federal Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. Section 841, makes it unlawful to manufacture, distribute, dispense or possess marijuana.

(f)      The United States Supreme Court in Gonzales v. Raich (2005) 125 S. Ct. 2195, ruled that the Controlled Substances Act applies even in states such as California which have medical marijuana laws. In March of 2007, the Ninth Circuit Court of appeals, in revisiting the Raich matter on remand from the United States Supreme Court’s 2005 decision, found that the use of medical marijuana was not a fundamental right protected under the Fifth and Ninth Amendments of the United States Constitution.

(g)     Accordingly, marijuana dispensaries are illegal under federal law.

(h)     The illegality of marijuana dispensaries under federal law notwithstanding, such operations also generate serious negative secondary impacts which unduly burden the communities in which they are located; threaten public peace; and otherwise undermine efforts to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the public at large. These negative secondary impacts outweigh whatever medical benefits may reasonably be attributed to the use of marijuana by Glendora residents: (1) who are legitimately prescribed marijuana under legitimate circumstances by bona fide physicians; and (2) who might actually patronize such an establishments.

(i)      The negative secondary impacts referenced above include burglaries, robberies, violence, increased vandalism, illegal sales of marijuana to, and use of marijuana by, minors and other persons without medical need in the areas immediately surrounding such marijuana dispensaries.

(j)      The voters of the state of California approved Proposition 64 allowing the personal use of marijuana and marijuana products by persons over the age of twenty-one (codified as amendments, repeals and additions to section of the state of California Business and Professions Code, Food and Agriculture Code, Health and Safety Code, Labor Code, Revenue and Taxation Code and Water Code. Section and entitled “The Adult Use of Marijuana Act”). (Ord. 2014 § 3, 2017; Ord. 1903 § 1, 2008)

 

5.23.030 Marijuana dispensaries and cultivation prohibited.
(a)     No person(s) may operate a marijuana dispensary or cultivate, manufacture, process, distribute, store, exchange, deliver, make available or give away marijuana or marijuana-infused products to any person, qualified patient, or primary caregiver of qualified patients pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 within the city of Glendora.

(b)     Any person who owns or manages real property located within the city of Glendora shall not allow such property to be used for the operation of a marijuana dispensary or the cultivation of marijuana.

(c)     No person(s) may be issued a business license or business permit to operate a marijuana dispensary or to cultivate, manufacture, or process marijuana or marijuana-infused products within the city of Glendora. (Ord. 2004 § 3, 2016; Ord. 1903 § 1, 2008)

 

5.23.040 Separate offense for each day.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any such person commits, continues, permits, or causes a violation thereof, and shall be penalized accordingly. (Ord. 1903 § 1, 2008)

 

5.23.050 Public nuisance—Civil injunction.
The violation of any provision of this chapter or Section 21.03.110 of this code shall constitute, and is declared to be, a public nuisance and contrary to the public interest and shall, at the discretion of the city, create a civil cause of action for interim injunctive relief. (Ord. 1903 § 1, 2008)

 

5.23.060 Violations.
Any person who violates of any provision of this chapter or Section 21.03.110 of this code is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1903 § 1, 2008)

Chapter 5.24 GLENDORA CABLE TELEVISION ORDINANCE
Article I. Short Title and Definitions
5.24.100 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the “Glendora Cable Television Ordinance.” (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.200 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and abbreviations shall have the following meaning:

(1)     “Affiliate” means any person which directly or indirectly owns or controls grantee, any person which grantee directly or indirectly owns or which it controls, or any person under common ownership or control with grantee.

(2)     “Applicant” means any person submitting an application for grant or transfer of a franchise.

(3)     “Basic cable service” means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals.

(4)     “Broadcast signal” means a television or radio signal that is transmitted over the air to a wide geographic audience and is received by a cable television system and retransmitted its subscribers.

(5)     “Cable communications system” or “system,” also referred to as “cable television system,” or “cable system” means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment, that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include:

(A)    A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations;

(B)    A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility uses any public right-of-way;

(C)    A facility of a common carrier, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or

(D)    Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system.

(6)     “Cablecast signal” means a non-broadcast signal that originates within the facilities of the cable television system.

(7)     “Cable-mile” means a linear mile of strand or conduit-bearing cable as measured on the street or public or private easement from pole to pole or pedestal to pedestal.

(8)     “Cable service” means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service and any subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service.

(9)     “Channel” or “cable channel” means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel as defined by the Federal Communications Commission.

(10)   “City” means the city of Glendora, a municipal corporation of the state of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form.

(11)   “Commence construction” means the point in time when the first connection is physically made to a utility pole, or under grounding of cables is initiated, after preliminary engineering (strand mapping) and after all necessary permits and authorizations have been obtained.

(12)   “Commence operation” means the point in time when sufficient distribution facilities have been installed so as to permit the offering of cable service to a dwelling unit located within the franchise area and such services are actually subscribed to by a resident of the franchise area.

(13)   “Commercial use channel” means the channel capacity, if any, designated for commercial use as defined and required by federal law.

(14)   “Completion of construction” means the point in time when all distribution facilities have been installed by the grantee so as to permit the offering of cable service to all of the potential subscribers in the franchise area subject to the limitations of section 5.24.804.

(15)   “Council” means the present governing body of the city or any future board constituting the legislative body of the city.

(16)   “Distribution facilities” means non-subscriber specific cable equipment including trunk and distribution lines, excluding drop lines to specific locations.

(17)   “Federal Communications Commission” or “FCC” means the present federal agency of that name as constituted by the Communications Act of 1934, or any successor agency created by the United States Congress.

(18)   “Franchise” means the right to construct, operate and maintain a cable television system using the city streets pursuant to the terms and condition of this chapter, the franchise ordinance and the acceptance of the franchise ordinance. Any reference to the “franchise” incorporates by reference this chapter, the franchise ordinance and the acceptance of the franchise ordinance.

(19)   “Franchise area” means the geographic area within the city designated in a franchise where the grantee may operate a cable television system.

(20)   “Franchise fee” means the tax, fee or assessment of any kind imposed by the city on a grantee or cable subscriber, or both, solely because of its status as such. The term “franchise fee” does not include:

(A)    Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and grantee(s) or their services but not including a tax, fee, or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against grantee or cable subscribers);

(B)    Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by grantee for public, educational or governmental access facilities;

(C)    Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding, enforcing, transfer or renewal of the franchise, including payments of bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or

(D)    Any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code.

(21)   “Franchise ordinance” means the ordinance granting a franchise to a person to operate a cable television system pursuant to the terms of this chapter. Any conflict between the terms of this chapter and the franchise ordinance shall be resolved in favor of the franchise ordinance.

(22)   “Grantee” means any person granted a franchise.

(23)   “Gross revenues” means any and all revenue or compensation in any form received directly or indirectly by the grantee or its affiliates, from the operation of the cable television system utilizing the public streets and rights-of-way in the city for which a franchise is required under this chapter, including, but not limited to, monthly subscriber fees for basic cable service, pay-television fees, pay-per-view fees and related per-event revenues, installation and reconnection fees, leased channel fees, fees paid for data transmission, converter rentals, advertising revenues, copyright fees and franchise fees. Copyright fees, franchise fees or any other costs of doing business which are charged to subscribers as a separate line item appearing on their billing statements shall be included in gross revenues. Gross revenues excludes refundable deposits and taxes, fees or assessments imposed upon any person by a city, county, state or other governmental agency collected by the grantee for pass-through to such governmental agency.

Gross revenues shall include revenues from sources other than the grantee’s subscribers, including without limitation revenues derived from the sale of advertising or the lease of channel capacity by the grantee on its cable system, provided that such revenues are paid directly to grantee, and not to its affiliates.

(24)   “Installation” means the connection of the cable television system from feeder cable to subscribers’ terminals, and the provision of service.

(25)   “Interactive service” means two-way communications between system subscribers and the system headend or hub.

(26)   “Local origination channel” means any channel where the grantee is the primary program supplier or originator, and provides video programs to subscribers.

(27)   “Other programming service” means information that the grantee makes available to all subscribers generally.

(28)   “Pay-television” or “pay-per-view” means the delivery to subscribers over the cable television system of video programming for a fee or charge to subscribers over and above the charge for basic cable service, on a per program, per channel, or other subscription basis.

(29)   “Person” means any natural person, partnership of every kind, association, joint stock company, trust, domestic and foreign corporation, or organizational entity.

(30)   “Public, educational or government access” or “PEG access” means programming, channel capacity, facilities and equipment designated for public, educational, or governmental use.

(31)   “Resident” means any person residing in the city as otherwise defined by applicable law.

(32)   “School” means any accredited primary and secondary school, college and university.

(33)   “Person” means any entity, including an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, corporation, or governmental entity.

(34)   “Public rights-of-way” means any of the following that are owned and controlled, used or dedicated for use, by the public and located within the city’s jurisdictional limits: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, rights-of-way and similar public property within which a grantee may place its facilities for operating its cable television system.

(35)   “Subscriber” means any person who subscribes to a service provided by the grantee by means of or in connection with the cable television system.

(36)   “Video programming” means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station.

(37)   “City manager” means the city manager of the city of Glendora or designee.

(38)   “Material breach” means any substantial and repeated failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter. A material breach for the purposes of assessing penalties shall be deemed to have occurred for each day, following the expiration of the notice and cure period specified herein that any material breach has not been remedied by the grantee, irrespective of the number of customers affected.

(39)   “Normal operating conditions” means those service conditions which are within the control of the grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of the grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the grantee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.

(40)   “Service interruption” means the loss of picture or sound on one or more video channels. (Ord. 1622 § 1, 1994; Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

Article II. Grant of Franchise
5.24.302 Grant.
The city may grant a franchise pursuant to a franchise ordinance. Each franchise shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter, the franchise ordinance, and the acceptance of the franchise ordinance. No subsequently enacted ordinances or regulations shall materially alter the rights or obligations of the grantee under the franchise ordinance or this chapter, provided that the franchise shall be subject to all ordinances and regulations of general application now in effect or subsequently enacted, including those concerning encroachment permits, business licenses, zoning and building, which ordinances or regulations are a valid and proper exercise of the city’s police powers. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.304 Franchise required.
It is unlawful for any person to construct, install or operate a cable television system in the city within any street or within any other right-of-way within the city which has not yet been dedicated to the city but is designated or delineated for public use on any tentative subdivision map approved by the city and, in each such case, to construct or install any equipment or facilities for a cable system, whether or not operational, without a properly granted franchise awarded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, which franchise is in full force and effect. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.306 Duration.
The term of the franchise or any franchise renewal shall be established in the franchise ordinance. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.308 Franchise nonexclusive.
(a)     Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive and city-wide. The city may grant additional franchises as it deems appropriate.

(b)     In the event that, subsequent to the effective date of this chapter, the city grants an additional franchise for a cable communications system on terms that, on a whole, are more favorable or less burdensome than those contained in an existing grantee’s franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, such more favorable or less burdensome terms shall be automatically extended to such existing grantee to the effect that any provision in such grantee’s franchise which is inconsistent with such more favorable or less burdensome terms shall be superseded by such more favorable or less burdensome terms. Such more favorable or less burdensome terms shall be effective with respect to the grantee’s franchise as of the effective date of the franchise granted to such other person. In order to invoke the benefit of this clause such existing grantee shall notify the city in writing of the specific terms in the proposed franchise that are more favorable or less burdensome than the terms of the existing franchise prior to the public hearing described in Section 5.06.316, provided that the city has given such existing grantee at least ten days prior written notice of such public hearing, together with a copy of the proposed franchise. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.310 Franchise nontransferable.
(a)     Except as otherwise provided in the franchise ordinance, the franchise shall not be transferred, sold, hypothecated or assigned, nor shall any of the rights or privileges therein be hypothecated, assigned, sold or transferred, either in whole or in part, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any person, except the grantee, either by act of the grantee or by operation of law, without the prior consent of the city expressed by resolution. Nothing set forth in this chapter shall prevent the grantee from leasing or otherwise allocating use of any channel or programming time to any person, over a commercial use channel.

(b)     In reviewing a transfer request, the city may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party, and grantee shall assist the city in any such inquiry. In seeking the city’s consent to any change of ownership or control, grantee shall have the responsibility of insuring that the transferee completes an application in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to the city, which application shall be submitted with all application fees required pursuant to Section 5.24.320 of this chapter. An application shall be submitted to the city not less than sixty days prior to the date of transfer. The grantee shall be in material compliance with its franchise. The transferee shall possess the qualifications and financial and technical capability to operate and maintain the system and comply with all franchise requirements for the remainder of the term of the franchise. If the city finds that the legal, financial, character, technical and other public interest qualities of the applicant are satisfactory, and that the proposed transferee has the capability to operate and maintain the system and comply with all franchise requirements for the then remaining term thereof, the city shall consent to the transfer and assignment of the rights and obligations of such franchise. The city may not withhold its consent to a transfer unreasonably.

(c)     Notwithstanding the foregoing, pledges in trust or mortgages of the assets of the system to secure an indebtedness may be made without the city’s prior consent; except that no such arrangement may be made which would in any respect under any condition prevent the grantee or any successor from complying with all its obligations under the franchise, nor may any such arrangement permit a third party to succeed to the interest of the grantee without the prior consent of the city. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.312 Change in control.
(a)     City consent is further required for any change in control of the grantee, pursuant to Section 5.24.310 above. “Change of control” shall mean any acquisition of grantee’s or grantee’s parent’s voting stock by a person or group of persons acting in concert which results in that person or group of persons owning more than fifty percent of the voting stock of the grantee or grantee’s parent.

(b)     Any change of control of the grantee occurring without prior city approval shall constitute a material breach of the franchise. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.314 Franchise area—Annexations.
(a)     The franchise ordinance shall establish the franchise area.

(b)     Territory annexed to the city which is not within the franchise area of an existing franchise may be added to an existing franchise pursuant to council resolution adopted after conducting a noticed public hearing, provided that such new territory shall be deemed a part of the franchise area of any grantee authorized to serve the entire geographic area of the city without action by the council.

(c)     Territory annexed to the city that is already covered by an existing franchise or license granted by another public entity but where the grantee of such franchise or license has not commenced installation of a cable television system in the area of such annexed territory shall be deemed not to be served by a franchise or license, and all rights acquired under said franchise or license in the area of such annexed territory shall terminate by operation of law as of the effective date of the annexation.

(d)     Territory annexed to the city that is already served by a franchise or license issued by another public entity, may continue to be served by the grantee under said franchise or license for the balance of the term of said franchise or license, subject to the provisions of said franchise or license and the provisions of this chapter, and provided the franchise fees, which the city may establish by resolution up to the maximum permitted by law, are paid. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.316 Franchise applications.
(a)     Any person may apply for the grant of a new franchise.

(b)     The city may, by advertisement or any other means, solicit applications for new franchises pursuant to a request for proposals.

(c)     Upon receipt of an application, the city manager shall cause to be prepared a report, including his or her recommendations respecting such application, which shall be filed with the council, each applicant, and existing grantees. Upon receipt of said report, a public hearing shall be noticed to consider the approval of the application.

(d)     The city may, at any time prior to the close of the public hearing, require the applicant to provide supplementary information reasonably necessary to determine whether the application should be approved.

(e)     Following the public hearing, the council, at its discretion, shall determine whether to approve the application. In making its determination, the council shall give due consideration to the quality of the service proposed, income to the city, experience, character, technical and financial responsibility of the applicant, and any other considerations deemed pertinent by the council for safeguarding the interests of the city and public. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.317 Multiple franchises.
(a)     The city may grant franchises on a city-wide basis only. The city may limit the number of franchises granted, based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the following considerations:

(1)     The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the facilities of two or more cable systems;

(2)     The benefits that may accrue to cable subscribers as a result of cable system competition, such as lower rates and improved service;

(3)     The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition, such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents’ property, and the disruption arising from numerous excavations of the rights-of-way.

(b)     The city may require that any new grantee be responsible for its own underground trenching and the costs associated therewith, if, in the city’s opinion, the rights-of-way in any particular area cannot feasibly and reasonably accommodate additional cables. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.318 Franchise renewal.
The city may establish franchise renewal procedures by resolution subject to applicable federal and state law. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.320 Franchise processing costs.
Any application for either a new franchise grant, a franchise renewal or a franchise transfer, shall be made in a manner prescribed by the city manager, and shall include an application fee, in an amount to be set by the city manager, to recover the costs necessary to adequately analyze the application. In addition, the grantee shall reimburse the city for all out-of-pocket processing costs, which shall include, but not be limited to, costs of publications of notices, development and publication of relevant franchise ordinances and agreements, and any other out-of-pocket not covered by the application fees, incurred by the city in its study and evaluation of applications. The city may periodically bill the applicant for such additional amounts to reimburse the city for administrative expenses incurred in addition to the application fee. The bills shall be supported with evidence of the expense or cost incurred. The applicant shall pay such bills within thirty days of receipt.

These franchise processing costs are over and above any construction inspection and permit fees and the franchise fees specified in this chapter or the franchise ordinance. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.322 Franchise fee.
(a)     Every grantee shall pay a franchise fee to the city in the amount designated in the franchise ordinance. The city, upon request, shall be furnished a statement, either audited and certified by an independent certified public accountant or certified by a financial officer of the grantee, reflecting the total amounts of gross revenues and all computations for the period covered by the payment. The city shall have the right to conduct an independent audit of those records of grantee reasonably necessary to determine gross revenues, and if such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of five percent or more, the grantee shall assume all costs of such an audit.

(b)     Acceptance of a franchise fee payment for more than four years after its receipt shall amount to a release and accord and satisfaction as to any claim the city may have for additional sums payable. The grantee shall maintain gross revenue records for a minimum of four years.

(c)     Any delinquent franchise fee payment shall be subject to an interest charge of one and one-half percent per month. In addition, failure to pay a franchise fee payment which is due and payable within fifteen days after receipt of a notice from the city shall subject the quarterly payment to a five percent penalty.

(d)     The franchise fee shall be received by the city within forty-five days after the close of each quarter of the grantee’s fiscal year. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.324 Revocation of franchise—Assessment of damages and penalties.
(a)     The city reserves the right to terminate any franchise in the event of a material breach of any of its material terms or any material term of any applicable federal, state or local statute or regulation, which breach is not cured following written notice and a reasonable opportunity to cure. Such a breach may include, but not be limited to:

(1)     If the grantee practices, or attempts to practice, any fraud or deceit upon the city;

(2)     If the grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or upon listing of an order for relief in favor of grantee in a bankruptcy proceeding;

(3)     If the grantee materially fails to substantially meet the customer service standards established in this chapter over a three-month period of time;

(4)     If the grantee fails to provide or maintain in full force and effect, the liability and indemnification coverages, letter of credit or bonds as required by the franchise;

(5)     If the grantee willfully violates any orders or rulings of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to the franchise, provided that the grantee may contest any such orders or rulings by appropriate proceedings conducted in good faith, in which case no breach of the franchise shall be deemed to have occurred;

(6)     If the grantee ceases to provide at least eighty percent of its standard cable service over all or a substantial portion of its cable system for a period of five days or more;

(7)     If the grantee willfully fails to provide the city with required information, reports and/or test results in a timely manner as provided in the franchise;

(8)     Subject to any applicable force majeure provisions, if the grantee fails to initiate or complete scheduled system construction or reconstruction within the time set forth in the franchise ordinance;

(9)     Any other wilful act or omission by the grantee which materially violates the terms, conditions or requirements of the franchise or any order, directive, rule or regulation issued thereunder and which is not timely corrected or remedied following receipt of written notice of the violation;

(10)   A documented pattern and practice of material violation of the material terms, conditions, or requirements of the franchise followed by a cure which was prompted by a notice to cure received from the grantor. (Ord. 1622 § 4, 1994; Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.326 Procedure for adjudication of breaches of the franchise.
(a)     Prior to imposing any sanction or penalty including termination of the franchise upon the grantee, the city council or the city manager shall give the grantee a reasonable notice and an opportunity to cure period to correct the material breach. The written notice shall be by certified mail or by other means providing for certification of receipt.

(b)     The notice to cure period shall be a minimum of fifteen days in the case of any payments due under the franchise and a minimum of thirty days in all other cases (except in cases of emergency where a shorter time may be prescribed consistent with the nature of the emergency). Where thirty days is insufficient time for the grantee to cure the noticed breach, the grantee shall be deemed in compliance with the provisions if, within that thirty-day time period grantee begins a good faith effort to cure such breach and shall present a specific and reasonable timetable to the city for the cure of the breach.

(c)     Upon receiving the city manager’s notice of the breach, the grantee shall investigate the alleged breach, and within the time period established in the notice and in accordance with subsection (b) above, notify the city manager in writing of the results of the investigation and its proposed action or resolution, if any. In the event the city manager does not refer the matter to a hearing officer or the city council as provided under subsection (d) within thirty days of the receipt of the grantee’s response, the grantee’s proposed action or resolution shall be final.

(d)     If the breach is not cured within such time period as the city manager establishes, the city manager shall cause to be noticed a public hearing before the city council or refer the matter to a hearing officer. All breaches of the customer service standards where the city manager determines that the penalty may not include franchise termination shall be referred to a hearing officer.

(e)     The grantee shall not be deemed to be in default in the performance of its obligations under this chapter and no penalty or sanction shall be imposed upon the grantee where the grantee has remedied the breach to the reasonable satisfaction of the city manager within the period specified in the notice specifying the breach. (Ord. 1622 § 5, 1994; Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.327 City council procedures.
(a)     The council shall hold a public hearing, upon ten days written notice duly given to grantee and published notice provided to the public. The grantee may appear at the public hearing before the council and present information, orally or in documented form, that it deems relevant and appropriate to the council’s deliberations. Based on the evidence presented at the public hearing, the council shall determine by resolution whether the franchise should be revoked or the grantee should be assessed damages. Nothing herein is intended to limit the council’s right to make other determinations which are reasonably related to the franchise.

(b)     Should the city council find that there has been a material breach of the franchise, but that revocation is inappropriate, then the council may assess and levy against the letter of credit of the grantee monetary damages up to the limits established in the franchise ordinance for material franchise violations. This provision for assessment of damages is intended by the parties to be separate and apart from city’s right to enforce the provisions of the construction and performance bonds and liquidated damages.

(c)     The city council shall cause the grantee to receive written notice of any action taken following the public hearing.

(d)     Within not less than thirty days of receiving notice of the city council’s action, grantee shall be entitled to initiate an action in state or federal court to challenge the determination of the council wherein all claims and defenses shall be heard de novo. Once such an action is initiated, any assessment or other determination by the city council shall be stayed pending a final determination of the court. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.328 Hearing officer procedures.
(a)     The city manager may refer to a hearing officer any controversy or claim arising out of or relating to the franchise or its existence, construction, interpretation, performance, enforcement, operation, breach, continuance or termination. Such hearing proceedings shall be initiated by the city manager by written notice to the grantee. Notice shall be by certified mail or by other means providing for certification of receipt.

(b)     The city manager shall select a retired California Superior or Appellate Court Judge, or a retired Federal Court Judge as the hearing officer.

(c)     The hearing shall be conducted according to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1280, et seq., (the “General Arbitration Act”).

(d)     The hearing officer shall commence the hearing within thirty days of his selection unless the parties and the hearing officer otherwise agree. Any party to the hearing may issue a request to compel reasonable document production from the other party. Disputes concerning the scope of document production and enforcement of document requests shall be subject to agreement by the parties, or if agreement is not reached within twenty days of the document request, then by disposition by order of the hearing officer. Except as may be otherwise specifically agreed by the parties, no other form of pretrial discovery shall be available to the parties; provided that the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure Section 1283.05 shall apply.

(e)     The hearing officer shall be vested with quasi-judicial authority, and shall be entitled to: (1) order the grantee to undertake remedial action to cure any breach of its obligations under its franchise, (2) assess liquidated damages and/or levy a penalty upon the grantee in accordance with the terms of this chapter and the franchise ordinance, (3) determine that the grantee has not violated any of its obligations under its franchise, or (4) terminate the franchise.

(f)      At any hearing conducted pursuant to this section, the city shall have the burden of establishing a material breach to the satisfaction of the hearing officer by a preponderance of the evidence. The cable television provider may present such evidence, as it may desire.

(g)     The hearing officer shall enter findings of fact and conclusions of law which must be supported by the evidence. The hearing officer shall not have the power to commit errors of law or legal reasoning, and the award may be vacated or corrected pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1286.2 or 1286.6 for any such error. Any party to a hearing may petition the Superior Court for Los Angeles County, California to confirm, correct or vacate the award on the grounds stated in the General Arbitration Act. Any proceedings on appeal shall be in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1294 and 1294.2.

(h)     All witnesses testifying at the hearing shall be sworn. Witnesses shall be subject to direct and cross-examination. However, formal rules of evidence applicable to the trial of civil or criminal proceedings in the trial courts of this state shall apply to evidence adduced at the hearing only to extent that such rules are reasonably necessary to the preservation of the probative nature of the evidence proffered. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

(i)      Except as may be apportioned by the hearing officer in his discretion, each party shall bear one-half of the fees and expenses of the hearing officer, together with any other expenses of the hearing proceedings, incurred or approved by the hearing officer. Each part shall bear its own witness and attorneys’ fees or other expenses incurred by such party for its own benefit.

(j)      Any failure of the grantee to comply with the final order of the hearing officer shall be deemed a material breach of the franchise, and may be grounds for termination of the franchise.

(k)     The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. It shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. In the event grantee initiates such a review, the hearing officer’s determination, orders and recommendations shall be stayed pending a final order of the court. (Ord. 1622 § 6, 1994; Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.330 Force majeure—Grantee’s inability to perform.
In the event the grantee’s performance of any of the terms, conditions or obligations required by this chapter or its franchise is prevented by any cause beyond the grantee’s reasonable control, such inability to perform shall be deemed to be excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof, provided the grantee has notified the city in writing within thirty days of its discovery of the occurrence of such an event. In such an instance, the grantee shall have reasonable time, under the circumstances, to perform its obligation under this chapter or to procure a substitute for such obligation which is satisfactory to the city. For the purpose of this section, causes or events not within the control of the grantee shall include, but not be limited to acts of God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, epidemic, labor disputes, shortage of labor, freight embargoes, shortages or unavailability of materials and supplies, explosion, natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides and fires, rationing, and power or communications failures, but shall not include financial inability of the grantee to perform or failure of the grantee to obtain any necessary permits or licenses from other governmental agencies or the right to use the facilities of any public utility where such failure is due solely to the acts or omissions of the grantee. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.332 Removal and abandonment—Purchase of system.
(a)     In the event that the franchise is terminated, or nonrenewed, then such grantee shall, upon demand of the city, and at the sole expense of the grantee, promptly remove or, in its discretion, abandon in place, all or any portion of its cable television system. Upon abandonment of the cable television system in place, the grantee shall cause to be executed, acknowledged and delivered to the city, such instruments as the city attorney shall prescribe and approve, transferring and conveying the ownership of the cable television system to the city.

(b)     In removing its cable television system, the grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation it made and leave all streets in as good condition as that prevailing prior to the grantee’s removal of its cable television system without materially affecting the electrical or telephone cable, wires, or attachments. The liability, indemnity, insurance, security fund and bonds required under the franchise shall continue in full force and effect until the removal is complete.

(c)     In the event a franchise is not renewed or is terminated, the city and the grantee may agree that the grantee will maintain and operate its cable television system until a subsequent grantee is selected and a subsequent or modified cable television system becomes operational. The city, or another party approved by the city pursuant to the franchise application procedures, may acquire the cable television system at a price established pursuant to the provisions of Section 627(a) of the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984.

(d)     Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this chapter, the grantee may not abandon any of its cable television system in place if it materially interferes with the use of the street or public rights-of-way in which such property is located or with the use thereof of any public utility, which material interference shall be reasonably determined by the city engineer. The grantee shall not be required to remove any portion of its cable television system which has been abandoned or deemed abandoned in accordance with the provisions of this chapter unless it constitutes a substantial portion of the cable television system. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.334 Receivership and foreclosure.
(a)     Subject to applicable provisions of the bankruptcy code, any franchise shall, at the option of the city, cease and terminate one hundred twenty days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of the grantee whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of said one hundred twenty days, or unless:

(1)     Such receiver or trustee shall have, within one hundred twenty days after his or her election or appointment, fully complied with all terms of the franchise and remedied all breaches of the franchise or provided a plan for the remedy of such breaches which is satisfactory to the city; and

(2)     Such receiver or trustee shall, within said one hundred twenty days, execute an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the franchise.

(b)     Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of a cable television system , the grantee shall notify the city clerk of such fact, and such notification shall be treated as a notification that a change in ownership of the grantee has taken place and the provisions of this chapter governing such changes shall apply. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

Article III. General Financial and Insurance Provisions
5.24.402 Construction bond.
The grantee shall file with the city a construction bond in the amount specified in the franchise ordinance within thirty days prior to the commencement of any construction work by the grantee. The construction bond shall be in the form approved by the city attorney, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld if the bond is in a form consistent with the usual custom and practice of the industry. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.404 Performance bond.
If required under the franchise ordinance, the grantee shall, at least forty-five days after the effective date of the franchise ordinance, file with the city a performance bond in the amount specified in the franchise ordinance and in the form approved by the city attorney. The city, in its sole discretion, may permit consolidation of the performance bond with the construction bond and letter of credit specified in this chapter. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.406 Letter of credit.
(a)     Within forty-five days after the effective date of the franchise ordinance, the grantee shall, if required by the franchise ordinance, establish a letter of credit in favor of the city in the sum specified in the franchise ordinance and in the form approved by the city attorney. The letter of credit shall serve as security for the faithful performance by the grantee of all the provisions and obligations of the franchise.

(b)     If thirty days following receipt of written notice from the city of the grantee’s failure to pay the city an amount owing under the franchise, the grantee has not paid such amount as is due and owing to the city, the letter of credit may be assessed by the city upon five days prior written notice to the grantee indicating the intention of the city to draw upon the letter of credit, the amount to be drawn and the reason therefor. If authorized by the franchise ordinance, the city may assess the letter of credit for purposes including, but not limited to:

(1)     Failure of the grantee to pay the city sums due under the terms of the franchise after due notice and opportunity to cure as provided under this chapter;

(2)     Reimbursement of costs borne by the city to correct franchise violations not corrected by the grantee, after due notice and opportunity to cure as provided under this chapter.

(3)     Monetary remedies or damages assessed against the grantee due to breach of the franchise after due notice and opportunity to cure as provided under this chapter.

(c)     The grantee shall deposit a sum of money sufficient to restore the letter of credit to the original amount within thirty days after notice from the city that an amount has been withdrawn from the letter of credit, specifying the date and amount of the withdrawal. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.408 Alternative remedies.
Remedies provided for in this chapter are cumulative and in addition to other rights the city may have at law or equity or under the franchise, which it may exercise at any time, save and except that collection of liquidated damages shall be in lieu of any claim for actual damages. In no event shall the amount of any bond or letter of credit be construed to limit the grantee’s liability for damages. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.410 Liquidated damages.
Each franchise ordinance shall contain a liquidated damages provision in connection with the construction, rebuild or reconstruction of the cable television system. Liquidated damages due the city shall be a proper charge against the letter of credit, or other security specified in the franchise ordinance, to the extent grantee does not pay such damages when due following due notice and opportunity to cure as provided under this chapter. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.412 Indemnification.
(a)     The grantee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from all damages, penalties, judgments and liability of any kind, and defend all claims, actions or causes of action arising as a result of the grantee’s operation of the cable television system, regardless whether any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by the franchise, to the extent such damages, penalties, judgments, claims, actions or causes of action arise out of or are caused by the act or omission of the grantee, its officers, employees or agents. Upon demand of the city, made by and through the city attorney, the grantee shall appear in and defend the city, its officers, employees and agents in any legal action, whether judicial, administrative or otherwise, with respect to which city is entitled to indemnification hereunder.

(b)     The city shall indemnify and hold harmless the grantee, its affiliates and their respective officers, directors, employees and shareholders from and against any and all damages, penalties, judgments and liability of any kind, and defend all claims, actions or causes of action arising as a result of the use of the grantee’s cable television system by the city, including the use of access channels provided to the city for purposes of public, educational or governmental programming or the programming carried on such channels, or any public, educational or governmental programming provided by the city for carriage on any other channel or channels of the grantee’s cable system, including without limitation with respect to the solicitation, production, content, selection, scheduling, funding or presentation or such programming and of commercial advertising or promotional material for use in connection with such programming, as well as such liability as may arise from claims of libel, slander, defamation, invasion of privacy, infringement of copyright, musical performing rights or any other right of any person. This indemnity shall not apply with respect to any programming provided by the grantee and which is carried on the access channels. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.414 Insurance.
(a)     Within forty-five days after the effective date of the franchise ordinance, the grantee shall furnish proof that the grantee is insured under a broad form policy of liability insurance issued by a company authorized to do business in California. Such proof may be by one or more certificates of insurance evidencing compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the franchise ordinance. The insurance policy shall include, but not be limited to, coverage for premises operations, explosion and collapse hazard, underground hazards, contractual insurance, broad form property damage, independent contractors and personal injury, and automobile liability. The grantee shall also maintain a policy of broadcaster’s liability coverage. The insurance shall be maintained at the sum specified in the franchise ordinance.

(b)     The city and its officers and employees shall be named as additional insureds on said policy (except broadcaster’s liability coverage) at no cost to the city. Grantee shall also provide workers’ compensation coverage consistent with California statutory requirements. The city shall receive thirty days advance written notice of any proposed reduction in coverage of the insurance policies on which it is carried as a named insured, as well as on coverage required to maintained by this section. Such advance notice shall also be required as to any proposed or actual cancellation of any such policies of insurance. Insurance endorsements of such coverage shall be filed with the city. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

Article IV. Design and Construction
5.24.502 System design and construction schedule.
The cable television system shall be constructed in accordance with the design requirements and construction schedules contained in the franchise ordinance. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.504 Geographical coverage.
Subject to the line extension standards set forth in this chapter, the grantee shall design and construct the cable television system so as to pass by every residential dwelling unit within the franchise area. Cable television system construction and provision of service shall be nondiscriminatory, and the grantee shall not deny service to any section of the franchise area on the grounds of economic preference. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.506 Minimum service requirements.
Any cable television system shall provide, at a minimum:

(1)     The operational capability of relaying to subscriber terminals the number of channels of video programming set out in its franchise ordinance;

(2)     Reception and transmission of broad categories of video programming, subject to economic and commercial feasibility, including local broadcast stations, children’s programming, foreign language and multicultural programming, news and sports channels, premium service programming, and local origination and educational and governmental access channels;

(3)     Such PEG facilities, equipment and services as specified in the franchise ordinance. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.508 Provision of service.
After cable service has been established by activating trunk and/or distribution cables for any area, the grantee shall provide cable service to any requesting subscriber within that area within thirty days from the date of request, provided that (1) such subscriber is located within one hundred fifty feet of such trunk and/or distribution cable, (2) the grantee is able to secure all rights-of-way necessary to extend service to such subscriber within such thirty-day period on reasonable terms and conditions, (3) the grantee is not required to construct its service drop in an indirect or circuitous manner, and (4) the grantee complies with the line extension policies of this chapter and the franchise ordinance. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.510 Leased channel service.
The grantee shall offer leased channel service to unaffiliated third parties in accordance with the provisions of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.512 Educational and governmental access channels.
The grantee shall provide channel capacity for PEG access programming and for local origination programming, as specified in the franchise ordinance. The grantee shall not exercise any editorial control over educational and governmental channels provided pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.514 Notice of programming changes.
The grantee shall provide at least thirty days advanced written notice to the city and subscribers prior to dropping, retiering or adding any channel to the cable television system. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.516 Undergrounding.
(a)     The cable television system shall be placed underground in those portions of the franchise area where both telephone and power lines are underground. In addition, whenever the poles on which the cable system is constructed are being eliminated, the grantee shall concurrently replace its aerial facilities with underground facilities unless alternative aerial facilities are available. At no time shall the cable television system be the only aerial facility. Where under grounding is required, the grantee shall have the option of sharing or not sharing utility trenches. At no time shall the grantee place cable underground without appropriate conduit.

(b)     Where the grantee’s cable television system is installed underground, line extenders, amplifiers, taps, power supplies, traps and related electronic equipment and components may be placed in appropriate housings above the surface of the ground where consistent with accepted construction practices for the type of cable system constructed by the grantee. The franchise ordinance shall provide a procedure for under grounding taps and pedestals at the subscribers’ expense and relocating the taps and pedestals within the technical constraints of the cable system.

(c)     Where the overhead facilities of the utility providing electrical service are placed underground pursuant to the provisions of Rule 20A of the California Public Utilities Commission, or any successor to such rule, the grantee shall concurrently relocate underground its aerial plant installed with such overhead facilities, provided that if any portion of the relocation of such overhead facilities is paid for from funds other than those specifically allocated by the electrical utility to the relocation pursuant to said Rule 20A, the entire expense of such portion of said relocation of the grantee’s aerial plant shall be borne by the city.

(d)     Where the overhead facilities of the utility providing electrical service are placed underground pursuant to the provisions of Rule 20B or Rule 20C of the California Public Utilities Commission or any successor to such rules, the grantee shall concurrently relocate underground its aerial plant installed with such overhead facilities, provided that the city shall bear the cost and expense of (1) all necessary trenching, backfilling and repaving required in connection with the underground installation of the grantee’s aerial plant, (2) the installation of all conduits, vaults and/or pedestals required in connection with the underground installation of such plant and (3) all structures and substructures required in connection therewith.

(e)     In all circumstances other than those set forth in subsections (c) and (d) of this section, the city shall reimburse or cause affected property owners to reimburse the grantee for the cost of relocating its aerial plant underground together with the overhead facilities of the utilities providing electric and/or telephone service.

(f)      Subject to all applicable federal and state laws, statutes and regulations, in the event of multiple franchisees desiring to serve new residential developments in which the electric power and telephone utilities are underground, the following procedure shall apply with respect to access to and utilization of underground easements:

(1)     The developer shall be responsible for contracting and surveying all franchised cable operators to ascertain which operators desire to provide cable television service to that development. The developer may establish a reasonable deadline to receive cable operator responses. The final tract map shall indicate the cable operators that have agreed to serve the development;

(2)     If one or two cable operators wish to provide service, they shall be accommodated in the joint utilities trench on a nondiscriminatory shared basis;

(3)     The developer shall provide at least ten working days notice of the date that utility trenches will be open to the cable operators that have agreed to serve the development;

(4)     Sharing the joint utilities trench shall be subject to compliance with the Public Utilities Commission and utility standards. If such compliance is not possible, or if three or more cable operators desire to provide service to the development, the developer shall provide a separate trench for the cable television cables, with the entire cost shared among the participating operators. With the concurrence of the developer, the affected utilities and the cable operators, alternative installation procedures, such as the use of deeper trenches, may be utilized, subject to applicable law;

(5)     Any cable operator wishing to serve an area where the trenches have been closed shall be responsible for its own trenching and associated costs; provided that if the cable operator was not provided timely written notice of the availability of such trenches, the developer shall reimburse the operator for such costs. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.518 Use of poles.
(a)     A grantee shall be authorized to utilize existing poles, conduits, and other facilities of a public utility, but shall not be authorized to construct or install any new, different, or additional poles in the streets without city approval.

(b)     If the city authorizes another franchise to operate within an existing franchise area, it shall do so on the condition that the additional grantee reimburse and hold harmless the prior grantee(s) from and against all reasonable costs and expenses associated with making the poles ready for the additional cable television system. Reasonable costs and expenses include, but are not limited to, the cost and expense of strengthening poles, replacing poles, rearranging attachments, and inspection fees. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.520 Construction standards.
Each grantee shall install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures, and other equipment in accordance with applicable pole attachment standards, electrical codes and industry standards of the cable television industry generally applicable to the type of cable system which the grantee has constructed. Each grantee shall adhere to all building and zoning codes currently or hereafter in force. Each grantee shall locate and maintain its line, cables, and other appurtenances, on public property, in such a manner as to cause no unreasonable interference with the use of said public property by any person. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.522 Required approvals.
The city engineer shall approve the location and method of construction of all underground facilities and equipment located on public rights-of-way (including any above-grade portion of such facilities and equipment), provided such approval is not unreasonably withheld or delayed, and shall be consistent with the provisions of Section 5.24.516 of this chapter, as well as with the design or technical specifications of the system. The city engineer shall also approve the location and installation of all new aerial facilities consistent with Public Utilities Commission, General Order 95. Such facilities and equipment shall be located so as not to endanger persons or property. The construction shall be subject to city permit and inspection fees as may be required by other applicable laws or regulations heretofore or hereafter adopted, including, but not limited to, those pertaining to works and activities in, on, under or over streets. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.524 Submission of drawings.
Upon written notice to the grantee, the grantee shall furnish the city with as-built drawings of its entire cable television system in the city. Upon any material modification of the as-built plans, such as a system rebuild or trunk replacement, the grantee shall file the revised as-built plans within thirty days completion of the modification. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.526 Relocation of facilities and equipment.
(a)     For purposes of this section, the word “project” shall mean any lawful change of grade, alignment or width of any public street, way, alley or place, including but not limited to, the construction of any subway or viaduct, that the city may initiate, either through itself, or any redevelopment agency, community facility district, assessment district, area of benefit, reimbursement agreement or generally applicable impact fee program. This section shall not apply to any assessment district for the under grounding of aerial facilities on residential collector streets.

(b)     The grantee shall remove or relocate any facilities installed, used and maintained under the franchise if and when made necessary by any project.

(c)     When such removal or relocation is required, the grantee shall begin physical field work on the removal or relocation within one hundred twenty days after written notice from the city manager, or his or her designee. If, despite its reasonable efforts, grantee is unable to begin removal or relocation within the above one-hundred-twenty-day period, the grantee shall give written notice to the city manager of the reason or reasons for the delay and the date removal or relocation is expected to begin. The grantee shall proceed promptly to complete such required work. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.528 Maintenance.
Should the grantee fail, refuse or neglect to properly perform any maintenance or construction work required by the franchise following due notice from the city and a reasonable opportunity to remedy such failure, refusal or neglect as provided in this chapter, or should the grantee fail to commence to perform such work within the period of time allowed therefor, and diligently progress and complete such work thereafter, the city manager may, upon five days prior written notice to the grantee (except in cases of emergency), cause such work or other act to be completed in whole or in part by city forces or others, and upon so doing shall submit to the grantee an itemized statement of the costs thereof. The grantee shall, within thirty days after receipt of such statement, pay to the city the entire amount thereof, without off-set or deduction. After thirty days following the grantee’s failure to pay the city said costs, the city may assess the letter of credit provided for in this chapter, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.530 Technical standards.
The grantee shall comply at all times with FCC technical standards. Furthermore, if and when the city may, consistent with federal law, enforce technical standards more stringent than those promulgated by the FCC, then the city may, subject to the terms of the grantee’s franchise, pursuant to resolution and on the basis of the evidence presented at a noticed public hearing, establish new technical standards which exceed the FCC’s technical standards. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.532 Performance testing.
Upon request by the city not to exceed once per year, the grantee shall perform tests to determine compliance with the FCC technical standards, or those that may be established under Section 5.24.530 of this chapter (if applicable.) The grantee shall provide the city a copy of the test results within thirty days of the completion of the test. The grantee shall permit the city to witness the testing. At any time after commencement of service to subscribers, the city may order that the grantee perform additional tests on the basis of substantial numbers of complaints received or other evidence indicating significant noncompliance with the applicable technical standards. Such additional tests shall be limited to the particular matter in controversy. The costs of any such tests, and any necessary retests, shall be borne by the grantee. The grantee shall permit reasonable access to the cable system to permit the city or its consultants to test the system. The city shall bear the cost of such third-party testing, unless it is determined the grantee is in material noncompliance with the technical standards. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.534 Interconnection.
(a)     The franchise ordinance may establish the obligation of the grantee to interconnect PEG channels of its cable television system serving the city with adjacent systems owned by the same grantee. The franchise ordinance shall address the timing, method, technical standards and allocation of costs for the interconnection.

(b)     Consistent with the franchise ordinance, upon receiving city directive, each grantee shall immediately initiate negotiations with the owners of adjacent systems regarding interconnecting PEG channels. The grantee shall report to the city the results of such negotiations no later than sixty days after initiation, unless the city grants an extension of time to complete negotiations. Interconnection shall not be required if the city finds that the grantee has negotiated in good faith and has failed to obtain agreement with the system or systems of the proposed interconnection with respect to timing, method, technical standards and allocation of costs for the interconnection, or that the cost of the interconnection would cause an unreasonable or unacceptable increase in subscriber rates. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

Article V. Customer Service Standards
5.24.602 Customer service standards.
Grantee shall maintain an office reasonably accessible to customers to provide the necessary facilities, equipment and personnel to comply with the following customer service standards under normal operating conditions:

(1)     Knowledgeable, qualified customer service representatives shall be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries a minimum of sixty hours weekly, from eight a.m. to eight p.m., Monday through Friday, and ten a.m. to seven p.m. on Saturdays. A service or automated response system, such as an answering machine will be available to record nonemergency, after-hours messages, and customer service representatives will promptly answer phone messages the next business day.

(2)     An emergency toll-free or collect call access telephone line shall be available on a twenty-four-hour basis, including weekends and holidays.

(3)     A business and service office located within the city shall be open Monday through Friday from eight a.m. to five p.m., and on Saturdays from ten a.m. to three p.m. Grantee shall adequately staff the office to accept subscriber payments and respond to service requests and complaints.

(4)     An emergency system maintenance and repair staff, capable of responding to and repairing major system malfunctions on a twenty-four-hour basis shall be provided.

(5)     Grantee shall schedule service and installation appointments within a specified four-hour time period in compliance with California Civil Code Section 1722.

(6)     Telephone answer time by a customer service representative, including wait time, shall not exceed thirty seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed thirty seconds. These standards shall be met no less than ninety percent of the time under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis.

(7)     Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time.

(8)     Grantee shall provide written information in each of the following areas at the time of installation, at least once every year and upon request:

(A)    Products and services offered;

(B)    Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services;

(C)    Installation and service maintenance policies;

(D)    Instructions on how to use the cable service;

(E)     Channel positions programming carried on the system; and

(F)     Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the city’s cable office.

(9)     Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemization including, but not limited to basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits.

(10)   Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than either:

(A)    The customer’s next billing cycle following resolution of the request or thirty days, whichever is earlier; or

(B)    The return of the equipment supplied by the cable operator if service is terminated.

(11)   Customers and the city will be notified of any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions as soon as possible through announcements on the cable system and in writing. Notice must be given to customers a minimum of thirty days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the cable television provider. In addition, the cable television provider shall notify customers thirty days in advance of any significant changes in the other information required by subsection (8) of this section.

(12)   Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Scheduled interruption, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system, preferably between midnight and six a.m.

(13)   Grantee shall maintain a repair force of technicians capable of responding to customer requests for service within the following time frames ninety-five percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis:

(A)    System outage: within two hours, including weekends, of receiving customer calls which by number identify a system outage of sound or picture of one or more channels, affecting all the customers of the system or a considerable number thereof.

(B)    Service interruptions: within twenty-four hours, including weekends, after the interruption becomes known.

(C)    Inferior reception quality: within forty-eight hours, including weekends, after receiving a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality.

(14)   Grantee shall be deemed to have responded to a request for service under the provisions of subsection (13) of this section when a technician arrives at the service location, if necessary, or otherwise begins work on the problem. In the case of a customer not being home when the technician arrives, response shall be deemed to have taken place if the technician leaves written notification of arrival.

(15)   Not less than ninety-five percent of the time measured, on an annual basis, standard installations will be performed within seven business days after an order has been placed. “Standard” installations are up to one hundred twenty-five feet from the existing distribution system.

(16)   Pursuant to Section 76.309 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, these customer service standards shall not become effective until ninety days after the grantee has been notified of their adoption. (Ord. 1622 § 2, 1994; Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.604 Verification of standards.
(a)     Upon reasonable notice, grantee shall demonstrate compliance with any or all of the standards required in Section 5.24.602. Grantee shall provide sufficient detail to permit the city to verify the extent of compliance.

(b)     A written log or an equivalent stored in computer memory and capable of access and reproduction, shall be maintained for three years. The log shall indicate the time and date of all service interruptions, requests for cable service or repairs, and responses to requests for cable service or repairs.

(c)     A repeated, documented and verifiable pattern of actual noncompliance with the customer service standards of Section 5.24.602, after the city has given the grantee due notice and a reasonable opportunity to cure in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, may be termed a breach of the grantee’s franchise, subject to any and all remedies as prescribed in this chapter and the franchise ordinance. (Ord. 1622 § 2, 1994; Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.606 Right of privacy of subscribers.
The grantee shall at all times comply with the “protection of subscriber privacy” provisions of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, and all subsequent state and federal regulations concerning subscriber privacy. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.608 Identification required.
Each grantee shall provide its employees, contractors and subcontractors with identification for all individuals who may make personal contact with residents of the city. The grantee shall provide a list of current employees, contractors and subcontractors to the city upon request. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.612 Subscriber complaints.
(a)     The grantee shall establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints without intervention by the city consistent with the franchise. The written procedures shall prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit in writing to the city a complaint that grantee has violated any provision of the franchise or the subscriber’s contract with grantee.

(b)     In the event that cable service to any subscriber is interrupted, without fault of the subscriber, or those within its control, for twenty-four or more consecutive hours, the grantee shall provide each affected subscriber requesting the same a pro rata rebate of the monthly fees for each twenty-four-hour period of the interruption. In addition, customer service representatives of grantee shall have the discretion to grant refunds of up to one month for service interruptions.

(c)     The grantee shall designate a “government liaison person” who shall be responsible for working with the city manager or his designated representative to resolve consumer complaints. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

Article VI. Rates
5.24.702 Rate regulation.
The city shall not regulate the grantee’s rates for any class of cable service during the time period and to the extent that rate regulation is prohibited under the federal or state law. The city reserves the right to institute any rate regulation system permitted by law. The city may adopt such a rate regulation system by amendment to the franchise ordinance, provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall be deemed a waiver of the grantee’s rights to challenge any rate regulation system adopted by the city on constitutional or other applicable grounds. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

Article VII. Service Provisions
5.24.802 PEG programming.
Grantee shall provide support for PEG programming pursuant to the provisions of the franchise ordinance. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.804 System extension.
(a)     The grantee shall extend energized trunk or distribution cable from any existing terminus of the cable system to any area immediately adjacent thereto located within the grantee’s franchise area having a density of at least thirty-five residential dwelling units per mile as measured from that terminus, provided that (1) each such dwelling unit is to be located within a distance of no more than a standard one hundred fifty-foot drop as measured from the anticipated location of such trunk or distribution cable, and (2) the grantee is able to secure all necessary easements or rights-of-way for purposes of locating its cable system in the area of such extension, including the location of all trunk, distribution and drop cables, on reasonable terms and conditions.

(b)     The grantee shall extend cable television services to any isolated residences not within the terms of subsection (a) or commercial premises at a premium installation rate upon request by the resident or owner. The premium installation rate charged shall be the actual cost for the extension, including the costs, if any, of improving the trunk or distribution facilities to permit such extension. The grantee may request advance payment for such installation. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.806 Tenant rights.
It is the city’s intent that tenants not be discriminated against in the ability to subscribe to cable services. The grantee shall be required to provide service to tenants in individual units of a multiple housing facility with all services offered to other dwelling units within the franchise area, so long as the owner of the facility consents in writing, if requested by the grantee, to the following:

(1)     To the grantee’s providing the service to units of the facility on such terms and conditions as are reasonably acceptable to the grantee, provided that the owner of the facility does not seek to charge the grantee any fee or consideration for access to the facility or for the right of providing cable television service to the dwelling units within the facility;

(2)     To reasonable conditions and time for installation, maintenance, and inspection of the system on the facility premises;

(3)     To reasonable conditions promulgated by the grantee to protect the grantee’s equipment and to encourage widespread use of the system; and

(4)     To not discriminate in rental charges, or otherwise, between tenants who receive cable service and those who do not.

(5)     To provide all easements, rights-of-way and other rights of access deemed reasonably necessary or appropriate by the grantee for purposes of providing cable television service to the facility. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.808 Continuity of service mandatory.
(a)     It is the right of all subscribers to continue receiving service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. In the event that a new grantee elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify, or sell the system, the existing grantee shall, to the greatest extent economically and technically, maintain continuity of service to all subscribers.

          In the event of a change of grantee, or in the event a new operator acquires the system, the original grantee shall cooperate with the city, new grantee or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers.

(b)     In the event the grantee willfully fails to operate the system for five consecutive days without prior approval of the city or without just cause, the city may, at its option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time as the grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the city or a permanent operator is selected. If the city is required to fulfill this obligation for the grantee, then during such period as the city fulfills such obligation, the city shall be entitled to collect all revenues from the system, and the grantee shall reimburse the city for all reasonable costs or damages in excess of the revenues collected by the city that are the result of the grantee’s failure to perform. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

Article VIII. Operation and Maintenance
5.24.902 Maintenance and inspection of records.
The city shall have the right, upon two business days advance notice, to inspect all books, records, maps, plans, gross revenues, service complaint logs, performance test results and other like materials of the grantee which reasonably relate to the grantee’s compliance with the provisions of the franchise. If the records are not located within Los Angeles County, the grantee shall pay all of the city’s reasonable expenses in order to review the records. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.904 Complaint records.
(a)     An accurate and comprehensive file shall be kept by the grantee of any and all written complaints, inquiries, or requests for service or repairs regarding the cable system. A procedure shall be established by the grantee by the time of installation of the cable system to remedy complaints quickly and reasonably to the satisfaction of the city. These files and records shall remain open to the public during normal business hours, so that individuals are able to inspect their own files.

(b)     Records of the grantee’s actions in response to all complaints or inquiries which result in a service call shall be entered into a data base, or “log,” listing the date of consumer complaints and requests for service or repairs. The log shall further identify the subscriber and describe the nature of the complaint or request, and when and what action was taken by the grantee in response thereto. A separate log shall identify system outages. All such records shall be maintained for a period of three years, and shall be available for inspection in accordance with Section 5.24.902. Further, summaries of such records shall be available monthly and delivered quarterly to the city manager or his or her designated representative. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.906 Property damage.
Any physical damage caused by employees, contractors or subcontractors of the grantee to private or public property shall be repaired or replaced. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

Article IX. Condemnation
5.24.1002 Condemnation.
The city, in compliance with the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and California law governing eminent domain and upon payment of fair market value, may condemn the franchise, property and plant of the grantee. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

Article X. Reports
5.24.1102 Annual reports.
(a)     The city may require, pursuant to resolution adopted at least sixty days before the close of the grantee’s fiscal year, that within sixty days after the close of the grantee’s fiscal year, the grantee shall submit a written annual report, in a form approved by the city, including, but not limited to, the following information:

(1)     A summary of the previous year’s (or, in the case of the initial report year, the initial year’s) activities in development of the cable system, including, but not limited to, services begun or discontinued during the reporting year, and the number of subscribers for each class of service;

(2)     A revenue statement, audited by an independent certified public accountant, or certified by an officer of the grantee;

(3)     A statement of projected construction, if any, for the next two years;

(4)     A list of the grantee’s officers, members of its board of directors, and other principals of the grantee;

(5)     A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding five percent or more of the voting interest in the grantee and its parents, if any, unless the parent is a public corporation whose annual reports are publicly available.

(b)     In addition, at the city’s request, the grantee shall submit to the city an annual plant survey report which shall include, but not be limited to:

(1)     “As-built” maps of the portions of the franchise area that have been cabled and have all services available;

(2)     A summary of the system indicating miles and homes passed;

(3)     Annual proof of performance tests, in sufficient detail to enable the city to ascertain that the technical standards of the franchise are achieved and maintained.

(c)     If the city has reason to believe that portions or all of the system do not materially comply with the technical standards incorporated into the franchise ordinance, at the city’s request, but no more often than once per three years, the grantee and the city shall agree upon the appointment of a qualified independent engineer to evaluate and verify the technical performance of the cable television system. The cost of such evaluation shall be borne by the grantee if the evaluation indicates a material breach of the franchise, which shall be determined to exist if more than twenty-five percent of all test points measured materially fail to comply with the applicable technical requirements of the franchise ordinance. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.1104 Copies of reports.
(a)     Copies of all reports materially adversely affecting the franchise submitted by the grantee to the FCC or any other federal or state agency shall be submitted to the city simultaneously with filing such reports with said agencies. The grantee’s routine public correspondence to said agencies need not be automatically submitted to the city, but shall be made available to the city upon written request.

(b)     All reports and records required under this or any other section shall be furnished at the sole expense of the grantee. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.1106 Failure to report.
The refusal, failure, or neglect of the grantee to file any of the reports required under this chapter, where such refusal, failure or neglect is not remedied following due notice and an opportunity to cure as provided in this chapter, or the inclusion of any materially false or misleading statement or representation made knowingly by the grantee in such report, shall be deemed a material breach of the franchise, and shall subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the city under the franchise or otherwise. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.1108 Public reports.
A copy of each of the grantee’s annual and other periodic public financial reports and those of its parent, subsidiary and affiliated corporations and other entities, as the city requests, shall be submitted to the city within thirty days after receipt of a request. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.1110 Inspection of facilities.
The grantee shall allow the city to make inspections of any of the grantee’s facilities and equipment relevant to the franchise at any time upon reasonable notice, or, in a case of emergency, upon demand without prior notice. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.1112 Subscriber satisfaction surveys.
The grantee shall provide the city with a copy of all subscriber satisfaction surveys conducted by the grantee. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.1114 Periodic review of performance and quality of service.
(a)     At the city’s sole option, within ninety days of the third anniversary of the effective date of each franchise, and every three years thereafter throughout the term of the franchise, the city may hold a public hearing at which the grantee shall be present and shall participate, to review the performance and quality of service of the cable communications system. The reports required herein regarding subscriber complaints, the records of performance tests and the opinion survey report shall be utilized as the basis for review. In addition, any subscriber may submit comments or complaints during the review meetings, either orally or in writing, and these shall be considered.

(b)     Within thirty days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the city shall issue a report with respect to system performance and quality of service. If any noncompliance with the franchise is found, the city may direct the grantee to correct the noncompliance within a reasonable period of time in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

(c)     Failure of the grantee, after due notice and opportunity to cure as set forth in this chapter, to correct the noncompliance shall be considered a breach of the franchise, and the city may, at its sole discretion, exercise any remedy within the scope of this chapter considered appropriate. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.1116 System and services review.
To address technological, economic, and regulatory changes in the state of the art of cable communications, to facilitate renewal procedures, and to promote flexibility in the cable system, the following system and services review procedures are hereby established:

(1)     At the city’s sole option, the city may hold a public hearing on or about the fifth anniversary date of the franchise ordinance at which the grantee shall be present and shall participate, to review the cable communications system and services. Subsequent system and services review hearings may be scheduled by the city each three years thereafter.

(2)     Sixty days after receiving notice from the city, the grantee shall submit a report to the city indicating the following:

(A)    Information reasonably available to the grantee identifying cable system services reported in cable industry trade journals that are being commonly provided on an operational basis, excluding tests and demonstrations, to communities in the United States with comparable populations, that are not provided to the city.

(B)    Any specific plans for provision of such new services by the grantee.

(3)     Topics for discussion and review at the system and services review hearing shall include, but shall not be limited to, services provided, economic and technical feasibility of providing new services, application of new technologies, system performance, programming, subscriber complaints, user complaints, rights of privacy, amendments to the franchise, under grounding processes, developments in the law, and regulatory constraints.

(4)     Either the city or the grantee may select additional topics for discussion at any review hearing.

(5)     Not later than sixty days after the conclusion of each system and service review hearing, the city shall issue a report, including specifically a listing of any cable services not then being provided to the city that are considered technically and economically feasible and for which there is a demonstrated need among the grantee’s subscribers in relation to the cost thereof. The city may request, but not require, the grantee to provide such services within a reasonable time. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

Article XI. Miscellaneous Provisions
5.24.1202 Compliance with state and federal laws.
Subject to the grantee’s rights under its franchise ordinance, the grantee shall at all times comply with all applicable laws and regulations of the state and federal government or any administrative agencies thereof. However, if any such state or federal law or regulation shall require the grantee to perform any service, or shall permit the grantee to delete any service, or shall prohibit the grantee from performing any service, in conflict with the terms of the franchise or any law or regulation of the city, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, the grantee shall notify the city of the point of conflict believed to exist. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

 

5.24.1204 Notices.
The grantee shall maintain within Los Angeles throughout the term of the franchise, an address for service of notices by mail. (Ord. 1598 § 1, 1992)

Chapter 5.25 VIDEO FRANCHISE FEES, CUSTOMER SERVICE AND OTHER VIDEO-RELATED MATTERS
5.25.010 Regulation of state video franchises and city video franchises.
Pursuant to California Assembly Bill 2987 effective January 1, 2007, the California Public Utilities Commission (PUC) has the authority to grant state video franchises. Under this new legislative scheme, the city of Glendora will acquire certain rights and responsibilities with respect to state video franchise holders. These include the receipt of a franchise fee and a fee for public, educational and government (PEG) purposes, both based on a percentage of the gross revenues of state franchise holders, as well as the establishment and enforcement of penalties for violations of customer service rules. The city will retain authority, without change, over all city video franchisees until such time as they no longer hold a city franchise, or are no longer operating under a current or expired city franchise. The city may continue to grant, modify, renew, extend or terminate city video franchises for video service until January 1, 2008. After January 1, 2008, the city may modify, renew, extend or terminate existing city video franchises, whether current or expired. The purpose of this chapter is to help secure the city’s rights and clarify its responsibilities under the provisions of the new legislative scheme. (Ord. 1875 § 2, 2007)

 

5.25.020 Definitions.
(a)     For purposes of this chapter, “state franchise,” “video service,” and “video service provider” shall have the same meanings as those terms are defined in Section 5830 of the California Public Utilities Code.

(b)     For purposes of this chapter, the term “state video franchise holder” shall have the same meaning as “video service provider,” and “state video franchise” shall have the same meaning as “state franchise.”

(c)     For purposes of this chapter, “city video franchise” shall mean the city’s video franchises existing at the time the ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted. (Ord. 1875 § 2, 2007)

 

5.25.030 State video franchise fees.
(a)     For any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the city of Glendora, there shall be a fee paid to the city equal to five percent of the gross revenue of that state video franchise holder.

(b)     For any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the city of Glendora, there shall be an additional fee paid to the city equal to one percent of the gross revenue of that state video franchise holder, which fee shall be used by the city for PEG purposes consistent with state and federal law.

(c)     Gross revenue, for the purposes of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, shall have the definition set forth in California Public Utilities Code Section 5860. (Ord. 1875 § 2, 2007)

 

5.25.040 Audit authority.
Not more than once annually, the city manager, or his or her designee, may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a state video franchise holder to ensure compliance with Section 5.25.030. (Ord. 1875 § 2, 2007)

 

5.25.050 Customer service penalties under state video franchises.
(a)     A state video franchise holder shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service.

(b)     The city manager, or his or her designee, shall monitor the compliance of state video franchise holders with respect to state and federal customer service and protection standards. The city manager, or his or her designee, will provide the state video franchise holder written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer and service standards, and will allow the state video franchise holder thirty days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedies within the thirty-day time period will be subject to the following penalties to be imposed by the city manager:

(1)     For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of five hundred dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed fifteen hundred dollars for each violation.

(2)     For a second violation of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of one thousand dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed three thousand dollars for each violation.

(3)     For a third or further violation of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of two thousand five hundred dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars for each violation.

(c)     A state video franchise holder may appeal a penalty assessed by the city manager to the city council within sixty days of the date the city manager renders a decision in writing. After relevant speakers are heard, and any necessary staff reports are submitted, the city council shall vote to uphold, amend, or overturn the penalty. The city council’s decision on the imposition of a penalty shall be final. (Ord. 1875 § 2, 2007)

 

5.25.060 City response to state video franchise applications.
(a)     Applicants for state video franchises within the boundaries of the city of Glendora must concurrently provide complete copies to the city of any application or amendments to applications filed with the PUC. One complete copy must be provided to the city clerk, and one complete copy to the city manager.

(b)     The city manager, or his or her designee, will provide any appropriate comments to the PUC regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a state video franchise. (Ord. 1875 § 2, 2007)

 

5.25.070 Public rights-of-way—Encroachment.
(a)     The city shall allow a state video franchise holder to install, construct, and maintain a network within public rights-of-way under the same time, place, and manner as the provisions governing telephone corporations under applicable state and federal law.

(b)     Encroachment Permit Process.

(1)     The director of public works shall prescribe the form of each application, documents provided for or required under this chapter for encroachment permits.

(2)     An application for an encroachment permit is complete when the applicant has complied with all statutory requirements, including the California Environmental Quality Act (Division 13 (commencing with Section 21000) of the Public Resources Code).

(3)     The director of public works shall either approve or deny an application from a state video franchise holder for an encroachment permit within sixty days of receiving a completed application.

(4)     If the director of public works denies an application for an encroachment permit, it shall, at the time of notifying the applicant of the denial, furnish to the applicant a detailed explanation of the reason for the denial.

(c)     Appeal of Decision.

(1)     Any person aggrieved by the determination by the director of public works shall have the right of immediate appeal to the city council. Such an appeal shall be in writing, and shall be filed with the city clerk within thirty days of the date of mailing notice of the action appealed from.

(2)     The city clerk shall schedule the appeal hearing before the city council at a regularly scheduled meeting within thirty days of receiving a complete appeal package from the appellant. For purposes of this section, a complete appeal package includes the written request for appeal, a copy of the original application for encroachment, the letter of denial from the director of public works, and any and all supporting evidence which the appellant desires the city council to consider on the appeal.

(3)     The city clerk shall give the party appealing, and any other person requesting the same, at least seven days written notice of the time and place of such hearing; this notice provision may be waived by the appellant, and such other persons who have requested such notice.

(4)     The hearing before the city council in such cases shall not be a formal public hearing.

(5)     The city council may approve the encroachment permit, deny the encroachment permit, or request that the director of public works review the application again subject to additional recommendations. The city council’s decision shall be final and conclusive.

(d)     Nothing herein shall be construed to change existing law regarding the permitting process or compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (Division 13 (commencing with Section 21000) of the Public Resources Code) for projects by a state video franchise holder.

(e)     For purposes of this section, an “encroachment permit” means any permit issued by the city relating to construction or operation of facilities pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1875 § 2, 2007)

 

5.25.080 Extension of existing city video franchises.
(a)     Any entity providing video service under an expired city video franchise on or after January 1, 2007, shall have the terms of its city video franchise extended on the same terms and conditions until January 2, 2008. The extension of a city video franchise does not preclude the city from further modifications, renewals, extensions or termination of that city video franchise.

(b)     With respect to any city video franchise to which subsection (a) applies, Chapter 5.24 of the Glendora Municipal Code shall continue to govern and supersede Sections 5.25.010 through 5.25.070, inclusive, until such time as the city video franchise expires, or such time as the city video franchise terminates pursuant to state law.

(c)     With respect to any city video franchise to which subsection (a) applies, the city video franchise holder shall make adequate interconnection available for the existing PEG channel(s) and its/their capacity to any new state video franchise holder within six months from the date the city requests the new state video franchise holder to designate the capacity of the PEG channels in accordance with Public Utilities Code Section 5870. This provision is intended to supplement Public Utilities Code Section 5870 and foster the intent of The Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 which partially seeks to “Continue access to and maintenance of the public, education, and government (PEG) channels.” For purposes of implementing this section, the first three months of the six month period are the same three months provided for pursuant to Public Utilities Code Section 5870. (Ord. 1875 § 2, 2007)

Chapter 5.28 AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS
5.28.010 License required.
No personal property shall be sold at auction in the city except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. It is unlawful to sell or cause or permit to be sold at auction any personal property in the city unless such sale is conducted by an individual who has applied for and obtained an auctioneer’s license from the city. Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1416 § 4, 1983; Ord. 1232 § 2, 1975)

 

5.28.020 Issuance and revocation of license.
(a)     The director of finance is authorized to grant or renew an auctioneer’s license for any period of time not exceeding one year to any individual applying therefor on a form to be provided by the director of finance upon payment by the applicant of the fees provided for in Section 5.28.030 and the filing by the applicant of the bond required by Section 5.28.040.

(b)     The form on which application shall be made for an auctioneer’s license shall require the following information:

(1)     The name of the applicant;

(2)     The residence and business address of the applicant;

(3)     The length of time for which an auctioneer’s license is desired;

(4)     A statement as to whether or not the applicant holds, or has held, an auctioneer’s license from any state, municipality, governing body or licensing authority; a list of such licenses and a statement of the time, place and by whom issued; a statement as to whether any state, municipality, governing body or licensing authority has ever refused to issue or to renew an auctioneer’s license to the applicant, together with a full and accurate statement as to the reasons for any such refusal; and a statement as to whether any state, municipality, governing body or licensing authority has ever revoked an auctioneer’s license held by the applicant, together with a full and accurate statement as to the reasons for any such revocation;

(5)     A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance and, if so, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor;

(6)     The fingerprints of the applicant and the names of at least two reliable property owners of the county who will certify as to the applicant’s good moral character and business responsibility, or, in lieu of the names of references, any other available evidence as to the good moral character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such moral character and business responsibility, except that the director of finance may waive this requirement with respect to an application for renewal of an auctioneer’s license by any individual holding an unexpired auctioneer’s license issued under this chapter who has in a previous application under this chapter complied with this requirement.

(c)     Before issuing an auctioneer’s license to any individual applying therefor, the director of finance shall refer the application to the chief of police who shall cause to be made such investigation of the applicant’s moral character and business responsibility as he or she deems necessary for the protection of the public good, except that the director of finance may waive this requirement with respect to an application for renewal of an auctioneer’s license by any individual holding an unexpired auctioneer’s license issued under this chapter if an investigation of such applicant’s moral character and business responsibility has previously been made under this section in connection with a prior application for an auctioneer’s license under this chapter. The chief of police shall cause the investigation herein provided for to be made within a reasonable time and shall certify to the director of finance whether or not the moral character and business responsibility of the applicant are satisfactory.

(d)     An auctioneer’s license may be revoked by the director of finance or an application for issuance or renewal of such license may be refused by the director of finance if he or she determines, after notice and hearing, that:

(1)     The applicant or license holder is not an individual of good moral character and business responsibility; or

(2)     The application of the applicant or license holder contains any false, fraudulent or misleading material statement; or

(3)     The applicant or license holder has made any false, fraudulent or misleading material statement in the course of conducting an auction sale of, or in offering for sale at auction, any real or personal property in the city; or

(4)     The applicant or license holder has perpetrated a fraud upon any person, whether or not such fraud was perpetrated in the conduct of an auction in the city; or

(5)     The applicant or license holder has violated any of the statutes of the state relating to auctions or auctioneers; or

(6)     The applicant has been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or

(7)     The applicant or license holder has conducted an auction sale of, or offered for sale at auction, any real or personal property in the city in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.

(e)     Notice of the hearing provided for in subsection (d) of this section shall be given in writing to the applicant or license holder as the case may be. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the applicant or license holder as the case may be at his or her last-known address at least five days prior to the date set for hearing. The applicant or license holder as the case may be shall have the right to be represented at such hearing by counsel.

(f)      Any individual aggrieved by the action of the director of finance in refusing to issue any license or in revoking any license or special permit already issued shall have the right to appeal to the council of the city. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the council, or person designated by it, within fourteen days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed, postage prepaid, to such individual’s last-known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds of appeal. The council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided in subsection (e) of this section. The appellant shall have the right to be represented at such hearing by counsel. The decision and order of the council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 1232 § 2,) 1975)

 

5.28.030 License fees.
The fees for an auctioneer’s license shall be as established pursuant to resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1536 § 6, 1989; Ord. 1232 § 2, 1975)

 

5.28.040 Bond.
Every applicant for an auctioneer’s license shall file with the director of finance a surety bond running to the city in the amount of one thousand dollars with surety acceptable to and approved by the director of finance conditioned that the applicant, if issued an auctioneer’s license, will comply fully with all the provisions of the ordinances of the city and the statutes of the state regulating and concerning auctions and auctioneers, will render true and strict accounts of all of his or her sales to any person or persons employing him or her to make the same, will not practice any fraud or deceit upon bidders or purchasers of property from him or her at any auction sale or suffer or permit any person in his or her employ to practice any such fraud or deceit, and will pay all damages which may be sustained by any person by reason of any fraud, deceit, negligence or other wrongful act on the part of the licensee, his or her agents or employees, in the conduct of any auction or in the exercise of the calling of auctioneer. A liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state which conforms to the above requirements may be permitted by the director of finance in his or her discretion in lieu of a bond. (Ord. 1232 § 2, 1975)

 

5.28.050 Report of auctioneer.
At the conclusion of any auction sale of personal property consummated in the city, the duly licensed auctioneer shall file with the director of finance a final written report of the sale itemizing the sale of taxable and nontaxable tangible personal property and describing identifiable secondhand tangible personal property. (Ord. 1232 § 2, 1975)

 

5.28.060 Auctions prohibited on streets, sidewalks and public property.
It is unlawful to conduct an auction sale of personal property on any of the streets, sidewalks or public property of the city. (Ord. 1232 § 2, 1975)

 

5.28.070 Night auctions prohibited.
It is unlawful to offer for sale at auction or sell at auction any articles between the hours of twelve midnight and eight a.m. (Ord. 1232 § 2, 1975)

 

5.28.080 Chapter not applicable to judicial sales.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to auction sales conducted by trustees or referees in bankruptcy, executors, administrators, receivers, or other public officers acting under judicial process, nor to the sale of real property at auction. (Ord. 1232 § 2, 1975)

 

5.28.090 Separability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. (Ord. 1232 § 2, 1975)

Chapter 5.30 OUTDOOR DISPLAYS
5.30.010 Compliance required.
(a)     It is unlawful for any person to display any goods, equipment or materials outdoors on premises improved for nonresidential purposes without complying with all of the provisions of this chapter. Every person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b).

(b)     The outdoor display of goods, equipment or materials shall only be permitted in conjunction with, and on the same premises as, a business housed inside a building.

(c)     Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall not preclude the necessity of obtaining any other permit or license required by this code, ordinance of the city or other applicable law. (Ord. 1420 § 1, 1983)

 

5.30.020 Requirements for outdoor display.
Outdoor display shall be permitted if:

(1)     The applicant has a current business license to conduct business on the premises;

(2)     The premises are improved with a building that houses the business for which the current business license has been issued;

(3)     The outdoor display of goods, equipment and materials is permitted on the premises, pursuant to Title 21 of this code. (Ord. 1420 § 1, 1983)

 

5.30.030 Conditions of outdoor display.
Every outdoor display shall be permitted on condition that the applicant comply with all of the following:

(1)     The items being displayed shall be of the same type that are lawfully displayed and sold inside the business conducting the outdoor display on the premises;

(2)     The aggregate display area shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the linear frontage of the building or six feet, whichever is greater as indicated by a site plan by the applicant. Outdoor displays may also be conducted on any other areas of a property subject to the approval by the director of planning and redevelopment and the city building official.

(3)     No item, or any portion thereof, shall be displayed more than three feet from the building frontage. Outdoor displays may be conducted on any other areas of a property subject to the approval by the director of planning and redevelopment and the city building official.

(4)     No item, or any portion thereof, shall be displayed on public property; provided, however, items may be displayed within the public right-of-way if an encroachment permit has first been procured from the city;

(5)     Items shall be displayed only during the hours that the business conducted inside the building on the premises is open for business;

(6)     The outdoor displays shall be limited to Saturdays only unless an extended outdoor display event is requested by an applicant (an extended outdoor display event may not exceed five consecutive days with each day or portion thereof counting as one day). Such requests may be approved by the director of planning and redevelopment subject to all other requirements of this chapter provided that no more than six requests have been granted in a calendar year.

(7)     No items shall be displayed in a manner that causes a safety hazard, obstructs the entrance to any building; interferes with, or impedes the flow of, pedestrian or vehicle traffic; is unsightly or creates any other condition that is detrimental to the appearance of the premises or any surrounding property; or in any other manner is detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or causes a public nuisance.

(8)     The outdoor display may not violate any of the provisions of the city’s Municipal Code including the Sign Code, Zoning Code or Building Codes. (Ord. 1839 §§ 2—5, 2006; Ord. 1420 § 1, 1983)

Chapter 5.32 SPECIAL OUTDOOR DISPLAY EVENTS
5.32.010 Definition.
For the purpose of this chapter, “special outdoor display event” means any event of limited duration conducted outside the confines of a building and sponsored by the owner or owners of the property or conducted on a public right-of-way. The regulations relating to a special outdoor display event shall be applicable whether or not a fee or admission is charged for such event. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to include within the definition of a special outdoor display event, any event sponsored by a nonprofit organization where only food or beverages are served or sold. (Ord. 1419 § 1, 1983)

 

5.32.020 Permit required.
(a)     It is unlawful for any person to display any goods, equipment or materials outdoors on premises improved for nonresidential purposes or public rights-of-way without first having procured a special outdoor display event permit and without complying with all provisions of this chapter. Every person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b).

(b)     Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall not preclude the necessity of obtaining any other permit or license required by this code, ordinance of the city or other applicable law. (Ord. 1419 § 1, 1983)

 

5.32.030 Permit application.
(a)     Application for permit to conduct special outdoor display events shall be made by the owner of the property or his or her duly authorized representative on which the property on which the event is to be conducted, and shall be in writing to the director of finance or the director’s designee on a form provided by the city for that purpose, and shall be filed with the director of finance not less than sixty days prior to the opening date of such event. The application shall be accompanied by the payment of a filing fee as established by city council resolution.

(b)     The application shall contain the following information:

(1)     The name and address of the property owner;

(2)     The exact location where the event is to be conducted;

(3)     The name and address of the operator or operators of the event;

(4)     The dates the event is to be conducted shall be limited to three events per year per property with a maximum of three days in duration;

The maximum number of days permitted for Christmas tree and pumpkin sales shall be limited to thirty days;

(5)     A list of communities in California where the event has previously been conducted by the operators of the proposed event;

(6)     The number and types of rides, games, shows, displays and other individual concessions comprising the event, including all food stands and food vehicles;

(7)     The number of persons who will be engaged in conducting the event;

(8)     A plot plan showing the entire property in addition to that portion of the property proposed to be used to store equipment and to conduct the special outdoor display event including an exact description and plot plan describing the total extent of any off-street parking area which would be occupied for the purpose of conducting the special outdoor display event and storing the equipment thereto: Location, type and number of items to be displayed, restroom facilities, trash receptacles, traffic and pedestrian ingress and egress, fire prevention and safety equipment;

(9)     Events proposed within the public right-of-way are permitted if an encroachment permit has first been procured from the city;

(10)   Such other information as shall be required by the finance director. (Ord. 1419 § 1, 1983)

 

5.32.040 Issuance—Refusal.
(a)     The finance director or designee shall conduct such investigation as he or she may deem necessary concerning the application and the event proposed to be conducted to determine whether the applicant is of good moral character and proposes to engage in an enterprise in a manner which shall not be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the city or its inhabitants, either by reason of the character of the applicant, the nature of the business or the manner in which the business is proposed to be conducted. The director shall have the findings set forth in writing and attached to this application.

(b)     If, after such investigation, the finance director, or designee, determines that the applicant is of good moral character and proposes to engage in an enterprise which will not be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the city or its inhabitants either by the reason of the character of the applicant, the nature of the event or the manner in which the event is proposed to be conducted, then the finance director, or designee, shall issue such permit upon such terms and conditions and restrictions, regulating the operation and conduct of such event not in conflict with any paramount law, as terms and conditions may be necessary or expedient to protect the public peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the city or its inhabitants.

(c)     Within fifteen working days after an application has been accepted as complete, the director of finance or the director’s designee shall either issue a permit or give notice to the applicant that the application has been denied and the grounds therefor. When a permit is denied, the notice shall state that the denial shall become final seven days following the date the notice is given, unless within such period of time, the applicant files, with the director of finance or the director’s designee, a written request for a hearing before the city council.

(d)     Appeal Hearing. At the next regular meeting of the city council after a request for hearing has been filed with the director of finance or the director’s designee, the request shall be deemed received by the city council. Within thirty days thereafter, the city council shall hold a hearing. Notice of the hearing date shall be given to the applicant not less than ten days prior thereto. Within ten days after the hearing, the city council shall cause written notice of its decision to be given to the applicant.

(e)     The city council shall make any decision regarding issuance of a permit in accordance with the requirements for permit issuance as set forth in this chapter. The decision of the city council shall be final.

(f)      Notices. Notices required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be given in writing by personal service or by United States Postal Service, certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the applicant at the address shown on the application form. The giving of notice under this chapter shall be deemed to have occurred as of the date of personal service or as of the date of deposit with the United States Postal Service. (Ord. 1419 § 1, 1983)

 

5.32.050 Conduct of operation.
The following regulations shall govern the operation of any special outdoor display event for which a permit has been issued:

(a)     No ride, game, booth, amusement device, or any structure shall exceed the height of any business structures located on the same parcel of real property, or thirty-five feet, whichever is the lesser height.

(b)     All applicable local, state and federal laws and regulations shall be observed.

(c)     The physical layout of the area set apart for the conduct of the special outdoor display event, including the area used for installation or storage of all equipment, shall be such that no more than fifteen percent of the parking area designed to serve the business or shopping center is used for this event.

(d)     Before erecting any structures, application must be made to the building inspection superintendent. All applicable building and electrical regulations must be obeyed. Permits issued by the state, Division of Industrial Safety, must be furnished to the building inspection superintendent before the erection and operation of any ride. No rides, amusement devices or concessions shall be put into operation until inspected and approved by the building inspection superintendent; provided, however, that no such inspection or approval by the city shall be construed as a representation by the city, or any employee thereof, that any such ride, amusement device or concession is structurally or operationally safe. Each ride shall have a sign displayed at the entrance to the ride and visible to all patrons containing the message that any person using the equipment does so at their own risk.

(e)     No game shall be permitted to be conducted at a special outdoor display event until inspected and approved by the chief of police or his designee. No game shall be approved which violates any laws of the state or any other provisions of this code. No game shall be approved in which it is impossible, due to the game equipment, for the participant to win by the use of skill.

(f)      Any and all facilities for the storage and handling of food and beverages shall be in conformance with the county health department.

(g)     No trailers, tents or other temporary living quarters will be allowed on the premises where the special outdoor display event is to be conducted except upon approval of the finance director on a finding that no hazard to public health or safety will result from such approval.

(h)     The conduct of the special outdoor display event shall be confined to the hours when the business establishment or shopping center is open for business, and in no event shall the special outdoor display event be operated after eleven p.m. of any night.

(i)      No special outdoor display event shall be conducted within five hundred feet of any hospital, rest home or convalescent facility.

(j)      No permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be transferred by the applicant to any other person or to any property not shown on the application as the premises for which the permit is requested.

(k)     The finance director shall have discretion to require the posting of a cash deposit to ensure that the premises on which this special outdoor display event is being conducted will be left in a clean and orderly condition. The amount of the cash deposit shall in no event exceed five hundred dollars.

(1)     A temporary business license shall be required for each merchant currently not licensed by the city. (Ord. 1419 § 1, 1983)

 

5.32.060 Liability and property damage insurance.
Prior to the erection of any structure in connection with a special outdoor display event, the operator or operators of the event shall furnish certificates to the finance director naming the city as additional insured and showing that there is in full force and effect liability and property damage insurance covering every activity of the proposed special outdoor display event in a minimum amount of three hundred thousand dollars for death or injury to one person and five hundred thousand dollars for death or injury of more than one person in any one accident and fifty thousand dollars property damage, or, in such additional amount as deemed necessary by the finance director; provided, however, that maximum insurance coverage may be one million dollars for death or injury to more than one person in any accident and one hundred thousand dollars property damage. (Ord. 1419 § 1, 1983)

 

5.32.070 Powers of city council.
The city council shall have the exclusive power to grant a renewal or extension of a permit beyond the days specified in Section 5.32.030(d). (Ord. 1419 § 1, 1983)

Chapter 5.34 ALARM SYSTEMS
5.34.010 Purpose.
The city council finds and declares that:

A.      The vast majority of alarms to which the police department responds are false alarms, which are reported to the police by alarm companies.

B.      Most false alarms are the result of improper maintenance or improper or careless use of an alarm system.

C.      The public and police officers are subjected to needless danger when the officers are called to respond to false alarms.

D.      Officers responding to false alarms are not available to carry out other police duties.

E.       In the interest of using limited police resources most effectively and efficiently, the number of false alarms can and must be reduced.

F.       The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the dangers and inefficiencies associated with false alarms and to encourage alarm companies and property owners to maintain the operational reliability, proper use of alarm systems, and to reduce or eliminate false alarm dispatch requests.

G.      This chapter governs systems intended to summon a police response, establishes fees, penalty, establishes a system of administration, sets conditions for the suspension of a police response and establishes a public education and training program. (Ord. 2045 § 2, 2020)

 

5.34.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

“Alarm administrator” means the person or persons designated by the police department to administer the provisions of this chapter.

“Alarm agreement” means the legal contract or agreement by and between the alarm installation company and/or monitoring company and the alarm user.

“Alarm agreement holding company” means the alarm installation company or monitoring company that holds the alarm agreement with the alarm user.

“Alarm dispatch request” means a notification to the police department that an alarm, either manual or automatic, has been activated at a particular alarm site.

“Alarm installation company” means a person in the business of selling, providing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing an alarm system at an alarm site for compensation, and includes individuals or firms that install and service alarm systems used in a private business or proprietary facility.

“Alarm registration” means a registration and unique number issued by the alarm administrator to an alarm user, which authorizes the operation of an alarm system.

“Alarm response manager (ARM)” means a person designated by an alarm installation company and monitoring company to handle alarm issues for the company and act as the primary point of contact for the city’s alarm administrator.

“Alarm site” means a location served by one or more alarm systems. In a multi-unit building or complex, each unit shall be considered a separate alarm site if served by a separate alarm system. In a single unit building that houses two or more separate businesses with separate alarm systems, each business will be considered a separate alarm site.

“Alarm system” means a device or series of devices, which emit or transmit an audible or remote visual or electronic alarm signal, which is intended to summon police response. The term includes hardwired systems and systems interconnected with a radio frequency method such as cellular or private radio signals, and includes local alarm systems, but does not include an alarm installed in a motor vehicle, on an individual’s person or a system which will not emit a signal either audible or visible from the outside of the building, residence or beyond, but is designed solely to alert the occupants of a building or residence.

“Alarm user” means any person who has contracted for monitoring, repair, installation or maintenance service for an alarm system from an alarm installation company or monitoring company, or who owns or operates an alarm system which is not monitored, maintained or repaired under agreement.

“Alarm user awareness class” means a class conducted for the purpose of educating alarm users about the responsible use, operation, and maintenance of alarm systems and the problems created by false alarms.

“Alarm user list” means a list provided by the alarm user’s alarm installation company or, if no alarm agreement exists between the alarm user and an alarm installation company, the alarm user’s monitoring company.

“Arming station” means a device that controls an alarm system.

“Automatic voice dialer” means any electronic, mechanical, or other device which, when activated, is capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded voice message to the police department or city requesting an officer dispatch to an alarm site.

“Burglar alarm” means an alarm intended to identify the presence of an intruder in either a business or residence.

“Business license” means a business license issued by the city of Glendora business license division to an alarm installation company or monitoring company to conduct business in the city.

“Cancellation” means the termination of a police response to an alarm site after an alarm dispatch request is made but before an officer’s arrival at the alarm site.

“City” means city of Glendora.

“Conversion of alarm user” means the transaction or process by which one alarm installation company or monitoring company begins the servicing or monitoring of a previously unmonitored alarm system or an alarm system that was previously serviced or monitored by another alarm company.

“Duress alarm” means a silent alarm system signal generated by the entry of a designated code into an arming station in order to signal that the alarm user is being forced to turn off the system and requires an officer response.

“Enhanced call verification” means an attempt by the monitoring company, or its representative, to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user and/or the alarm user’s designated representatives by telephone and/or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting a police burglar alarm dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. For the purpose of this chapter, telephone verification shall require, as a minimum, that a second call be made to a different number, if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting an officer dispatch. Names and numbers of those contacted or attempted to contact shall be provided when requested.

“False alarm” means an alarm dispatch request to the police department, which results in the responding officer finding no evidence of a criminal offense or attempted criminal offense after completing an investigation of the alarm site.

“Holdup alarm” means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress.

“Local alarm system” means an unmonitored alarm system that annunciates an alarm only at the alarm site.

“Monitoring” means the process by which a monitoring company receives signals from an alarm system and relays an alarm dispatch request to the police department.

“Monitoring company” means a person in the business of providing monitoring services.

“One plus duress alarm” means the manual activation of a silent alarm signal by entering a code that adds one number to the last digit of the normal arm/disarm code (e.g., normal code equals 1234, one plus duress code equals 1235).

“Panic alarm” means an alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency situation requiring an officer response.

“Person” means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, organization or similar entity.

“Police department” means the Glendora police department.

“Protective or reactive alarm system” means an alarm system that produces a temporary disability or sensory deprivation through use of chemical, electrical, sonic or other means, including use of devices that obscure or disable a person’s vision.

“Registration number” means a unique individual number assigned to an alarm user as part of alarm registration issued by the police department.

“Responsible party” means a person capable of appearing at the alarm site upon request who has access to the alarm site, the code to the alarm system and the authority to approve repairs to the alarm system.

“Robbery alarm” means an alarm signal generated by the manual or automatic activation of a device or any system, device or mechanism on or near the premises intended to signal that a robbery is in progress and that a person is in need of immediate police assistance in order to avoid bodily harm, injury or death. The term has the same general meaning as “holdup alarm” or “duress alarm.”

“SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01” means the ANSI—American National Standard Institute-approved Security Industry Association—SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design features for security system control panels and their associated arming and disarming devices to reduce the incidence of false alarms. Control panels built and tested to this standard by Underwriters Laboratory (UL), or other nationally recognized testing organizations, are marked as follows: “Design evaluated in accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard Features for False Alarm Reduction.”

“Takeover” means the transaction or process by which an alarm user takes over control of an existing alarm system that was previously controlled by another alarm user.

“Verified response” means a police response that is based on information received from a person physically present at a location (e.g., an alarm site) or from real-time audio or video surveillance positively verifying that there is evidence of either a crime or an attempted crime at the location.

“Zones” mean a division of devices into which an alarm system is divided to indicate the general location from which an alarm system signal is transmitted. (Ord. 2045 § 2, 2020)

 

5.34.030 Administration—Funding—Increases in fees and penalties—Annual evaluation.
A.      Responsibility for administration of this chapter is vested with the police department.

B.      The police department shall designate an alarm administrator to carry out the duties and functions described in this section.

C.      Monies generated by fees and penalties assessed pursuant to this section shall be dedicated for use by the police department for the administration of the provisions of this chapter and officers’ response to alarms.

D.      The amount of the fees and penalties set forth in this section shall be specified in the city fee schedule, which may only be revised by a duly adopted resolution of the city council. For purposes of this subsection, “fees” includes any type or class of fee and includes late charges.

E.       The alarm administrator shall conduct an annual evaluation and analysis of the effectiveness of this chapter and identify and implement system improvements as warranted. (Ord. 2045 § 2, 2020)

 

5.34.040 Alarm registrations required—Terms—Fees and fee collection.
A.      An alarm user shall not operate, or cause to be operated, any alarm system without a valid alarm registration. A separate alarm registration is required for each alarm site having a distinct address or business name. A registration fee, including a completed alarm registration application, shall be received and approved by the alarm administrator prior to any alarm system activation.

B.      Owners of local alarm systems are required to adhere to all sections of this chapter and are subject to all fees, penalties, suspensions, penalties or other requirements that are applicable.

C.      The fee for a new initial alarm registration and the alarm registration renewal fee shall be collected by the alarm administrator.

D.      Existing Alarm Systems.

1.       Any alarm system that has been installed before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be registered and a registration fee collected by the alarm administrator.

a.       The alarm agreement holding company shall provide within forty days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter an alarm user list of existing alarm users in the city, in a format approved by the alarm administrator, including name, address, billing address and telephone number, to the alarm administrator.

b.       The alarm agreement holding company may apply to the alarm administrator for an extension of the time limit in subsection (D)(1)(a) of this section based on extenuating circumstances.

2.       The alarm agreement holding company may, through a mutual written agreement, have another alarm company provide the alarm user’s list.

E.       New Alarm Systems.

1.       Any alarm installation company that installs an alarm system on premises located within the city of Glendora shall notify the alarm administrator within ten days that an alarm system has been installed and send the alarm administrator the required information.

2.       In the case of self-installed alarm systems that are to be monitored by a monitoring company, the monitoring company shall act as the alarm installation company regarding the duties to notify the alarm administrator.

3.       Failure of an alarm installation company to notify the alarm administrator of a new alarm system installation within ten days of installation shall result in a penalty as established by resolution of the city council to be imposed on the alarm installation company.

4.       The initial alarm registration fee shall be collected by the alarm administrator. Failure of the alarm user to submit an application and registration fee within the thirty days after notice shall result in the alarm system being classified as nonregistered and late charges being assessed.

F.       Alarm Registration and Renewal Fees.

1.       An alarm registration shall expire one year from the date of issuance, and must be renewed annually by the alarm user. The alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user of the need to renew their registration thirty days prior to the expiration of the registration. It is the responsibility of the alarm user to submit the updated information and renewal fees prior to the registration expiration date. Failure to renew shall be classified as use of a nonregistered alarm system and subject the alarm site to a suspension and late charge.

2.       Registration fees shall be collected annually based on a one-year registration period. The amount of the registration and renewal fees required is established by resolution of the city council.

G.      Late Charge. Alarm users who fail to make payment for an alarm registration prior to the registration’s expiration date will be assessed a late charge as established by resolution of the city council.

H.      Refunds. No refund of a registration fee or registration renewal fee will be made.

I.        Upon receipt of a completed alarm registration application form and the alarm registration fee, the alarm administrator shall issue a registration number or alarm registration renewal to the applicant unless:

1.       The applicant has failed to pay any fee or penalty assessed under this chapter; or

2.       An alarm registration for the alarm site has been suspended, and the condition causing the suspension has not been corrected; or

3.       The alarm installation company and/or the monitoring company listed on the registration application is not in possession of a current valid State of California Department of Consumer Affairs alarm company operator’s license.

4.       Any false statement of a material fact made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm registration shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue an alarm registration. (Ord. 2045 § 2, 2020)

 

5.34.050 Registration application—Contents.
An application for an alarm registration must be in a format provided by the police department. The information required on such forms shall be determined by the alarm administrator. Registration applicants acknowledge that the police response may be influenced by factors including, but not limited to, the availability of officers, priority of calls, traffic conditions, weather conditions, emergency conditions, prior alarm history, administrative actions and staffing levels. (Ord. 2045 § 2, 2020)

 

5.34.060 Transfer of registration prohibited.
A.      An alarm registration cannot be transferred to another person or alarm site. An alarm user shall inform the alarm administrator and their alarm company of any change to the information listed on the alarm registration application within ten business days after such change.

B.      Exceptions may be made in the discretion of the alarm administrator when the transfer proposed is among members of the family of the original registration holder or successors in interest to the property for which the alarm registration has been issued. (Ord. 2045 § 2, 2020)

 

5.34.070 Duties of alarm users.
A.      An alarm user shall:

1.       Maintain the alarm site and the alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarms.

2.       Make every reasonable effort to arrive at the alarm system’s location within thirty minutes after being requested by the monitoring company or police department in order to:

a.       Deactivate an alarm system;

 

b.       Provide access to the alarm site; and/or

c.       Provide alternative security for the alarm site.

3.       Provide his, her, or its monitoring company with the updated names and telephone numbers of at least two individuals who are able and have agreed to:

a.       Receive notification of an alarm system activation at any time;

b.       Respond to the alarm site at any time; and

c.       Provide access to the alarm site and deactivate the alarm system, if necessary.

4.       Not activate an alarm system for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report.

5.       Notify his, her, or its monitoring company of any suspension of police response (as provided for under this chapter) and request that the monitoring company not make a burglar alarm dispatch request.

B.      No person shall operate or cause to be operated any automatic voice dialer which, when activated, uses a telephone device or attachment to automatically dial a telephone line leading into the police department or the city and then transmit any pre-recorded message or signal. A penalty in an amount established by resolution of the city council shall be imposed for each violation of this prohibition.

C.      An alarm user shall keep a set of written operating instructions for each alarm system at each alarm site. (Ord. 2045 § 2, 2020)

 

5.34.080 Audible alarms—Restrictions, abatement of malfunctioning alarm.
A.      No alarm system shall emit a sound resembling an emergency vehicle siren or civil defense warning. The chief of police shall make the final determination regarding any question of an audible alarm within this section.

B.      After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter no one shall install, modify or repair an alarm system in the city of Glendora that has a siren, bell or other signal that is audible from any property adjacent to the alarm site that sounds for longer than ten consecutive minutes after the alarm is activated, or that repeats the ten-minute audible cycle more than three consecutive times during a single armed period. A penalty in an amount established by resolution of the city council shall be imposed for each violation of this prohibition.

C.      In the event that an audible alarm is activated and fails to reset itself or continues to activate for more than sixty minutes and the responsible person listed on the alarm registration or other responsible person cannot or will not respond and silence the alarm, and the continued activation of the alarm is creating a disturbance, the police department may cause the alarm to be silenced in a manner determined appropriate for the circumstances. The alarm user shall be held responsible for the actual costs involved to abate the malfunctioning alarm up to a maximum of three hundred dollars. The city, its employees or agents shall not be responsible or liable for damage resulting from such disconnection. (Ord. 2045 § 2, 2020)

 

5.34.090 Registration and duties of alarm installation companies and monitoring companies.
A.      Registration.

1.       No alarm company operator or alarm agent, as defined by the Business and Professions Code, shall install, maintain, or repair any alarm system within the city unless the alarm company operator or alarm agent has, prior to performing such work, obtained a business license and registered his or her name and address and filed a copy of his or her state identification card with the city’s finance department.

2.       Each alarm installation company and alarm monitoring company must designate one individual as the alarm response manager (ARM) for the company. The individual designated as the ARM must be knowledgeable of the provisions of this chapter, as well as have the knowledge and authority to deal with false alarm issues and respond to requests from the alarm administrator. The name, contact number, and e-mail address of the ARM shall be provided to the alarm administrator. Failure to comply within thirty days after being notified in writing from the alarm administrator may result in the suspension of police department response to alarm dispatch requests from the noncomplying alarm installation company or monitoring company.

3.       Each alarm installation company shall provide the name, address and phone number of any monitoring company it is using to monitor its alarm sites within the city, and monitoring companies shall do the same for alarm installation companies that use their monitoring services within the city.

4.       Disconnected Alarm Users. An alarm installation company or alarm monitoring company that holds the alarm agreement shall notify the alarm administrator by the fifteenth day of each month of all their alarm customers within the city of Glendora that have discontinued their alarm service with the company in the previous month. Failure to comply shall result in a penalty per violation in an amount established by resolution by the city council. The penalty may be waived by the alarm administrator when the alarm installation company or monitoring company provides documentation that it has a valid contract with the respective alarm user.

B.      Alarm installation companies shall:

1.       Upon the installation or activation of an alarm system, the alarm installation company shall distribute to the alarm user information summarizing:

a.       The applicable law relating to false alarms, including the registration fee and the potential for penalties and suspension of an alarm registration;

b.       How to prevent false alarms; and

c.       How to operate the alarm system.

2.       After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, alarm installation companies shall not program alarm systems so that they are capable of sending one plus duress alarms. Monitoring companies may continue to report one plus duress alarms received from alarm systems programmed with one plus duress alarms installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

3.       After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, alarm installation companies shall not install, modify or repair “single action” devices for the activation of holdup, robbery or panic alarms. New devices shall require two actions or an activation time delay to provide more positive assurance that the user intends to activate the device.

4.       Ninety days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, an alarm installation company shall, on new installations, use only alarm control panels which meet ANSI/SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard—Features for False Alarm Reduction.

5.       An alarm installation company shall not use an automatic voice dialer for any alarm system which, when activated, uses a telephone device or attachment to automatically dial a telephone line leading into the police department or the city and then transmit any pre-recorded message or signal.

6.       Ensure that alarm users of alarm systems equipped with a duress, robbery, holdup or panic alarm have been provided adequate training as to the proper use of the alarm system’s operation and function.

7.       All alarm systems shall be supplied with an uninterrupted power supply in such a manner that the failure or interruption of the normal electric utility service will not activate the alarm system.

8.       All audible alarm systems shall include a device which will limit the duration of the audible alarm to a period of not more than ten minutes per activation.

C.      A monitoring company shall:

1.       Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers designated by the alarm administrator or other approved communication processes.

2.       Employ enhanced call verification procedures on all burglar alarm dispatch requests. The Glendora police department may refuse to accept an alarm dispatch request from a monitoring company that has failed to comply with the procedures required by enhanced call verification. This subsection becomes effective ninety days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

3.       Communicate alarm dispatch requests to the police department in a manner and form determined by the alarm administrator.

4.       Communicate cancellations to the police department in a manner and form determined by the alarm administrator.

5.       Communicate any available zone information (north, south, front, back, door, window, etc.) about the location of an alarm signal(s) as part of an alarm dispatch request.

6.       Communicate the type of alarm activation (silent or audible, interior or perimeter), if available, on any alarm dispatch request.

7.       Notify communications (dispatch) of any alarm site that it knows, or reasonably should know, has guard dog(s), pets or is fitted with a protective-reactive alarm system. During any alarm at such a site, a responsible party must be contacted and confirm that he or she will respond to the alarm site to disarm the device or take control of the guard dog(s).

8.       After an alarm dispatch request, promptly advise the police department if the monitoring company knows that the alarm user or a responsible party is on the way to the alarm site.

9.       Each monitoring company must maintain, for a period of at least one year after the date of an alarm dispatch request, all records relating to the alarm dispatch request. Records must include the name, address and telephone number of the alarm user, each alarm system zone activated, the time of alarm dispatch request and evidence of all attempts to verify. The alarm administrator may request copies of such records for any individual alarm user. If the request is made within sixty days after an alarm dispatch request, the monitoring company shall furnish requested records within three business days after receiving the request. If the records are requested between sixty days and one year after an alarm dispatch request, the monitoring company shall furnish the requested records within thirty days after receiving the request.

10.     Each monitoring company shall, upon request, immediately provide the police department with the names and phone numbers of the alarm user’s emergency contacts at the time of each alarm dispatch request.

D.      Conversion of Alarm Users. An alarm installation company or monitoring company that converts the servicing of any alarm system account from another company shall notify the alarm administrator of such conversion and shall make a reasonable effort to provide to the alarm administrator, within sixty days from the date of conversion, an alarm user list of the converted accounts, in a format acceptable to the alarm administrator, that includes the following:

1.       Registration number.

2.       Customer name.

3.       Customer billing address.

4.       Customer telephone number.

5.       Alarm site address.

6.       Alarm installation company license number.

7.       Monitoring company license number.

E.       The customer lists described in subsection D of this section are proprietary and confidential information and will not be released to anyone absent a court order. (Ord. 2045 § 2, 2020)

 

5.34.100 Duties and authority of the alarm administrator.
A.      The alarm administrator shall:

1.       Designate the manner and form of alarm dispatch requests and the telephone numbers and/or communication process that is to be used for such requests; and

2.       Establish a procedure to accept cancellation of alarm dispatch requests.

B.      The alarm administrator shall establish a procedure to acquire and record information on alarm dispatch requests.

C.      The alarm administrator shall establish and implement a procedure to notify the alarm user of a false alarm. The notice shall include the following:

1.       The date and time of an officer’s response to the false alarm; and

2.       Any false alarm penalty incurred.

D.      The alarm administrator may require that a conference be held with an alarm user and the alarm installation company or monitoring company responsible for repairing or monitoring of the alarm system to review the circumstances of each false alarm. The conference may be held in person or through a conference telephone call, at the alarm administrator’s discretion. Failure to participate may result in suspension of the alarm registration, as indicated by the facts of the case.

E.       The alarm administrator may establish an alarm user awareness class. The alarm administrator may request the assistance of associations, alarm companies and law enforcement agencies in developing and implementing the class. The class shall inform alarm users of the alarm ordinance and problems created by false alarms and teach alarm users how to avoid creating false alarms.

F.       If a false robbery, holdup or panic alarm has occurred and the alarm was triggered using a single action, non-recessed device, the alarm administrator may consider a waiver or partial waiver of the false alarm penalty, if action is taken by the alarm user to remove or replace the single action, non-recessed device.

G.      The alarm administrator shall make a copy of this chapter and/or a chapter summary sheet available to each alarm user.

H.      The alarm administrator may use electronic means to communicate with alarm users, alarm installation companies and monitoring companies when applicable or when requested by the recipient and at the alarm administrator’s discretion. (Ord. 2045 § 2, 2020)

 

5.34.110 False alarm penalties—Penalties—Late charges.
A.      The alarm administrator may assess the alarm user a penalty for a false alarm occurring at that alarm user’s alarm site. The amount of said penalties for the listed categories shall be established by city council and may be subsequently amended by resolution of the city council.

1.       Burglar false alarm penalties.

2.       Robbery false alarm penalties.

3.       Residential panic false alarm penalties.

B.      If a false alarm penalty is not paid within thirty days after the invoice is mailed, a late charge as established by resolution of the city council shall be imposed.

C.      Penalties for False Alarms from Nonregistered Alarm Systems. For person(s) operating a nonregistered alarm system incurring a false alarm, penalties shall be imposed as established by resolution of the city council.

D.      Any monitoring company after five business days of receiving notice from the alarm administrator that an alarm user’s registration status is that of nonregistered shall not make a burglar alarm dispatch request from that alarm user.

E.       If cancellation of a police response occurs prior to the officer’s arrival at the alarm site, the response is not considered a false alarm and no false alarm penalty will be assessed.

F.       The alarm installation company shall be assessed a penalty in an amount established by resolution of the city council if the officer responding to a false alarm determines that an on-site employee of the alarm installation company directly caused the false alarm. Such false alarms are not included in the total number of false alarms for the alarm user, nor is the alarm user to be held liable for any false alarm penalty resulting from such alarm activation.

G.      A penalty in an amount established by resolution of the city council shall be imposed against any monitoring company that fails to verify alarm system signals as required in Section 5.34.090(C)(2).

H.      A penalty in an amount established by resolution of the city council shall be imposed against an alarm installation company if the alarm administrator determines that an employee of the alarm installation company knowingly made a false statement concerning the inspection of an alarm site or the performance of an alarm system.

I.        Notice of the right of appeal under this chapter will be included with notice of any penalty.

J.       All registration fees, renewal registration fees or penalties assessed under this section are due within thirty days of written notice unless otherwise noted. A late charge in an amount established by resolution of the city council shall be imposed for each individual fee or penalty due that is not paid within thirty days.

K.      The alarm administrator may waive the false alarm penalty for the first chargeable false alarm during the alarm user’s one-year registration period, pending the successful completion of the online alarm user awareness class available through the alarm administrator. In order to have the penalty waived, the alarm user shall have successfully completed the class within thirty days of the penalty notice. Alarm users without online access may request the online school and test be mailed to them. Reasonable additional time to complete the alarm user awareness class shall be allowed for mail delivery. (Ord. 2045 § 2, 2020)

 

5.34.120 Notice to alarm users of false alarms and suspension of a police response.
A.      The alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user in writing after each false alarm. The notice shall include the amount of the penalty for the false alarm, the fact that police response to further alarms will be suspended after the fourth false alarm during the alarm user’s one-year alarm registration period (excluding duress, robbery, holdup and panic alarms), and that the alarm user has the right to appeal.

B.      The alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user in writing thirty days beforehand that a police department response to further alarms is to be suspended. The right of appeal under this chapter shall be included with the notice. The notice of suspension shall also include the amount of any fees and/or penalties due and a description of the reinstatement process. (Ord. 2045 § 2, 2020)

 

5.34.130 Alarm registration suspension, fees, penalties, violation to make alarm dispatch request for suspended alarm site and verified response.
A.      The alarm administrator shall notify the police department of each alarm user whose alarm registration qualifies for suspension under this section. The alarm administrator may suspend an alarm registration if it is determined that:

1.       There is a false statement of a material fact in the registration application.

2.       The alarm user has had four or more false burglar alarms within the one-year registration period, except that the alarm administrator may waive a suspension of a registration upon receipt of documented work orders showing reasonable attempts to repair the alarm system prior to the notice of suspension.

3.       The alarm user fails or refuses to pay an alarm registration or alarm registration renewal fee, false alarm penalty, late charge, or any other fee, penalty, or charge assessed under this section.

B.      It is a violation of this section for a person to operate a burglar alarm system during the period in which the alarm registration is suspended. It is a violation of this chapter for a monitoring company to make an alarm dispatch request to a burglar alarm site after the monitoring company’s alarm response manager (ARM) has been notified by electronic mail by the alarm administrator that the registration for that alarm site has been suspended. A grace period of five business days after the ARM’s notification shall be granted the monitoring company to comply.

C.      False Alarm Penalties Under Suspension Status. In addition to the penalties set forth in Section 5.34.110(A), a supplemental penalty is hereby imposed upon any person operating a suspended burglar alarm system. The amount of said penalties shall be established by resolution of the city council.

D.      It shall be the responsibility of the alarm user to notify their respective alarm monitoring company of their suspension status. An alarm user shall be held financially accountable for all false alarm penalties incurred.

E.       Unless there is a separate indication that there is a crime in progress, the police department may or may not dispatch an officer to an alarm site for which an alarm registration is suspended.

F.       Upon an additional suspension for excessive false alarms within twelve months after an alarm user has reinstated their alarm system, the status of the registration shall be that of verified response. Verified response status for burglar alarm requests shall be enforced for twelve months from the official date of notice of suspension. Such affected alarm user may apply for reinstatement after the expiration of the twelve months. (Ord. 2045 § 2, 2020)

 

5.34.140 Appeals of determinations regarding alarm registrations, fees and penalties.
A.      If the alarm administrator assesses a fee or penalty, suspends an alarm registration or denies the issuance, renewal or reinstatement of an alarm registration, the alarm administrator shall send written notice of the action and a statement of the right to appeal to the affected applicant, alarm user, alarm installation company or alarm monitoring company.

B.      The applicant, alarm user, alarm installation company or alarm monitoring company may appeal any action described in subsection A of this section to the police chief (or designee) by setting forth in writing the reasons for the appeal and delivering the appeal to the police chief (or designee) within twenty business days after receipt of notice of the action via certified mail. Failure to deliver the appeal within that time period is a waiver of the right to appeal.

C.      The procedure for an appeal to the police chief (or designee) is as follows:

1.       The applicant, alarm user, alarm installation company or monitoring company may file a written request for appeal by paying an appeal fee and setting forth the reasons for the appeal. The appeal must be entitled “Appeal from Alarm Administrator’s Action.” The appeal fee shall be in an amount established by resolution of the city council and will be returned to the appealing party if the appeal is successful.

2.       The police chief (or designee) shall conduct a hearing on the appeal within thirty days after the police department’s receipt of the request for appeal and appeal fee and shall consider the evidence submitted by the appealing party and the alarm administrator. The police chief (or designee) must base the decision on the preponderance of evidence presented at the hearing and must render a decision within fifteen days after the date of the hearing. The decision shall affirm or reverse the decision or action taken by the alarm administrator.

3.       Filing of an appeal stays any action by the alarm administrator to suspend an alarm registration or require the payment of a fee or penalty until the appeal process has been exhausted. This provision applies only to the action of the alarm administrator that is the subject of the appeal. This provision does not operate as a bar to enforcement action on violations of this section that occur thereafter.

D.      The alarm administrator or the police chief, or their respective designees, may adjust the count of false alarms or assessed penalties based on:

1.       Evidence that a false alarm was caused by action of a communications services provider (i.e., telephone, cellular, cable company);

2.       Evidence that a false alarm was caused by a power outage of more than four hours or severe weather such as a tornado or earthquake;

3.       Evidence that an alarm dispatch request was not a false alarm; or

4.       The occurrence of multiple alarms within a twenty-four-hour period, which may be considered as one false alarm if the alarm user has taken corrective action, unless the false alarms are directly caused by the alarm user.

E.       The alarm administrator may waive all or part of a false alarm penalty due to extenuating circumstances or to encourage corrective action with supervisor approval. (Ord. 2045 § 2, 2020)

 

5.34.150 Reinstatement of suspended alarm registrations.
A.      On the suspension of an alarm registration, a person whose alarm registration has been suspended may obtain reinstatement of the registration by the alarm administrator if the person:

1.       Pays a reinstatement fee as established by resolution of the city council;

2.       Pays, or otherwise resolves, all outstanding fees, penalties, and other charges;

3.       Submits a written notice from an alarm installation company stating that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if necessary) by the alarm installation company;

4.       The alarm user successfully completes an alarm user awareness class and test.

B.      The police department shall reinstate its response to an alarm site as soon as is practicable after receiving notice of reinstatement from the alarm administrator. The alarm user and monitoring company shall take notice that the alarm site has been officially reinstated only after receiving notice from the alarm administrator of that fact. It shall be the responsibility of the alarm user to verify that his, her, or its registration status and future police response have been properly restored. (Ord. 2045 § 2, 2020)

 

5.34.160 Suspension of police response to dispatch requests from certain alarm installation companies and monitoring companies.
A.      The police chief or command staff designee may suspend police response to an alarm dispatch request from an alarm installation company or monitoring company if it is determined that:

1.       There is a violation of this chapter by the alarm installation company or monitoring company and the condition causing the violation has not been corrected; and/or

2.       The alarm installation company or monitoring company has failed to pay any fee, penalty, or other charge assessed under this section, more than sixty days after the fee, penalty, or other charge is due.

B.      The police department may not respond to any alarm dispatch request where the alarm installation company or monitoring company who installed or monitors that alarm has failed to comply with California licensing requirements or failed to maintain a valid copy of the State of California Department of Consumer Affairs alarm company operator’s license.

C.      A suspension of police response made pursuant to this section is subject to the appeal process provided for within this chapter. In addition, the alarm administrator has the ability to accept a workable solution from the affected party prior to an appeal. The affected party has sixty days after the written notice of suspension before police response is suspended to its alarm customers.

D.      The alarm administrator shall notify all known alarm users subscribing to an alarm installation company or an alarm monitoring company that the police department has suspended response to the company’s alarm dispatch requests.

E.       The city shall assess the alarm installation company or monitoring company a reinstatement fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. In addition, if the alarm administrator has incurred costs in notifying alarm users by mail of the suspension of their alarm installation company or monitoring company, reimbursement to the city of those costs shall be a condition of reinstatement. (Ord. 2045 § 2, 2020)

 

5.34.170 Police department response.
A.      Subject to the suspension provisions in Section 5.34.130 and the discretion discussed in Section 5.34.190, the police department at its discretion will respond to all “in progress” robbery, panic or burglar alarms as promptly as possible, taking into account pending calls for service and any policy establishing priority of dispatched calls following notification of the receipt of the alarm from the monitoring company. Police supervisors may, in their discretion, cancel a police response to any or all alarms based on weather or other factors affecting police service needs.

B.      The police chief or designee may re-prioritize assignment of burglar alarms and response time at any time during a twenty-four-hour period as may be necessary due to the service needs of the community. (Ord. 2045 § 2, 2020)

 

5.34.180 Confidentiality of alarm information.
All information contained in documents gathered through alarm registrations, the submission of customer lists, the alarm appeal process and records relating to alarm dispatch requests must be held in confidence by all employees of the alarm administrator, city of Glendora and any third-party alarm administrator. Such information is proprietary and is hereby declared confidential and not a public record. Absent special circumstances, such information must not be released to the public or any person other than a law enforcement agency, third party administrator or the applicable alarm user, alarm installation company or alarm monitoring company except pursuant to court order. Per California Government Code Section 6254(f). (Ord. 2045 § 2, 2020)

 

5.34.190 Scope of police duty—Immunities preserved.
The issuance of alarm registrations does not create a contract between the police department and/or the city of Glendora and any alarm user, alarm installation company or monitoring company, nor does it create a duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, on the part of the police department to respond to any alarm. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure of the police department to respond to an alarm dispatch request is hereby disclaimed to the maximum extent permitted by law and full governmental immunity as provided by law is expressly retained by the police department and the city of Glendora. By applying for an alarm registration, the alarm user acknowledges that the police department response is influenced by the availability of officers, priority of calls, traffic conditions, weather conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels, prior response history and administrative actions. (Ord. 2045 § 2, 2020)

Chapter 5.36 MOBILEHOME PARK RENT STABILIZATION
5.36.010 Purpose and intent.
There is presently within the city of Glendora a shortage of spaces for the location of mobilehomes. Because of this shortage, there is a low vacancy rate and rents have for several years risen rapidly in some mobilehome parks causing concern among a substantial number of city residents. Because of the high cost of moving mobilehomes, the potential damage resulting therefrom, the requirements relating to the installation of mobilehomes, including permits, landscaping and site preparation, the lack of alternative home sites for mobilehome residents and the substantial investment of mobilehome owners in such homes, a virtual monopoly exists in the rental of mobilehome spaces, creating a situation where park owners have unbridled discretion and ability to exploit mobilehome park tenants. For these reasons, among others, the city council finds and declares it necessary to protect the owners of mobilehomes from unreasonable rent increases, while at the same time recognizing the need of park owners to receive a fair return on their property and rental income sufficient to cover increases in the cost of repairs, maintenance, insurance, employee services, additional amenities, and other costs of operation. (Ord. 1642 § 2A, 1995)

 

5.36.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms set forth in this section have the following meanings:

(1)     “Accurate” means correct mathematically on the rent schedule form and any supplement application material.

(2)     “Capital improvement” means any addition or betterment made to a mobilehome park which has a useful life of five or more years, which add to the value of the property and appreciably prolongs its useful life, and which may be amortized in accordance with applicable Internal Revenue Code regulations. “Capital improvement” does not include mere repair or replacement of existing facilities or improvements.

(3)     “City” means the city of Glendora.

(4)     “City council” means the legislative body of the city.

(5)     “City staff” or “staff” means the staff of the city.

(6)     “Complete” means rent schedule forms as required by this chapter are filled out properly.

(7)     “Compliance” means the submittal of rent schedule forms and other requested material, documentation, information and responses to staff questions to comply with this chapter.

(8)     “Consumer Price Index” or “CPI” means the “Cost of Living Index for Urban Consumer of the Los Angeles—Anaheim—Riverside Area” (all items) based on the year 1982 = 100, as published by the United States Department of Labor Bureau of Statistics, as of the twelve-month period ending four months prior to the effective date of the proposed rent increase (e.g., November effective date would be for twelve-month period ending June 30th).

(9)     “Fair return” or “reasonable expense” means that space rent permitted for occupancy of a space or for operation and maintenance costs, or charges for capital improvements or rehabilitation work as determined by the factors set forth in Civil Code Section 1947.15.

(10)   “Gross income” means the sum of the gross space rent plus other income generated as the result of operating a mobilehome park (e.g., laundry facilities, recreational vehicle storage, etc.) plus revenue received from the sale of utility services (e.g., gas, water, electricity, cable TV, refuse, etc.) where such utilities are billed individually to the tenants by the owners.

(11)   “Mobilehome” means a structure with dimensions larger than eight feet by forty feet or size larger than three hundred twenty square feet designed for human habitations, transported over streets and highways to a permanent occupancy site, and installed on the site either with or without a permanent foundation.

(12)   “Mobilehome park” or “park” means a manufactured housing community as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18801 or an area of land in the city of Glendora where five or more mobilehome spaces are rented or leased out for mobilehomes used as residences. Mobilehome park does not include developments which sell lots for mobilehomes or manufactured housing, or which provide condominium, community apartment or stock cooperative ownership, even if any homes in the development are rented or leased out. Mobilehome park includes trailer park.

(13)   “Mobilehome park owner” or “owner” means the owner, lessor, operator or manager of a mobilehome park. Mobilehome park owner includes trailer park owner.

(14)   “Mobilehome park rent mediation committee,” “mediation committee” or “committee” means that group selected from time to time by the affected mobilehome park owners and affected tenants to review rent increases as provided in this chapter. A committee convened for the purposes set forth in this chapter shall be composed of the following membership:

(A)    Two representatives for the owners of the affected mobilehome park, appointed by the owner or the manager of said mobilehome park; and

(B)    Two representatives for the tenants of the affected mobilehome park selected by all of the affected tenants through secret ballot; and

(C)    A mediator selected by a majority of the other four members of the mediation committee;

(D)    The mobilehome park rent review officer or his or her designee who shall not have a vote.

(15)   “Mobilehome park rent review officer” or “officer” means the deputy city manager or such other staff person designated by the city manager from time to time whose duties shall be to receive on behalf of the mobilehome park rent mediation committee all notices filed by an owner or tenant pursuant to this chapter, to set or conduct all hearings required to be held by the mediation committee or him or her pursuant to this chapter, to make all determinations required of him or her by this chapter, to act as staff liaison to the mobilehome park rent mediation committee, to take those other actions or assume those other duties assigned to him or her by the mediation committee and to make all determinations required of the officer by this chapter.

(16)   “Mobilehome tenant” or “tenant” means any person entitled by written or oral agreement or by sufferance to occupy a mobilehome park space to the exclusion of others. Mobilehome tenant includes trailer park tenant.

(17)   “Net operating income” means gross income less operating expenses.

(18)   “Operating expenses” means those costs to operate and maintain a mobilehome park, as defined in the rent schedule forms required by this chapter.

(19)   “Operation and maintenance” means services provided by the mobilehome park owner related to the use or occupancy of a mobilehome park space, including, but not limited to, water and sewer, cable television, natural gas, electricity, refuse removal, management and administration (including employee salaries and fringe benefits), maintenance and repairs, supplies, advertising, recreation facilities, laundry facilities, parking, security services, insurance, property taxes, other governmental assessments, and other costs reasonably attributable to the operation and maintenance of the mobilehome park. The term “operation and maintenance” does not include legal fees related to rent stabilization or tenant relations, costs incurred in proceedings related to this chapter, or mortgage payments, whether for principal or interest, or both.

(20)   “Rehabilitation work” means work done on or in a mobilehome park in order to comply with an order issued by the city, county or other public agency, or to repair damage resulting from fire, earthquake or other natural disaster.

(21)   “Rent schedule forms” means forms, including any accompanying instructions, provided by the city and required by this chapter to be filed by the mobilehome park owner for a proposed rent increase.

(22)   “Space rent” means the consideration, including any bonuses, benefits or gratuities, demanded or received in connection with the use and occupancy of a space in a mobilehome park, or for the services provided, but exclusive of any amount paid by the tenant or tenants for the use of a mobilehome or trailer or utility charges or trash charges which are billed separately whether or not the units are individually metered. “Space rent” does not include (a) reasonable user fees for services actually rendered to some, but not all, of the tenants of the park, (b) any amount paid as a result of committee-approved capital improvement or rehabilitation work, or (c) rent paid for occupancy of a mobilehome owned by a mobilehome park owner.

(23)   “Space” means that portion of a mobilehome park designated for the location of one mobilehome for the purposes of leasing said portion by the owner to a mobilehome tenant.

(24)   “Space transfer charge” means any one-time charge permitted by this chapter at the time that a mobilehome in a mobilehome park or the space occupied by such a mobilehome is vacated voluntarily, or as a result of an eviction action, or a transfer or resale of the mobilehome; provided, however, that a space transfer charge may not be charged when a transfer occurs by reason of the death of a spouse, a transfer between spouses or co-owners, a transfer to a conservator of a person and/or the estate of the tenants, or a settlement agreement reached between spouses upon a dissolution or separation of their marriage.

(25)   “Trailer” means a structure with dimensions of eight feet by forty feet or less, or a size of three hundred twenty square feet or less, designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle and to be used for human habitation or for carrying persons and property, including, but not limited to, a trailer coach or a house trailer. (Ord. 1642 § 2A, 1995)

 

5.36.030 Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:

(1)     Mobilehome park spaces rented for nonresidential uses;

(2)     Mobilehome parks owned, leased, managed or operated by the United States government, the state of California, the county of Los Angeles or the city;

(3)     Mobilehome or trailer parks wherein individual tenancies do not exceed twenty successive days in the same or different locations within the same mobilehome park and which do not contemplate occupancy of more than twenty successive days by any one tenant;

(4)     Mobilehome parks which currently, or may in the future, charge less than three hundred fifty dollars per month for space rent shall be exempt unless the proposed increase exceeds fifteen percent of then current space rent at the time of any proposed increase;

(5)     Tenancies covered by leases or contracts which provide for more than a month-to-month tenancy; provided, however, that such exemption shall be only for the term of any such lease or contract. Upon the expiration or other termination of the term of any such lease or contract, this chapter shall immediately be applicable to the tenancy. This exemption is not intended to preclude the extension or commencement of any lease or contract. Any extension of a lease or contract or commencement of a new lease or contract by and between a park owner and a tenant shall be exempt from this chapter;

(6)     Mobilehome parks or spaces exempt pursuant to Civil Code Section 798.17;

(7)     Rents charged for a mobilehome owned by a mobilehome park owner.

Space rent charged to a tenant or tenants who occupy a space in an area created in an existing mobilehome park by the installation of additional mobilehome rental spaces is not exempted from the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1642 § 2A, 1995)

 

5.36.040 Rent increase—Legality.
(a)     Compliance with Chapter. On and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, it is unlawful for any mobilehome park owner in the city to (1) increase any space rent, and no increase in space rent shall be effective, unless the increase is made in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or (2) fail to comply with any provision of this chapter.

(b)     Effect on Leases. As to any increase in space rent regulated by this chapter, the owner shall indicate which, if any, of the affected mobilehome park spaces are covered by leases or contracts which provide for more than a month-to-month tenancy, together with the expiration date of each such lease or contract. Any space rent increase approved by the mobilehome rent mediation committee or through arbitration pursuant to this chapter shall not be applicable to spaces covered by any such lease or contract during the term of the applicable lease or contract. Upon the expiration of each such lease or contract, the space rent contained in that lease or contract shall remain in effect until the next rent adjustment permitted by this chapter or approved by the mediation committee or through arbitration pursuant to this chapter. This section is not intended to preclude the extension or commencement of any lease or contract which shall be governed by the provisions in Section 5.36.030 (5).

(c)     Space Transfer Charge. Subject to the limitations set forth above in Section 5.36.020 (24), when a tenant moves out of a mobilehome space, transfers ownership to another person or entity, or is evicted from a mobilehome space and such event occurs on or after the effective date of this chapter, the mobilehome park owner may charge the new tenant a one-time space transfer charge which shall not exceed five percent of the annual rent to be charged to the new tenant to whom the space is being transferred. The space transfer charge may not be assessed to a vacating tenant, regardless of the reason for the vacation. (Ord. 1642 § 2A, 1995)

 

5.36.050 Standard space rent increase.
(a)     Basis for Determination. The procedures and fees set forth in Sections 5.36.060 through 5.36.130, inclusive, shall not apply to any proposed standard space rent increase which does not exceed the lesser of seven percent of the total space rent of each affected mobilehome park space or the then current Consumer Price Index (“CPI”), provided that:

(1)     The proposed standard space rent increase shall become effective no sooner than one year from the date the last space rent increase of any kind became effective at the affected mobilehome park.

(2)     Not less than ninety days prior to the effective date of the proposed standard space rent increase, the owner filed with the officer a rent schedule form and supporting documentation together with a copy of the written notice of the proposed increase and proof that he or she served each affected tenant, as required herein, personally or by mail, with the notice. The notice shall state (a) as to the tenant served, the number of the space or identification by which the space for which notice is being given is routinely identified within the mobilehome park, (b) the proposed rent for the space and the effective date thereof, and (c) that a copy of the rent schedule form and supporting documentation is available to any affected tenant free of charge upon request at the owner’s office in the particular mobilehome park. The rent schedule form shall show the existing rent and proposed new maximum rent for each affected space together with the percentage increase and shall include the Consumer Price Index, together with documentation thereof.

(3)     If a space rent increase exceeds the permissible amount as described in subsection (a) of this section, the proposed increase may not be implemented by the mobilehome park owner unless and until approved by the mediation committee or by the arbitrator in accordance with Sections 5.36.060 through 5.36.130, inclusive, as applicable, pursuant to this chapter.

(b)     A standard proposed rent increase shall become effective as of the date specified in the notice to the affected tenants described in subsection (a) of this section; provided that the officer has made a written determination that the proposed standard rent increase does not exceed the permissible amount as described in subsection (a) of this section and meets all other requirements of this section. The officer shall comply with all of the following with respect to his or her determination:

(1)     The determination of the officer shall be served upon the owner, the affected tenants and any other person who has requested notice of such determination, in writing, within ten days of the filing of the rent schedule form required by subsection (a) (3) of this section;

(2)     After notice of the determination of the officer has been given, a hearing de novo for the purpose of reviewing the facts surrounding the officer’s determination shall be held by the mediation committee upon the filing of a written request from either the affected owner or the affected tenant(s) for mediation regarding the determination of the officer, setting forth the grounds for such request and any supporting documentation therefor, within ten days of service of the notice of determination by the officer. Notice of the request shall be served by the requesting affected tenant on the owner of the affected park or by the requesting affected owner on all affected tenants, as the case may be;

(3)     The de novo hearing shall be had on any request filed pursuant to this subsection within thirty days of service of the request after written notice of the date and time of such hearing given by the officer to the requesting party(ies), the owner of the affected park, and any other person who has requested notice of the notice of determination;

(4)     The prior written determination of the officer may be reversed or amended only upon a showing based upon a preponderance of the evidence made by the requesting tenant that the standard rent space increase exceeds the standards set forth in subsection (a) of this section. (Ord. 1642 § 2A, 1995)

 

5.36.060 Rent increase—Determination of allowable operation, maintenance and remainder increases.
(a)     Basis for Determination. A rent increase in excess of that permitted by Section 5.36.050 (a) which is based solely upon increased operation and maintenance costs, whether such costs are separately billed or included as a component of a single space rent charge shall be permitted, after mediation, only as determined pursuant to the following standards:

(1)     The proposed rent increase shall become effective no sooner than one year from the date the last increase became effective at the affected mobilehome park.

(2)     For purposes of determining allowable increases pursuant to this section, the space rent shall be divided into two components as follows:

(A)    The Portion of the Space Rent Attributable to the Cost of Operation and Maintenance. This component shall be increased as necessary to cover documented increases in operation and maintenance; provided, however, that increases in income from other park-related sources shall be deducted from the gross amounts claimed by the owner as increased operation and maintenance costs in determining the amount of the allowable increased costs for maintenance and operation. In the event that a mobilehome park owner converts from a commonly shared meter system for one or more utilities to a meter system for any one or more utilities for each space, or when the owner initiates a segregated charge or a separate trash or utility billing to each space, the owner shall file a written report of such change with the officer on or before the effective date of the proposed charge. The committee shall determine the amount to be deducted from the space rent as a result of such separate charges or billing. Thereafter, such charges or billings shall not be a part of space rent.

(B)    The Remainder of the Space Rent. After deduction from the space rent charge of the component for increased operation and maintenance costs as permitted by this section, the remainder of the space rent charge may be increased by not more than the lesser of the then current Consumer Price Index or seven percent of the then current space rent. Supporting documentation shall be filed to justify the requested increase.

(3)     Calculations of space rent increases for the particular mobilehome park, as provided in this section, shall be based upon the consecutive twelve-month period ending four months prior to the effective date of the proposed increase. In no event, however, shall the operation and maintenance component for any month, or portion thereof, be used in the calculations for more than one space rent increase.

(b)     Procedure for Obtaining Increase.

(1)     Not less than ninety days prior to the effective date of an increase proposed pursuant to this section, the owner shall file with the officer a rent schedule form and supporting documentation together with a copy of the written notice of the proposed increase and proof that he or she served each affected tenant, personally or by mail, with the notice. The notice shall state (a) as to each affected tenant, the number of the space or identification by which the space for which notice is being given is routinely identified within the mobilehome park, (b) the proposed rent for the space and the effective date thereof, and (c) that a copy of the rent schedule form and supporting documentation is available to any affected tenant free of charge upon request at the owner’s office in the affected mobilehome park. The rent schedule form shall show the existing rent and proposed new maximum rent for each affected space together with the percentage increase and shall include the Consumer Price Index, together with documentation thereof.

(2)     The owner shall deposit a minimum of one hundred dollars for the first space and twenty-five dollars for each additional space, as a “fee” to cover the cost of processing each space rent increase proposed pursuant to this section, including, but limited to, staff time, postage and copying. Upon conclusion of the procedures outlined in this subsection, the balance of the deposited fee not required for the processing, if any, shall be refunded to the owner. If additional costs are incurred, the owner shall be billed for, and shall be liable for, payment of such additional costs.

(3)     A mediation committee shall be convened to hear any request made pursuant to this section for increases in space rent or remainder rent of more than the lesser of the then current CPI or seven percent of the then current space rent and complying with the requirements of Section 5.36.060 (a) not later than forty-five days after service upon the officer of the notice required by Section 5.36.060(B)(1). At least ten days prior to the hearing the officer shall give written notice of the time and place at which the hearing will be held to (a) the mobilehome park owner requesting the increase, or his written designee, (b) each affected tenant and (c) to any other person who has requested notice of such hearings in writing. No hearing may be continued for more than twenty days beyond the initial hearing date without the owner’s written consent. If the mediation committee approves the increase as requested, or approves an increase lower than that requested by the owner, the same shall take effect on the date specified by the owner in the notice required by this section or as the mediation committee may otherwise direct in its sole discretion unless arbitration is requested pursuant to Section 5.36.150 of this chapter. In the event that arbitration is requested, the decision of the mediation committee shall be held in abeyance until the arbitrator has reached his or her decision.

(4)     The mediation committee shall make a final decision no later than fifteen days after the conclusion of the de novo hearing. The committee’s decision shall be based upon a preponderance of the evidence submitted at the hearing. The owner and all tenants, as well as any other person requesting written notice, shall be given written notice of the committee’s decision and given a copy of written findings upon which the committee based its decision within three days of the committee’s final decision. The decision of the committee is subject to a request for arbitration.

(5)     The committee may, with respect to:

(A)    The operation and maintenance component, approve all or part, or deny the increase noticed by the owner. Approval of all or part of the increase noticed by the owner shall be based upon a finding that the relevant portion of the rent schedule form, as originally filed by the owner or as amended by the owner, in writing, prior to the close of the hearing, is accurate, complete and in compliance with this chapter. A reduction of the increase requested shall be based on a finding that circumstances, as determined by the committee justify a lesser increase than that noticed by the owner.

(B)    The remainder component, (i) approve the increase noticed by the owner, in whole or in part, based upon a finding that the increase as approved, permits a fair return and sufficient rental income in accordance with the purpose and intent of this chapter, or (ii) deny in total the increase noticed by the owner, based upon a finding that an increase shall not be necessary for the owner to receive a fair return and sufficient rental income in accordance with the purpose and intent of this chapter. (Ord. 1642 § 2A, 1995)

 

5.36.070 Rent Increase—Discretionary.
An owner shall request that a mediation committee be convened when he or she seeks a discretionary space rent increase otherwise not based upon, or allowed by, Section 5.36.050 or 5.36.060 when he or she contends that the facts and circumstances of the particular case warrant such an increase. It is not the intent of this section to require the owner to justify space rent increases previously approved by the committee.

(1)     Basis for Determination.

(A)    In order for a discretionary space rent increase to be approved, in whole or in part, it shall be the responsibility of the owner to provide sufficient supporting documentation to justify a requested increase by demonstrating that, as a result of one or more factors, the space rent increase not otherwise permitted by Section 5.36.050 or 5.36.060 is necessary to permit a fair return and sufficient rental income in accordance with the purpose and intent of this chapter. The owner shall comply with any staff request for additional documentation to permit evaluation of the requested increase.

(B)    No increase in space rent shall be approved because of increased principal, interest or other expenses resulting from:

(i)      The refinancing of the affected mobilehome park;

(ii)     The sale of the mobilehome park, except for changes to property taxes and/or other governmental assessments as a result of the sale;

(iii)   Capital improvements;

(iv)    Rehabilitation work.

(C)    The mediation committee shall, with respect to a discretionary space rent increase noticed by the owner (a) approve the increase, in whole or in part, based upon a finding that the increase, as approved, permits a fair return and sufficient rental income in accordance with the purpose and intent of this chapter, or (b) deny in total the increase, based upon a finding that an increase is not necessary for the owner to receive a fair return and sufficient rental income in accordance with the purpose and intent of this chapter.

(2)     Procedure for Obtaining Discretionary Increase. The procedures set forth in subsections (b) (1) through (4) of Section 5.36.060 of this chapter shall be applicable to discretionary space rent increases, except that the initial deposit fee shall be a minimum of one hundred twenty-five dollars for the first space and thirty-five dollars for each additional space. (Ord. 1642 § 2A, 1995)

 

5.36.080 Amortization of capital improvement and rehabilitation work.
(a)     Basis for Determination.

(1)     An owner shall request that a mediation committee be convened to consider a capital improvement or rehabilitation work amortization schedule within twelve months after completion of the capital improvement or rehabilitation work. It is not the intent of this section to require the owner to justify the capital improvement or rehabilitation work, provided that the capital improvement or rehabilitation work satisfies the definition of either a capital improvement or rehabilitation work as set forth in Section 5.36.020.

(2)     It shall be the responsibility of the owner to provide sufficient documentation to support and demonstrate that the capital improvement or rehabilitation work satisfies the definition of either a capital improvement or rehabilitation work as set forth in Section 5.36.020. The owner shall comply with staff requests for additional documentation to permit evaluation of the requested schedule.

(3)     The amortization schedule shall spread the cost of the capital improvement or rehabilitation work uniformly among all of the mobilehome park spaces in the affected park, including spaces covered by leases or contracts which provide for more than a month-to-month tenancy, unless the owner can demonstrate with supporting documentation that the capital improvement or rehabilitation work does not benefit all of the spaces in the affected park or that the spaces are not all uniformly benefited.

(4)     When the capital improvement or rehabilitation work has been fully amortized, the space charge for said capital improvement or rehabilitation work shall cease.

(b)     Procedure for Review and Approval.

(1)     The procedures set forth in subsection (b)(1) through (4) of Section 5.36.060 of this chapter shall be applicable to the amortization schedule for capital improvement or rehabilitation work, with the following exceptions:

(A)    The owner shall file an amortization schedule in place of a rent schedule form. The amortization schedule shall provide documentation supporting a finding that the capital improvement or rehabilitation work satisfied the definition of a capital improvement or rehabilitation work as set forth in Section 5.36.020 of this chapter, the total cost of the capital improvement or rehabilitation work, and the amortization of such cost to each affected mobilehome park space on a monthly basis;

(B)    The initial deposit for determination of a request pursuant to this section shall be five hundred dollars.

(2)     The committee shall approve a request made pursuant to this section, in whole or in part, based upon the following findings:

(A)    The capital improvement or rehabilitation work satisfied the definition of either a capital improvement or rehabilitation work as set forth in Section 5.36.020 of this chapter;

(B)    The amortization schedule spreads the costs of the capital improvement or rehabilitation work equitably to all of the mobilehome spaces benefited by it, consistent with subsection (a) (3) of this section;

(C)    The financing of the capital improvement or rehabilitation work is at an interest rate that does not exceed the rate generally available to preferred customers for similar projects from lending institutions located in Los Angeles County; and

(D)    The amortization schedule permits the charge of a reasonable expense to the owner in accordance with the purpose and intent of this chapter.

(c)     Effect of Amortization Schedule Approved. No owner shall demand or receive in connection with the use and occupancy of a space in a mobilehome park any consideration, including bonuses, benefits or gratuities, for any capital improvement or rehabilitation work, unless an amortization schedule has been approved by the mediation committee as set forth in this section. The amount a tenant is to pay pursuant to an amortization schedule shall be in addition to, and not part of, the space rent. Such amount shall not be used in calculating any increase in space rent. (Ord. 1642 § 2A, 1995)

 

5.36.090 Authority of committee—Conduct of meetings and hearings.
All meetings and hearings conducted by the mediation committee pursuant to this chapter shall be conducted in accordance with the following:

(1)     Except as authorized by state law, all meetings and hearings shall be open to the public.

(2)     All parties to a hearing may have the assistance of an attorney, or such other person as may be stipulated by the parties in writing, in presenting evidence or in setting forth their position by oral or written argument. All witnesses shall be sworn and all testimony shall be under penalty of perjury under the laws of the state of California.

(3)     In the event that either an owner or an affected tenant or tenants shall fail to appear at the hearing at the time and place specified in notice thereof, the mediation committee may hear and review such evidence as may be presented and make determinations as if all parties had been present.

(4)     All hearings shall be tape recorded and all tapes shall be preserved for two years, or longer if requested, in writing, by any party affected by the hearing.

(5)     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the decision or determination of the mediation committee shall be rendered in writing and shall be final unless the affected owner or affected tenant(s) request arbitration pursuant to Section 5.30.150.

(6)     The mediation process shall in no event take longer than thirty days. If at the end of the thirty-day period, the mediation committee has been unable to reach a decision or the decision of the committee has not been ratified by the owner and sixty-six and two-thirds of the affected tenants, the rent increase shall be deemed denied and either party may seek arbitration as provided in Section 5.36.150 of this chapter.

(7)     A decision reached by the committee shall be submitted in writing to the owner and the affected tenants, with a request to ratify or approve the decision. The decision of the committee shall be final if, within ten working days of written notice of the decision to the owner and the affected tenants, it receives the approval of the park owner and at least sixty-six and two-thirds percent of the affected tenants. The committee shall poll the affected tenants after giving written notice of the decision of the mediation committee, by secret ballot which shall be tallied by the mediation committee or its designee(s). (Ord. 1642 § 2A, 1995)

 

5.36.100 Retroactive increases or refunds.
(a)     Tenant’s Payment of Retroactive Increase. The procedures set forth in this chapter are intended to result in a final decision prior to the effective date of any space rent increase. If mediation committee action does not result in a final decision by the effective date of the proposed increase, the decision shall be retroactive to the date in the notice of the increase provided by the owner to the affected tenant or tenants. If the final decision results in approval of the space rent increase, in whole or in part, the affected tenants shall pay the retroactive amount to the owner within thirty days after the decision or determination of the committee is noticed.

(b)     Owner’s Refund of Payments Collected in Violation of this Chapter. If the mediation committee finds that a space rent increase went into effect in violation of this chapter, or any portion thereof, within thirty days after notice of the decision of the committee, the affected owner shall refund to the affected tenants any amount of the increase which has been collected from them or file a request for arbitration pursuant to Section 5.36.150 of this chapter. (Ord. 1642 § 2A, 1995)

 

5.36.110 Notice of this chapter to new tenants.
Prior to, or at the time of, agreement to rent a mobilehome park space to a new tenant, the owner shall provide the new tenant with a copy of this chapter, as currently in effect. (Ord. 1642 § 2A, 1995)

 

5.36.120 Tenant’s right to refuse to pay rents in violation of this chapter.
A tenant may refuse to pay any increase in space rent which is in violation of this chapter. Such refusal shall be a defense in any action brought to recover possession of a mobilehome park space or to collect the applicable space rent increase. (Ord. 1642 § 2A, 1995)

 

5.36.130 Hardship to tenant.
(a)     Statement From Tenant. Any tenant affected by a proposed space rent increase or payment resulting from an approved amortization schedule (hereinafter, collectively, “the adjustment”) may file a statement of hardship with the mobilehome park owner not less than forty-five days prior to the effective date of the proposed adjustment. The statement shall identify whether all, or a portion, of the proposed adjustment constitutes an unreasonably severe economic hardship on the tenant. The statement shall be accompanied by a copy of the tenant’s two most recent federal tax returns and all other documentation that the tenant believes is relevant to establishing his or her hardship.

(b)     Request for Review From Owner. Within ten days after the hardship statement is filed by the tenant with the owner, the owner shall either notify the tenant in writing that the adjustment shall be reduced by the amount identified in the statement or shall file with the officer a written request to convene the mediation committee.

(c)     Actions to be Taken by the Mediation Committee With Respect to Tenant Hardship. The mediation committee shall meet and confer with the tenant claiming a hardship within fifteen days of the owner’s request to convene the committee and shall take any evidence or comments the tenant wishes the committee to consider. If the owner requests to meet with the committee, the committee shall meet with both the tenant claiming hardship and the owner and the owner may present any comments or evidence which he or she wishes the committee to consider. If the committee determines, pursuant to the requirement of subsection (d) below, that, on balance, the proposed rent adjustment constitutes an unreasonably severe economic hardship on the tenant, it may, by a majority vote, order the adjustment, or any portion thereof, be waived. The decision of the committee shall be final unless either the affected park owner or the affected tenant seeks arbitration pursuant to Section 5.36.150 of this chapter.

(d)     Basis for Committee Determination. Any tenant who establishes to the satisfaction of the committee that his or her household income and monthly housing expense meet the criteria established by the Housing Assistance Payment Program under then-existing provisions of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (Public Law 93-383), as it may be amended from time to time, and the regulations pertaining thereto, as amended from time to time, or any successor program thereto, shall be deemed to be suffering under an unreasonably severe economic hardship. The burden of proof for establishing unreasonably severe economic hardship by any means other than that specified above in this subsection shall be on the affected tenant. (Ord. 1642 § 2A, 1995)

 

5.36.140 Retaliatory eviction.
Notwithstanding Section 5.36.130 of the chapter, in any action brought to recover possession of a mobilehome park space, the court may consider as grounds for denial any violation of any provision of this chapter. Further, the determination that the action was brought in retaliation for the exercise of any rights conferred by this chapter shall be grounds for denial. Any action brought within three months of the determination of a request for a space rent increase pursuant to Sections 5.36.060 through 5.36.080, inclusive, of this chapter, including a determination made as a result of a hearing by the committee pursuant to Section 5.36.050 shall be presumed to be retaliatory. This presumption affects the burden of proof and is rebuttable by the owner. (Ord. 1642 § 2A, 1995)

 

5.36.150 Arbitration.
If a proposed rent increase is denied by the mediation committee or if mediation fails to reach a settlement, the owner or the affected tenant(s) may file with the mediation committee an application for arbitration; provided that the applying party has not filed for arbitration previously in the immediately preceding twelve month period. Arbitration requests and procedures shall be as follows:

(1)     Application. An application for arbitration shall be on a form provided by the mediation committee and shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee of two hundred dollars to cover the cost of the arbitrator. Any funds remaining from the mediation process may be applied to this fee. Half of any arbitration fee paid by an owner shall be charged to the tenants if the arbitration results in a decision favorable to the owner, in the form of a one-time pro rata pass through by the park owner to be paid by the affected tenant(s) within sixty days of the decision or as otherwise agreed between the owner and the affected tenant(s). If arbitration results in a decision favorable to the tenants, the owner shall refund half of the arbitration fee paid by the affected tenants, if any, in the form of a pro rata share applied to the rent of each such tenant within sixty days of the decision of the arbitrator or at such time as the owner and the affected tenant(s) may otherwise agree. Any surplus of the arbitration fee paid shall be returned to the party who paid it, but in no event shall such refund be a part of charges from the owner to the tenant or the tenants to the owner. If the arbitration costs exceed the amount deposited for the arbitration, the applying party shall pay the amount of those costs above the sum already deposited within five days of the close of the hearing.

The application shall specify the address of the mobilehome park, the space numbers for which rent is requested to be increased, the amount of the requested rent increase and the facts supporting the request. The application shall be made under penalty of perjury and supporting documents shall be certified or verified as requested by the arbitrator.

(2)     Selection of the Arbitrator. The applicant shall submit to the mediation committee the names of three arbitrators acceptable to him or her. Those names shall be submitted to the other affected party(ies) who may collectively select one of the three to serve as arbitrator. In the event that the other parties do not collectively agree to any of the names submitted, the arbitrator shall be selected by the mediation committee.

(3)     Notice. Written notice of the request for arbitration shall be given within ten days of the application for same and shall include: the name and address of the arbitrator, the amount of the increase requested in arbitration, a brief summary of the applicant’s justification for seeking arbitration and the increase or relief from the increase, notice that any supporting documents may be inspected at City Hall, notice of the other party’s(ies’) right to submit documents, written statements or photographs relating to the application within fifteen days of the notice, and the name and address to whom the documents should be submitted.

(4)     Records, Receipts or Other Documents Must be Produced as Requested. The applicant shall produce, at the request of the arbitrator, any records, receipts or other documents which the arbitrator may deem necessary.

(5)     Affected Tenants May Provide Documents or Other Evidence Supporting Their Position. The party(ies) affected by the arbitration other than the applicant may provide the arbitrator with any documents or other evidence, given under penalty of perjury and certified or verified as the arbitrator may request, which support their opposition to the rent increase.

(6)     Decision on Completeness of Application. The arbitrator shall determine within fourteen days after the date by which documentation must be supplied to him or her whether the application is complete. If the arbitrator determines that the application is not complete, the arbitrator shall notify the applicant in writing as to what additional information is required.

(7)     Hearing and Hearing Notice. Hearing shall be held by the arbitrator within forty-five days of the date when the application is deemed complete. Notice of the time, date and location of the arbitration hearing shall be given by the mediation committee to the affected tenants and the park owner.

(8)     Hearing Procedures. At the arbitration hearing, the applicant and the affected tenants may offer any testimony that is deemed relevant by the arbitrator to the requested rent increases. The applicant shall produce any records, documents or receipt which the arbitrator deems relevant. The applicant and the affected tenants may offer documents, written declarations, or other written or pictorial evidence for the first time at the hearing only if good cause is shown why such evidence was not filed prior to the hearing. Formal rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time as deemed necessary by the arbitrator. Within fifteen days after the close of the hearing, the arbitrator shall make his or her determination approving or disapproving the rent increase (in whole or in part) for the spaces specified in the application. (Ord. 1642 § 2A, 1995)

 

5.36.160 Civil remedies.
If any owner demands, accepts, receives or retains any payment of space rent in excess of the maximum permitted by this chapter, approved by the committee or through arbitration pursuant to this chapter, the tenant or tenants affected by such violation, individually or by class action, may seek relief in a court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive relief or damages or both. In any such court proceeding, the prevailing party shall be awarded his or her reasonable attorney fees and court costs. In its discretion, and in addition to any other relief granted or damages awarded, the court shall be empowered to grant to each tenant who is a party to the action or suit, civil damages in the sum of not more than three times the total monthly space rent demanded by the owner from each such tenant in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1642 § 2A, 1995)

 

5.36.170 Service of all notices required by this chapter.
All notices required by this chapter shall be mailed by United States mail, postage prepaid, or personally delivered. All such notices shall be deemed served when personally delivered or, if mailed, as of the second day after deposit in the United States mail, postage prepaid. (Ord. 1642 § 2A, 1995)

 

5.36.180 Fees.
Any fees established by this chapter may be changed by a resolution adopted by the city council after hearing. (Ord. 1642 § 2A, 1995)

 

5.36.190 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications, and to that end, the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. (Ord. 1642 § 2A, 1995)

Chapter 5.38 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FRANCHISE
5.38.010 Wireless communication franchise—Metricom, Inc.
The provisions of the franchise agreement between the city of Glendora and Metricom, Inc. are hereby enacted. This franchise shall not become effective until written acceptance thereof is filed by Metricom with the city clerk. By accepting this franchise, Metricom covenants and agrees to perform and be bound by each and all of the terms and conditions imposed by the city’s Municipal Code with this franchise. Such acceptance by Metricom must occur within ninety days of the enactment of this franchise by ordinance or else the franchise is void. (Ord. 1661 § 1, 1997)

Chapter 5.40 GLENDORA VILLAGE BUSINESS DISTRICT
5.40.010 Establishment.
Pursuant to the Parking and Business Improvement Area Law of 1989 (California Streets and Highways Code Sections 36500 et seq.), there is hereby established a business improvement area within the city to be known as the “Glendora Village business district” (the district). The boundaries of the Glendora Village business district are as follows:

 

Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Bennett Avenue (80 feet wide) and the centerline of Vermont Avenue (60 feet wide); then easterly along the centerline of said Bennett Avenue to the centerline of Vista Bonita Avenue (60 feet wide); thence southerly along the centerline of said Vista Bonita Avenue to the centerline of Foothill Boulevard (80 feet wide); thence westerly along the centerline of said Foothill Boulevard to the centerline of Glendora Avenue (100 feet wide); thence southerly 274.55 feet along the centerline of said Glendora Avenue; thence westerly 219.88 feet; thence southerly 119.90 feet, thence westerly to the centerline of said Vermont Avenue; thence northerly along the centerline of said Vermont Avenue ending at the centerline of said Bennett Avenue.

 

Businesses lying within said Glendora Village business district shall be subject to any amendments of the aforementioned Parking and Business Area Law of 1989 which may be enacted after the date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1922 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.020 Purpose.
The purpose and intent of the city council and the businesses lying within the district are as follows:

(a)     To advance and achieve the goals and objectives of the Glendora Village Business District advisory board, as described in Chapter 2.18;

(b)     To ensure that the activities and expenditures of the Glendora Village Business District advisory board, as described in Chapter 2.18, are focused on the general promotion of member businesses and events;

(c)     To diversify and strengthen the mix of businesses located in the district;

(d)     To improve the overall improvement of market conditions in the district;

(e)     The type or types of improvements and activities proposed to be funded by the levy of assessments on businesses in the area include all “improvements” and “activities” permitted under Sections 36510 and 36513 of Streets and Highway Code, specifically: (1) “improvement” means the acquisition, construction, installation, or maintenance of any tangible property with an estimated useful life of five years or more including, but not limited to, parking facilities, benches, trash receptacles, street lighting, decorations, parks, and fountains; (2) “activities” means, but is not limited to, promotion of public events which benefit businesses in the area and which take place on or in public places within the area, furnishing of music in any public place in the area, promotion of tourism within the area and activities which benefit businesses located and operating in the area. Except where funds are otherwise available, an assessment will be levied annually to pay for all improvements and activities within the area. (Ord. 2036 § 5, 2019; Ord. 1922 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.030 Businesses subject to charges and assessments.
All businesses within the district are subject to the charges and assessments imposed by this chapter, which are in addition to the business license tax required by this title. The charges and assessments imposed hereby are in addition to any and all other tax imposed by any other ordinance of the city council. Charities, resident farmers, ministers, employees of licensees, certain manual laborers, persons under court order, students, and veterans, as those terms are defined in Section 5.04.060, shall be exempt from paying the charges and assessments imposed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1922 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.040 Computation of charges and assessments.
Charges and assessments imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth in a resolution adopted by the city council. (Ord. 1922 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.050 Payment of charges and assessments.
(a)     Charges and assessments imposed by this chapter shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of Chapters 5.04 and 5.08 of this code in the same manner and at the same time as annual business license fees.

(b)     The charges and assessments imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city. Any person carrying on any business covered in this chapter without having lawfully paid the charges and assessments to the city shall be liable in an action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of the required charge and assessment. Such charge and assessment shall be due and payable once a year, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, and the person or business so assessed shall pay to the city the amount of the charge and assessment in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and Chapters 5.04 and 5.08. (Ord. 1922 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.060 Refusal to pay charges and assessments.
No person shall fail or refuse to pay any charges and assessments imposed by this chapter, and civil, administrative and criminal penalties and interest provided by the city council shall apply. (Ord. 1922 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.070 Voluntary contribution.
Any business which is exempt from the payment of the charges and assessments imposed by reason of federal, state or local law, or whose place of business is outside of the district, may make a voluntary contribution to the fund established by this chapter for the purposes provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 1922 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.080 Fund.
There is created a special fund designated Glendora Village business district fund, into which all revenues derived from charges, assessments, and contributions under this chapter, less the cost of collection, shall be placed, and such funds shall be used only for the purposes specified in Section 5.40.020. (Ord. 1922 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.090 Expenditures.
Expenditure of district funds recommended by the Business District advisory board, established in Chapter 2.18, must have a direct correlation to the purposes of the district, as stated in this chapter. (Ord. 2036 § 6, 2019; Ord. 1981 § 8, 2014; Ord. 1922 § 1, 2009)

 

5.40.100 Annual reports.
The Business District advisory board, established in Chapter 2.18, shall adopt an annual budget of proposed expenditures no later than thirty days after the beginning of each fiscal year. (Ord. 2036 § 6, 2019)

Title 6 HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 6.04 HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE
Chapter 6.06 POSTING OF COUNTY HEALTH INSPECTION GRADE
Chapter 6.08 SOLID WASTE
Chapter 6.09 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE MANAGEMENT

Chapter 6.04 HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE
Note
*       Editor’s Note: The city has a contract with the County of Los Angeles for health services, contract No. 7192. dated July 1, 1963, which is to remain in force until July 1, 1968, and unless then terminated, shall be renewed without further action of the contract parties from year to year.

 

6.04.010 Adoption of Los Angeles County Health and Safety Code.
The city adopts by reference and enacts into law the Los Angeles County Health and Safety Code, Ordinance No. 7583 as adopted by the board of supervisors for the county on August 25, 1959, and which became effective on September 25, 1959, and as amended to date by the following amending ordinances: 7616, 7674, 8095, 8200, 8284, 8425, 8588, 8614, 9375, 9656, 10075, 10238, 10624, 10728, 2018-0037.” A copy of Title 11, entitled “Health and Safety” of the Los Angeles County Code, has been deposited in the office of the city clerk and shall be at all times maintained by the city clerk for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 2042 § 1, 2019; Ord. 1902 § 2, 2008; Ord. 1247 § 1, 1975; Ord. 1192 § 1, 1973; Ord. 951 § 1, 1964; prior code § 10A)

 

6.04.020 Copies to be filed.
Not less than three copies of the Los Angeles County Health and Safety Code as described above shall be filed in the office of the city clerk, all of which shall be certified as true copies. (Ord. 951 § 2, 1964)

 

6.04.030 Penalty.
A person who violates the provisions of the Los Angeles County Health and Safety Code as adopted by reference is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of five hundred dollars, or imprisonment for six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1247 § 3, 1975; Ord. 1192 § 3, 1973)

Chapter 6.06 POSTING OF COUNTY HEALTH INSPECTION GRADE
6.06.010 Food official inspection report.
“Food official inspection report” means the written notice prepared and issued by the county health officer after conducting an inspection of a food facility to determine compliance with all applicable federal, state and local statutes, orders, ordinances, quarantines, rules, regulations or directives relating to the public health. (Ord. 1738 § 1, 2001)

 

6.06.020 Grading and letter grade card.
(a)     “Grading” means the letter grade issued by the county health officer at the conclusion of the routine inspection of a food establishment. The grade shall be based upon the scoring method set forth in this section resulting from the food official inspection report and shall reflect the food establishment’s degree of compliance with all applicable federal, state and local statutes, orders, ordinances, quarantines, rules, regulations, or directives relating to the public health.

(b)     “Letter grade card” means a card that may be posted by the county health officer at a food establishment upon completion of a routine inspection that indicates the letter grade of the establishment as determined by the county health officer using the scoring method set for forth in this section. For the purposes of this provision, a food establishment shall include a food establishment operating in conjunction with a food processing establishment. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the county health officer from creating and using a letter grade card in combination with an inspection score card. The county health officer, in his or her discretion, shall determine whether to post the letter grade card, the inspection score card, or both.

(c)     The county health officer, in his or her discretion, may immediately close any food establishment, which upon completion of the routine inspection does not achieve a “C” grade as defined herein. Nothing in this provision shall prohibit the county health officer from immediately closing any food establishment if, in his or her discretion, immediate closure is necessary to protect the public health.

(d)     The letter grade shall be based upon the final numerical percentage score set forth in the food official inspection report as follows:

(1)     A grade of “A” shall indicate a final score of ninety percent or higher as determined by the county health officer.

(2)     A grade of “B” shall indicate a final score less than ninety percent but not less than eighty percent as determined by the county health officer.

(3)     A grade of “C” shall indicate a final score less than eighty percent but not less than seventy percent as determined by the county health officer. (Ord. 1738 § 1, 2001)

 

6.06.030 Inspection score card.
(a)     “Inspection score card” means a card that may be posted by the county health officer at a food establishment, upon completion of a routine inspection, that indicates the total numerical percentage score for the establishment as determined by the county health officer and as set forth in the food official inspection report. For the purposes of this provision, a food establishment shall include a food establishment operating in conjunction with a food processing establishment. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the county health officer from creating and using an inspection score card in combination with a letter grade card. The county health officer, in his or her discretion, shall determine whether to post the inspection score card, the letter grade card, or both.

(b)     The county health officer, in his or her discretion, may immediately close any food establishment which, upon completion of the routine inspection, achieves a total numerical percentage score less than seventy percent as set forth in Section 6.06.020. Nothing in this provision shall prohibit the county health officer from immediately closing any food establishment if, in his or her discretion, immediate closure is necessary to protect the public health. (Ord. 1738 § 1, 2001)

 

6.06.040 Notice of closure.
“Notice of closure” means a public notice that may be posted by the county health officer at a food establishment upon suspension or revocation of the establishment’s public health permit and that results in the immediate closure of the establishment and the discontinuance of all operations of the food establishment, by order of the public health officer, because of violations of applicable federal, state and local statutes, orders, ordinances, quarantines, rules, regulations, or directives relating to the public health. (Ord. 1738 § 1, 2001)

 

6.06.050 Routine inspection.
“Routine inspection” means a periodic, unannounced inspection of any business or occupation to determine compliance with all applicable federal, state and local statutes, orders, ordinances, quarantines, rules, regulations, or directives relating to the public health. A routine inspection shall not mean an inspection conducted by the county health officer to determine compliance with a previously issued food official inspection report or any interim inspection conducted to determine compliance with specific regulations or legal requirements. (Ord. 1738 § 1, 2001)

 

6.06.060 Posting requirements—Penalty for noncompliance—Documents available for public review.
(a)     Upon issuance by the county health officer, the health officer shall post at every food establishment the letter grade card, the inspection score card, or both, as determined by the county health officer, so as to be clearly visible to the general public and to patrons entering the establishment. “Clearly visible to the general public and to patrons” shall mean:

(1)     Posted in the front window of the establishment within five feet of the front door;

(2)     Posted in a display case mounted on the outside front wall of the establishment within five feet of the front door; or

(3)     Posted in a location as directed and determined in the discretion of the county health officer to ensure proper notice to the general public and to patrons.

(b)     In the event that a food establishment is operated in the same building or space as a separately licensed or permitted business, or in the event that a food establishment shares a common patron entrance with such a separately licensed or permitted business, or in the event of both, the county health officer shall post the Letter Grade Card, the Inspection Score Card, or both, in the initial patron contact area, or in a location as determined in the discretion of the county health officer.

(c)     The letter grade card and the inspection score card shall not be defaced, marred, camouflaged, hidden or removed. It is unlawful to operate a food establishment unless the letter grade card, the inspection score card, or both, as determined by the county health officer, is or are in place as set forth hereunder. Removal of the letter grade card, the inspection score card, or both, is a violation of this chapter and may result in the suspension or revocation of the public health permit and shall be punishable as specified in Section 6.06.090.

(d)     Every food establishment shall post a legibly lettered sign which displays the following information so as to be clearly visible to the general public and to patrons entering the establishment:

 

“Any public health concerns regarding this establishment should be directed to the County of Los Angeles, Environmental Health office located at: (local office address and telephone number to be provided by the county health officer)”

 

(e)     The food official inspection report upon which the letter grade card, the inspection score card, or both, are based and all subsequent reports issued by the county health officer shall be maintained at the food establishment and shall be available to the general public and to patrons for review upon request. The food establishment shall keep the food official inspection report and all subsequent reports until such time as the county health officer completes the next routine inspection of the establishment and issues a new food official inspection report. (Ord. 1738 § 1, 2001)

 

6.06.070 Letter grade card and inspection score card—Period of validity.
A letter grade card, an inspection score card, or both, shall remain valid until the county health officer completes the next routine inspection of the food establishment. (Ord. 1738 § 1, 2001)

 

6.06.080 Public health permit suspension or revocation—Notice of closure.
(a)     Upon issuance of a written notice of suspension or revocation of the public health officer shall post a notice of closure at the food establishment so as to be clearly visible to the general public and to patrons.

(b)     Upon issuance of the written notice of suspension or revocation of the public health permit by the county health officer, the food establishment shall immediately close to the general public and to patrons and shall discontinue all operations until the public health permit has been reissued or reinstated by order of the county health officer or until the establishment no longer operates as a food establishment.

(c)     The notice of closure shall remain posted until removed by the county health officer. Removal of the notice of closure by any person other than the county health officer or the refusal of a food establishment to close upon issuance of the written notice of suspension of the public health permit is a violation of this chapter and may result in the suspension or revocation of the food establishment’s public health permit and shall be punishable as specified in Section 6.06.090. (Ord. 1738 § 1, 2001)

 

6.06.090 Penalty for violation.
Every violation of this chapter which is prosecuted shall be prosecuted as a misdemeanor/infraction in accordance with Section 1.01.110 of this code. (Ord. 1738 § 1, 2001)

 

6.06.100 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 1738 § 1, 2001)

Chapter 6.08 SOLID WASTE
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ords. 1627 and 1597.

 

6.08.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this chapter. Words and phrases not ascribed a meaning by this chapter shall have the meaning ascribed by Division 30, Part 1, Chapter 2 of the Public Resources Code, Section 40105 et seq., and the regulations of the California Integrated Waste Management Board, if defined therein, and if not, to the definitions found in the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (“RCRA”), 42 USC Section 6901 et seq., and the regulations implementing RCRA, as they may be amended from time to time.

“AB 939.” See definition of Act.

“Act” means the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, codified in part at Public Resources Code Section 40000 et seq., (and sometimes referred to as “AB 939”) as it may be amended from time to time.

“Bin” means a solid waste receptacle typically having a nominal capacity of at least one and a half cubic yards but not more than three cubic yards and a total weight, inclusive of contents, of not more than one hundred pounds per cubic yard.

“Bulky waste or bulky goods” means large items of solid waste such as appliances, furniture, large auto parts, and trees, branches and stumps up to a maximum two feet in diameter and four feet in length and weighing not more than fifty pounds each, which a collector has agreed to collect.

“Bundles” means trees, shrub and brush trimmings (except yucca, cactus or palm fronds) which are securely tied together forming an easily handled package not exceeding four feet in length or fifty pounds in weight and tied with a compostable material.

“City” means the city of Glendora, County of Los Angeles, State of California, a Municipal corporation and all of the territory lying within the Municipal boundaries of the city as presently existing and all geographic areas which may be added or annexed to the city.

“City manager” means an individual having that title in the employ of the city of Glendora or the city manager’s duly authorized representative.

“Civic litter container” means a container authorized by the city and placed in the public rights-of-way, at Municipal facilities or in public parks.

“Collection” means the act of collecting solid waste or construction and demolition waste at or near the place of generation or accumulation by a collector who has made arrangements with the generator for the collection of solid waste or construction and demolition waste on days designated by the collector.

“Collector” means a person, persons, local agency, firm, corporation or other entity franchised, permitted, licensed or otherwise authorized by the city council by resolution in writing naming the entity (in addition to a business license), to make arrangements with solid waste service recipients for the collection of solid wastes or construction and demolition waste within the city.

“Commercial bin” means a bin provided by a collector, usually three cubic yards, more or less, in capacity, designed for the deposit of solid waste, placed by a collector at commercial premises for the collection of commercial solid waste and charged at commercial rates. “Commercial bins” do not include construction and demolition bins, roll-offs or low-boys placed at specific locations for specific purposes within the city.

“Commercial premises” means all premises in the city, other than residential premises, where commercial solid wastes are generated or accumulated. The term “commercial premises” is a reference to location and not to ownership. The term “commercial premises” does not include residences using solid waste containers provided by single-family residential service recipients or solid waste containers delivered to single- or multi-family residential service recipients by a collector.

“Commercial solid waste” means all types of solid waste, including green waste and recyclable solid waste, generated or accumulated at stores, offices and other commercial premises and placed in commercial bins for accumulation and collection. “Commercial solid waste” does not include residential solid waste or recyclable material.

“Compost” means humus rich topsoil which is used to improve soil fertility and reduce moisture loss from the soil. “Composting” means methods of enhancing the natural process of decomposition and recycling of organic material into a humus-rich material known as “compost” by using special techniques and equipment including compost bins or compost piles. Proper composting techniques include ensuring plenty of oxygen is incorporated into the material to avoid bad odors.

“Compost bin” means either a constructed or purchased receptacle or enclosure used for composting. It should be maintained in a manner that does not detract from the surrounding properties and is free of bad odors.

“Compost material” means all green waste or yard waste and other organic matter including herbivorous animal manures and vegetable kitchen scraps. It does not include any meat or meat by-products or carnivorous animal wastes.

“Compost pile” means a constructed pile of compost material which is in the process of composting or is a pile of finished compost ready for spreading. A compost pile should not be more than four feet high, five feet wide and eight feet long. It should be maintained in a manner that does not detract from the surrounding properties, be free of bad odors and be covered with a layer of straw, leaves or tarp material. Disorderly piles of random sized dead vegetation, other organic matter and naturally accumulated vegetation are not to be considered compost piles.

“Construction and demolition waste” means a type of solid waste generated from activities related to public and private development and maintenance processes including, but not limited to: scrap and discarded wood, glass, metal, drywall, other fiber material, concrete, asphalt, gravel, and dirt excluding all hazardous substances.

“Container” means any commercial bin, residential solid waste container, vessel, can or other receptacle used for the temporary accumulation, collection and removal of solid waste, including recyclable solid wastes or green waste.

“Franchise agreement” means the right and privilege: (1) to make arrangements for the collection of and to collect some identified portion of the solid waste stream generated or accumulated within the city; (2) to transport to landfills, transformation facilities or other licensed solid waste management facilities; and/or (3) to recycle solid waste collected within the city. Any franchise shall be in writing, granted by the city council by resolution, specifically identifying the solid waste enterprise and is subject to all of the provisions and to any rights held by any other solid waste enterprise which may hold rights pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 49520.

“Franchise fee” means the fee or assessment imposed by the city, as may be established from time to time by council resolution, on a collector.

“Gardener” means any person with a city business license and a gardener’s self-haul disposal permit for gardening and landscaping maintenance services for hire.

“Generator” means any person or other entity which produces solid waste.

“Green waste” (also sometimes referred to as “compost material” or “yard waste”) means a form of solid waste composed of leaves, grass clippings, brush, branches and other forms of organic matter generated from landscapes and gardens, which are separated from other forms of solid waste. “Green waste” includes Christmas trees and Hanukkah bushes but does not include stumps or branches greater than four inches in diameter or four feet in length (see definition of “bulky waste” or “bulky goods”). Green waste does not include dirt, palm fronds, yucca or cactus.

“Hazardous waste” means any waste materials or mixture of wastes defined as a “hazardous substance” or “hazardous waste” pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act “RCRA”), 42 USC Section 6901 et seq., the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act “CERCLA”), 42 USC Section 9601 et seq., and all future amendments to either of them or as defined by the California Integrated Waste Management Board. Where there is a conflict in the definitions employed by two or more agencies having jurisdiction over hazardous or solid waste, the term “hazardous waste” shall be construed to have the broader, more encompassing definition.

“Humus” means dark, earthy material consisting of decomposed vegetation.

“Materials recovery facility or MRF” means a fully permitted facility where solid wastes, recyclable solid wastes, recyclable material and green wastes may be processed, sorted, prepared for resale or collected for transfer to another facility or landfill.

“Mulch” means any shredded vegetation, bark, wood chips, partially composted material, gravels or stones which are used in decorative and functional ways to cover soil and to provide pathways thereby preventing weed growth and retaining soil moisture. Disorderly piles of random sized dead vegetation are not to be considered “mulch.”

“Nonresidential property” means all properties which are not residential properties within the city including, but not limited to, retail, office, other commercial, industrial and institutional properties. “Nonresidential property” is a reference to location and not to ownership or to an interest in property.

“Organic solid waste” means all biodegradable or compostable solid waste material including paper, wood, animal or vegetable matter, other food wastes, manures, and green waste.

“Recyclable material” means a material which has commercial value and which is sold for compensation or donated to an entity other than a solid waste collector or enterprise. “Recyclable materials” are not part of the waste stream. “Recyclable materials” lose their character as “recyclable materials” upon being disposed of in the waste stream and become solid waste subject to this chapter.

“Recyclable solid waste” means a part of the solid waste stream which can be reused or processed into a form suitable for reuse through reprocessing or remanufacture, consistent with the requirements of the California Integrated Waste Management Act and has been designated as a recyclable solid waste by the city, the California Integrated Waste Management Board, or other agency with jurisdiction, and which has been separated by a service recipient from nonrecyclable solid waste.

“Resident” means any person residing within the city.

“Residential” or “residential premises” means single-family residential uses and multi-family residential uses, including apartments and condominiums (in which each unit has separate cooking and bathing facilities). “Residential” or “residential premises” is a reference to location and not to ownership or to an interest in property.

“Residential solid waste” means solid waste, also including recyclable solid waste and green waste, which is generated or accumulated at residential premises.

“Residential solid waste container” means a container (a trash can, barrel or cart) provided by a service recipient or a collector for the accumulation, temporary storage and collection of single-family residential solid waste. The term “residential solid waste container” does not include bins provided by a collector to residential service recipients who select that type of service, “multi-family residential bins” nor those commercial bins used by commercial solid waste service recipients. Unless automated collection is used, a residential solid waste container and its contents may not exceed a total weight of fifty pounds when placed for collection.

“Reverse vending machine” means a vending machine which accepts designated types of glass, plastic or metal containers for recycling and pays the depositor for the containers deposited for recycling.

“Roll-off” means a large bin, usually of a twenty to forty yard capacity, which is delivered to a site for a defined, nonrecurring temporary period of time for the collection of solid waste, green waste, recyclable solid waste, recyclable materials or construction and demolition waste.

“Self-hauler” means any resident or gardener within the city who obtains a self-haul permit to transport only that solid waste including recyclable solid waste, bulky goods and green waste generated at the premises identified on the permit to fully permitted landfills or fully permitted recyclable materials or recyclable solid waste processing facilities or composting facilities. A “residential self-hauler” refers to a resident. A “commercial self-hauler” refers to the person or persons responsible for the day-to-day operation of a commercial premises within the city.

“Service recipient” means the person or persons in charge of the day-to-day operation of each premises within the city of Glendora at which solid waste is accumulated or generated.

“Single-family residential” includes residences at which residential solid waste containers (i.e., trash cans, barrels, bins or automated containers), but not commercial bins are located and used for the collection and temporary accumulation of solid waste.

“Solid waste” means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes, and other discarded solid and semisolid wastes. Solid waste does not include hazardous waste or medical waste. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.020 Collection services—By collectors.
The city council may authorize one or more collectors to make arrangements with service recipients for the collection, transfer, recycling, composting and disposal of solid wastes within and throughout the city. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.030 Collection arrangements—Manner, time and frequency.
Collectors who arrange for the collection of solid wastes shall make arrangements with service recipients specifying the manner in which integrated waste management services are provided, subject to the city’s duty to protect public health, safety and well-being and to limit sources of noise and air pollution within the city by prohibiting the collection of solid wastes between six p.m. and six a.m. and on designated legal holidays. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.040 Collection arrangements required.
Each service recipient shall make arrangements with a collector for the collection of solid wastes, as set forth in this chapter, or shall obtain a self-haul permit from the city, as provided in Section 6.08.240 of this chapter, and shall implement measures to reach the diversion and other goals mandated by the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, as it may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.050 Collection categories.
In order to carry out its duties to plan for the management of vehicular traffic, mitigate adverse air quality effects, and to design programs to reduce waste in compliance with AB 939, the city council may determine waste management collection categories, including, but not limited to, e.g., residential, single-family residential, multi-family residential, commercial, industrial, self-haul, special event, household hazardous waste, recyclable solid waste, and green waste and may make or impose franchise, license, contract or permit requirements which vary for such categories. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.060 Solid waste fees, franchises, permits and licenses.
(a)     Pursuant to Division 30, Part 3, Chapter 8 of the Public Resources Code, Section 41900 et seq., the city may levy fees upon solid waste collectors and solid waste service recipients for planning and program development and administration regarding solid and household hazardous waste, recyclable solid wastes and/or green waste planning and for access to collection services for collection service, inspection, auditing, transfer and disposal and the planning for and response to releases and spills of solid wastes which have the characteristics of hazardous substances. Such fees may include charges for the use of disposal facilities and may include costs of preparing and implementing source reduction and recycling elements, household hazardous waste elements and integrated waste management plans. The city may collect all or part of such charges by such means as the council may elect.

(b)     The city council, by resolution, may waive permit fees, i.e., self-haul permit or business license fees, for not-for-profit recycling agents and collectors of green wastes.

(c)     Solid waste service fees shall be paid in compliance with this code.

(d)     No collector may require advance payments for service. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.070 Residential solid waste collection, franchise agreements, permits and licenses—Minimum standards.
(a)     The city council may award one or more franchise agreements, permits, licenses or other form of authorization (collectively “franchise”) for the collection of solid wastes, including recyclable solid wastes and/or green waste from all or a portion of residential premises in the city. Any such franchise shall be granted in writing by the city council, by resolution, upon a determination that the public health, safety and well-being so require.

(b)     The franchise shall be granted by resolution on such terms and conditions as the city council shall establish in its sole discretion as matters of local concern. At a minimum, franchises shall be in writing, naming the franchisee and shall provide that:

(1)     The franchisee, permittee, licensee or entity with another form of authorization (collectively “franchisee”) shall comply with the provisions of this chapter; and

(2)     The franchisee shall protect, defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from liability, including specifically liability under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (“RCRA”) 42 USC Section 6901 et seq., and the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, (“CERCLA”) 42 USC Section 9601 et seq., as they may be amended from time to time and all regulations implementing these acts, on terms satisfactory to the city; and

(3)     The franchisee shall be required to cooperate with the city in solid waste disposal characterization studies or other waste stream audits and to submit information required by the city on a monthly basis to meet the reporting requirements of AB 939 and to implement measures consistent with the city’s source reduction and recycling element in order for the city to reach the diversion and other goals mandated by the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, as it may be amended from time to time, to the extent authorized by law.

(c)     To protect public health, safety and well-being, any solid waste enterprise which asserts that it is entitled to collect residential solid waste pursuant to continuation rights (Public Resources Code Section 49520 et seq.), the dormant Commerce Clause, the Interstate Commerce Act, or other law, shall comply with all standards required of solid waste enterprises which have been awarded a solid waste franchise by the city. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.080 Commercial solid waste collection franchise agreements, permits and licenses—Minimum standards.
(a)     The city council may award one or more franchise agreements, permits, licenses or other form of authorization (collectively “franchise”) for the collection of solid wastes, including recyclable solid wastes, and/or green waste, from commercial premises in the city. Any such franchise shall be granted in writing by the city council, by resolution, upon a determination that the public health, safety and well-being so require.

(b)     The franchise shall be granted by resolution on such terms and conditions as the city council shall establish in its sole discretion as matters of local concern. At a minimum, franchises shall be in writing, naming the franchisee and shall provide that:

(1)     The franchisee, permittee, licensee or entity with another form of authorization (collectively “franchisee”) shall comply with the provisions of this chapter; and

(2)     The franchisee shall protect, defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from liability, including specifically liability under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (“RCRA”) 42 USC Section 6901 et seq., and the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, (“CERCLA”) 42 USC Section 9601 et seq., as they may be amended from time to time and all regulations implementing these acts, on terms satisfactory to the city; and

(3)     The franchisee shall be required to cooperate with the city in solid waste disposal characterization studies or other waste stream audits and to submit information required by the city on a monthly basis to meet the reporting requirements of AB 939 and to implement measures consistent with the city’s source reduction and recycling element in order for the city to reach the diversion and other goals mandated by the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, as it may be amended from time to time, to the extent authorized by law.

(c)     To protect public health, safety and well-being, any solid waste enterprise which asserts that it is entitled to collect commercial solid waste pursuant to continuation rights (Public Resources Code Section 49520 et seq.), the dormant Commerce Clause, the Interstate Commerce Act, or other law, shall comply with all standards required of solid waste enterprises which have been awarded a solid waste franchise by the city. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.090 Licensing.
(a)     Except as may be provided otherwise in a franchise granted by the city council, each collector shall possess a current city business license in addition to a franchise, permit, license or other form of authorization. (A solid waste business license is evidence only of payment of business license fees, not of the independent authorization from the city council to provide solid waste services in the city.) No person shall collect solid waste in the city without both a business license and a franchise, permit, license or other form of authorization granted in writing, naming the solid waste enterprise, granted by the city council, by resolution.

(b)     Except as may be provided otherwise in a franchise granted by the city council, in addition to a city business license, each collector shall possess a current city-issued solid waste collector’s franchise agreement. Each collector shall comply with all requirements set forth in the collector’s franchise agreement and this chapter. These requirements include, but are not limited to: payment of the annual city business license and collector’s fees, adherence to a schedule of maximum fees to be charged to service recipients for specific services (as may be adopted by the city council), and any other requirements that the city council may impose. All city requirements shall be established or modified by city council ordinance or resolution. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.100 Solid waste facilities.
No person shall construct or operate a solid waste management facility including, but not limited to, a materials recovery facility, solid waste transfer or processing station, composting facility, a buy-back or drop-off center, disposal facility or a recycling center without first satisfying all federal, state, county and city requirements for land use, environmental and other approvals. Reverse vending machines are exempt from this section. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.110 Solid waste collection fees—Liability for.
(a)     Each service recipient required by this chapter to arrange for solid waste collection shall be liable for the fees and charges for such collection.

(b)     Solid waste fees and charges (plus any interest or penalties) shall be due and payable on the date stated on the bill. The service recipient of each premises in the city at which solid waste subject to this chapter is generated or accumulated shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of all charges (plus any interest or penalties) for solid waste services, including any recycling.

(c)     If solid waste and recycling service fees and charges (and any applicable interest or penalties) are not paid, solid waste shall be continued but collection of the unpaid amount may be undertaken by any lawful means.

(d)     Upon written notice from the service recipient to discontinue solid waste collection services, there shall be refunded any unused deposits or fees. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.120 Containers—Responsibility of service recipients and self-haulers for use of.
(a)     Each service recipient and each self-hauler shall keep in a suitable place, as described in Section 6.08.130 of this chapter, one or more containers capable of holding without spilling, leaking, or emitting odors, all solid waste, including recyclable solid wastes and green waste which would ordinarily accumulate on the premises during a period of one week.

(b)     Each service recipient and each self-hauler who is in charge of any premises within the city shall deposit or cause to be deposited in containers or commercial bins all solid waste generated or accumulated on those premises. Green waste and recyclable solid waste which is source-separated before being set out for collection shall be placed in containers designated for green waste or recyclable solid waste, as appropriate. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.130 Containers—Placement and removal—Compost bin placement.
(a)     No person shall place a residential solid waste container adjacent to a street or public right-of-way for collection if the residential solid waste container and its contents weigh more than fifty pounds, unless mechanized collection is used.

(b)     To minimize interference with public rights-of-way, no person shall place a residential solid waste container or any bulky goods adjacent to a street or public right-of-way, for collection service before three p.m. on the day preceding the regularly scheduled collection day. Bulky goods may not be set out for collection unless the service recipient has made prior arrangements with the collector for pickup of the bulky goods.

(c)     During the hours for collection, residential solid waste containers shall be placed at the location designated by the collector and shall be accessible for mechanized pickup, if mechanized pickup methods are utilized by the collector. Bins shall be accessible to the collector. Except during the time a residential solid waste container is placed for curbside collection, residential solid waste containers shall not be visible from the public right-of-way.

(d)     Residential solid waste containers shall be removed by the service recipient from any location adjacent to a street or right-of-way not later than eight a.m. on the day following the regularly scheduled collection day.

(e)     No person may store any container in any place visible from a public right-of-way.

(f)      A collector who has been notified by a commercial solid waste service recipient or the city that commercial solid waste service is to be discontinued shall remove all of its bins from the premises of the service recipient at which service is discontinued within one week following receipt of notification.

(g)     To minimize interference with public rights-of-way, green waste shall be placed adjacent to a street or public right-of-way for collection in containers designated for the accumulation and collection of green waste. Branches shall be cut into pieces not to exceed four feet in length and four inches in diameter, and tied securely in bundles not exceeding fifty pounds and placed adjacent to a street or public right-of-way for collection. Green waste shall not be contaminated with other forms of solid waste or with hazardous substances. No person shall mix green waste with other forms of solid waste nor shall any person contaminate green waste with any other substance.

(h)     Compost bins and compost piles shall be placed in back yards out of view from the street or public right-of-way and must be maintained in ways that do not have a negative impact on adjacent neighbors. Compost bins and compost piles shall be maintained in neat, clean condition with no unpleasant odors. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.140 Solid waste—Arrangements for collection and removal.
(a)     Each service recipient shall make arrangements to have all solid waste (other than construction and demolition waste) generated or accumulated on the premises for which the service recipient is responsible collected and removed not less frequently than once a week. Subject to the foregoing requirements, collections shall be made by arrangement between the service recipient of commercial premises and multi-family residential premises and the collector.

(b)     Each self-hauler shall remove all solid waste (other than construction and demolition waste) on the premises for which the self-hauler is responsible collected and removed not less frequently than once a week.

(c)     Each collector shall collect the contents of each commercial bin (except construction and demolition roll-offs) placed, located or maintained in the city by that collector not less frequently than once a week, and more frequently if requested by the service recipient.

(d)     Subject to the requirements for minimum removals per week set forth above, service recipients may specify the frequency of collection of solid waste from the premises and the size and number of commercial or multi-family residential bins required.

(e)     In order to protect residents’ quiet enjoyment of their residential premises, no collector shall make collections from residential premises, including single-family and multi-family, between the hours of six p.m. and six a.m. on any day. No collector shall make collections from commercial premises between the hours of six p.m. and six a.m. on any day.

(f)      Collectors shall design their routes and times for collection in a manner which minimizes air pollution, traffic, noise and wear and tear on public and private streets and other problems with the potential to adversely affect public health, safety, or the environment and in a manner consistent with the city’s traffic demand management plan. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.150 Special collections.
Solid waste service recipients may order, and collectors shall provide, special collections of such things as bulky goods, and drop-off of roll-off bins, at rates not to exceed the rate ceilings set by the city. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.160 Collection equipment.
(a)     Any truck used for the collection or transportation of solid waste within the city shall be leakproof and equipped with a close-fitting cover which shall be affixed in a manner that will prevent spilling, dropping or blowing of any waste upon the public right-of-way during collection or transportation.

(b)     Each collector shall maintain its commercial bins within the city in a manner to protect public health and safety and prevent the spread of vector. Each collector shall maintain its commercial bins in the city free from those exterior paint or markings commonly referred to as “graffiti” or “tagging”. Each collector shall maintain its commercial bins with reflectors at each upper corner of the bin to ensure nighttime visibility.

(c)     Each collector shall post each commercial bin with conspicuous notices on each side of the commercial bin that the commercial bin is not to be used for the disposal of hazardous waste.

(d)     No person shall park, or cause to be parked within the city any vehicle containing solid waste unless the vehicle is free from odor and in a sanitary condition. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.170 Residential self-haulers, commercial self-haulers and gardeners—Disposal at authorized sites—Reporting requirements—Permits for self-haulers.
(a)     Residential self-haulers, commercial self-haulers and gardeners shall transport for disposal and dispose of solid waste, including green waste, only at lawfully permitted (or permit-exempt) solid waste facilities, recyclable solid waste facilities or composting facilities. Self-haulers or gardeners shall transport solid waste only in vehicles owned or leased by the self-hauler or gardener.

(b)     Before transporting solid waste, including recyclable solid wastes or green waste, each residential self-hauler shall obtain a residential self-haul permit from the city for a monthly fee as determined by resolution of the city council. Each self-hauler shall report to the city each month, the type, quantity, volume, weight and destination of solid waste, including green waste and recyclable solid wastes, collected in the city and transported from the city, and shall furnish the city with originals of weight tickets or gate receipts (at least four each month) from permitted (or permit-exempt) solid waste disposal facilities or green waste or composting facilities.

(c)     Before transporting solid waste, including recyclable solid wastes or green waste, each commercial self-hauler shall obtain a commercial self-haul permit from the city for a monthly fee as determined by resolution of the city council. Each commercial self-hauler shall report to the city each month, the type, quantity, volume, weight and destination of solid waste, including green waste and recyclable solid wastes, collected in the city and transported from the city, and shall furnish the city with originals of weight tickets or gate receipts from permitted (or permit-exempt) solid waste disposal facilities or green waste or composting facilities.

(d)     Before collecting and transporting green waste, each gardener shall obtain a gardeners’ self-haul permit in addition to the business license required under Section 5.04.040 of this code. There will be a fee as determined by resolution of the city council for this permit. In addition, each gardener shall report to the city quarterly on the quantities of green waste disposed and include original weight tickets or gate receipts from authorized solid waste facilities accepting green waste as alternative daily cover or composting facilities. Green waste shall not be disposed of as solid waste. No gardener may haul any solid waste except green waste. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.180 Recyclable solid waste placed for collection—Ownership—Hauler as transporter—Diversion requirements.
(a)     Upon placement of recyclable solid waste or green waste at a designated recycling collection location, or placement of recyclable solid waste or green waste in a container provided for collection, the recyclable solid wastes or green waste becomes the property of the collector, by operation of State Law Public Resources Code Section 41950(c).

(b)     The recycling or disposal of any recyclable solid waste which has become part of the solid waste stream by having been discarded shall be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

(c)     The city has the authority under the act and other laws to require any collector to use waste diversion methodologies and strategies to divert recyclable solid waste from landfills. These waste diversion methodologies or strategies may include, but are not limited to, requiring the collector to transfer recyclable solid waste, organic solid waste, and/or green waste to facilities at which diversion credit is granted. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.190 Recyclable material.
(a)     Except as provided below, nothing in this chapter shall limit the right of any person, organization, or other entity to sell recyclable material owned by that person, organization or other entity or to donate recyclable material to a charity or any other entity other than a solid waste enterprise or collector.

(b)     Recyclable material which is mixed with solid waste shall be considered to have been discarded and to have become recyclable solid waste.

(c)     If the seller or donor of recyclable material pays the buyer or the donee any consideration for collecting, processing, recycling, transporting or disposing of the recyclable material, or providing consultation services which exceed the selling price of the recyclable material, the transaction shall not be regarded as a sale or donation of recyclable material, but as an arrangement for the disposal of solid waste and shall be subject to this chapter.

(d)     A person who receives a discount or reduction in the collection, disposal and/or recycling service rates, for unsegregated or segregated solid waste shall not be deemed to be selling or donating recyclable material and does not fall within this “donate or sell” exception. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.200 Cleanup responsibility.
(a)     Until solid waste or green waste has been picked up by a collector, or self-hauled, the service recipient or self-hauler shall cleanup any and all solid waste or green waste spilled in any manner at the premises of which the person is in charge. This cleanup responsibility remains the sole responsibility of the service recipient or self-hauler notwithstanding human or animal interference, wind or other natural forces. For purposes of this section, the term “disposed into the environment” shall include, but is not limited to, the abandonment of or discarding of barrels, containers and other closed receptacles of solid or liquid waste of any kind whatsoever.

(b)     Each collector shall clean up immediately any solid waste spilled or otherwise released or discharged into the environment during the process of collection, removal or transfer. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.210 Accumulations of solid waste prohibited.
No person shall accumulate solid waste for more than seven consecutive calendar days; nor shall any person keep upon any premises in the city any solid waste which is offensive, obnoxious or unsanitary. Each of the foregoing is unlawful, constitutes a public nuisance and may be abated in the manner now or hereafter provided by law for the abatement of nuisances. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.220 Prohibitions regarding solid waste containers.
No person other than the service recipient or a collector authorized by the service recipient shall move any solid waste container or commercial bin from the location where the container has been placed for storage or collection. Nor shall any person other than the service recipient, or agent or employee of the service recipient, or a collector authorized by the service recipient, remove any solid waste from any container or commercial bin except pursuant to a waste stream audit or waste characterization study authorized by the city. Nor shall any person other than the service recipient, or an agent or employee of the service recipient, or a collector authorized by the service recipient, apply any paint or markings to any solid waste container or commercial bin without the prior written approval of the owner of the container or commercial bin. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.230 Prohibited use of civic litter container for residential, institutional, commercial, industrial or hazardous solid waste.
No person shall place or deposit residential, institutional, commercial, or industrial solid waste or hazardous waste in any civic litter container. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.240 Prohibited solid waste burning.
No person shall burn any solid waste within the city, except in an approved, permitted incinerator or transformation facility or other device which complies with all state, county, district and city codes and regulations including air pollution control authorities and provided any such act of burning in all respects complies with all other laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.250 Prohibited collection of solid waste without license.
No person shall collect any solid waste from any commercial premises or residential premises within the city without a city business license and a franchise and shall comply with Section 6.08.090 of this chapter. Self-haulers and gardeners must obtain self-haul permits from the city and comply with Section 6.08.170 of this chapter. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.260 Prohibited public nuisance.
It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to occupy, inhabit, maintain, or to be in day-to-day control of any premises within the city for which arrangements have not been made for regular collection and removal services for solid wastes, including recyclable solid wastes or green waste. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.270 Prohibited unauthorized disposal.
No person shall place solid waste or green waste in, or otherwise use the solid waste, recyclable solid waste, or green waste containers of another. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.280 Prohibited unauthorized removal of recyclable solid wastes.
The unauthorized removal of recyclable solid wastes and recyclable materials placed at designated recycling collection locations is prohibited by California Public Resources Code Sections 41950 through 51. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.290 Prohibited solid waste spills and releases.
No person transporting solid waste, including recyclable solid wastes or green waste within the city shall fail to clean up immediately, or arrange for the immediate cleanup, of any solid waste released, spilled or dumped into the environment during removal or transport within the city by such person. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.300 Prohibited unlawful dumping.
No person shall dump, deposit, release, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, inject, bury or dispose into the environment (including by abandonment or discarding of barrels, containers or other closed receptacles of solid or liquid waste of any kind whatsoever) any solid or liquid waste upon any premises within the city, or to cause, suffer or permit any solid or liquid waste to come to be located upon any premises in the city, except in an authorized or permitted solid waste container located according to Section 6.08.130 of this chapter or at an authorized or permitted solid waste facility. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.310 Violations.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day during which any violation of this title occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense and upon conviction shall be punishable as provided. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

 

6.08.320 Civil action by collector or recycling agent.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit the right of a collector to bring a civil action against any person who violates California Public Resources Code Sections 41950 through 51, nor shall a conviction for such violation exempt any person from a civil action brought by a collector or recycling agent. (Ord. 1668, § 1, 1997)

Chapter 6.09 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE MANAGEMENT
6.09.010 Purposes of chapter.
The purpose of this chapter is to reduce landfill waste by requiring an applicant for every covered project to divert a minimum of fifty percent by weight of the construction and demolition debris resulting from that project in compliance with state and local statutory goals and policies and to create a mechanism to secure compliance with the stated diversion requirement. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 2005)

 

6.09.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

“Applicant” means any individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever who applies to the city for the applicable permits to undertake any construction, demolition, or renovation project within the city.

“Construction” means the building of any facility or structure or any portion thereof including any tenant improvements to an existing facility or structure and includes, without limitation, alterations or improvements to an existing structure.

“Construction and demolition debris” or “construction and demolition waste” or “C&D waste” or “C&D debris” means excess or discarded materials which are to be removed from a site during or after the construction, renovation, repair or demolition of any housing, commercial building or other structure, fence, wall or paving.

“Conversion rate” means the rate set forth in the standardized conversion rate table approved by the city pursuant to this chapter for use in estimating the volume or weight of materials identified in a waste management plan.

“Covered project” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 6.09.030 of this chapter.

“Demolition” means the decimating, razing, ruining, tearing down or wrecking of any facility, structure, pavement or building, whether in whole or in part, whether interior or exterior.

“Divert” and “diversion” mean to use a material for any purpose other than disposal in a landfill.

“Diversion requirement” means the diversion of at least fifty percent by weight of the total construction and demolition debris generated by a project via reuse or recycling, unless the applicant has been granted an exemption pursuant to Section 6.09.110 of this chapter, in which case the diversion requirement shall be the maximum feasible diversion rate established by the WMP compliance official for the project.

“Noncovered project” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 6.09.030 of this chapter.

“Performance security” means any company checks, money order, or certificate of deposit submitted to the city pursuant to Section 6.09.070 of this chapter.

“Project” means any activity which requires an application for a building or demolition permit or any similar permit from the city.

“Recycling” means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace.

“Renovation” means any change, addition, or modification of an existing structure.

“Reuse” means further or repeated use of construction or demolition debris.

“Salvage” means the controlled removal of construction or demolition debris from a permitted building or demolition site for the purpose of recycling, reuse, or storage for later recycling or reuse.

“Valuation” means the estimated cost to replace the building or structure in kind, based on current replacement costs as determined by the city building official pursuant to Ordinance 1761.

“Waste management plan (WMP)” means a completed WMP form, approved by the city for the purpose of compliance with this chapter, submitted by the applicant for any covered project.

“WMP compliance official” means the designated staff person(s) authorized and responsible for implementing this chapter. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 2005)

 

6.09.030 Threshold for covered projects.
(a)     Covered Projects. All construction, demolition, and renovation projects within the city with a total valuation cost for the new or remodeled construction as determined by the building official which are, or are projected to be, greater than or equal to one hundred thousand dollars (covered projects) shall comply with this chapter. Failure to comply with any of the terms of this chapter shall subject the project applicant to the full range of enforcement mechanisms set forth in the Glendora Municipal Code.

(b)     Noncovered Projects. Applicants for construction, demolition, and renovation projects within the city whose total valuation cost as determined by the building official are less than one hundred thousand dollars (noncovered projects) shall be encouraged to divert at least fifty percent of all project-related construction and demolition debris, but shall not be required to comply with this chapter.

(c)     City-Sponsored Projects. All city-sponsored construction, demolition, and renovation projects, shall be considered “covered projects” for the purposes of this chapter and shall submit a waste management plan to the WMP compliance official prior to beginning any construction or demolition activities and shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this chapter.

(d)     Compliance as a Condition of Approval. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be listed as a condition of approval on any building or demolition permit issued for a covered project. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 2005)

 

6.09.040 Projects exempt from this chapter.
The following projects are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:

(1)     Immediate or emergency demolition required to protect the public health, safety or welfare, as determined by any public safety official, building official, or code compliance officer of the city given prior to demolition;

(2)     Swimming pools;

(3)     Work for which a building or demolition permit is not required by this code;

(4)     Projects for which only a plumbing permit, electrical permit or mechanical permit is required;

(5)     Roofing projects that do not include removal of the existing roof;

(6)     A project for which an exception, conditional use permit or design review approval has been obtained from the city prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter;

(7)     A project for which a valid application for a building permit has been lawfully submitted to the city prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter;

(8)     A project of city public works or city public construction for which the notice inviting bids has been published pursuant to Section 20160 et seq. of the California Public Contract Code prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 2005)

 

6.09.050 Required diversion rate.
The applicant for a covered project shall divert a minimum of fifty percent by weight of the construction and demolition debris resulting from the project. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 2005)

 

6.09.060 Submission of waste management plan (WMP).
(a)     WMP Forms. Applicants for building or demolition permits involving any covered project shall complete and submit a waste management plan (WMP), on a WMP application form approved by the city for this purpose as part of the application packet for the building or demolition permit. The completed WMP shall indicate all of the following:

(1)     The estimated weight of project C&D debris, by materials type, to be generated;

(2)     The maximum weight of such materials that can feasibly be diverted via reuse or recycling;

(3)     The vendor or facility that the applicant proposes to use to collect or receive that material; and

(4)     The estimated weight of C&D materials that will be landfilled.

(b)     Calculating Weight of Debris. In estimating the weight of materials identified in the WMP, the applicant shall use the standardized conversion rates approved by the city for this purpose including standard engineering practices as approved in the California Building Code and/or the conversion factors approved by the California Integrated Waste Management Board.

(c)     Deconstruction. In preparing the WMP, applicants for building or demolition permits involving the removal of all or part of an existing structure shall consider deconstruction, to the maximum extent feasible, and shall make the materials generated thereby available for salvage prior to being transported for disposal in a landfill. Deconstruction can be used to meet the fifty percent diversion requirement provided it is accounted for in the WMP. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 2005)

 

6.09.070 Performance security.
The applicant for any covered project shall submit with the WMP a performance security. The amount of the performance security shall be calculated as the lesser of three percent of total project valuation cost as determined by the building official or ten thousand dollars. Acceptable forms of performance security include the following: personal checks, company checks, money orders, and certificates of deposit. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 2005)

 

6.09.080 Administrative fee.
An administrative fee as authorized by resolution of the council, for processing the WMP shall be paid to the city prior to issuance of any permits. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 2005)

 

6.09.090 Review of WMP.
(a)     Time of Review. A WMP shall be approved or denied no later than thirty days after a complete application is submitted to the city. The approval may be based on imposed conditions reasonably necessary to meet the standards of this chapter.

(b)     Approval. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, no building or demolition permit shall be issued for any covered project unless and until the WMP compliance official has approved the WMP. Approval shall not be required, however, where an emergency demolition is required to protect public health or safety. The WMP compliance official shall only approve a WMP if he or she first determines that all of the following conditions have been met:

(1)     The WMP provides all of the information set forth in Section 6.09.060 of this chapter;

(2)     The WMP indicates that at least fifty percent by weight of all C&D debris generated by the project will be diverted; and

(3)     The applicant has submitted an appropriate performance security in compliance with Section 6.09.070 of this chapter.

If the WMP compliance official determines that these three conditions have been met, he or she shall mark the WMP “Approved,” return a copy of the WMP to the applicant, and notify the building division that the WMP has been approved.

(c)     Nonapproval. If the WMP compliance official determines that the WMP is incomplete or fails to indicate that at least fifty percent by weight of all C&D debris generated by the project will be reused or recycled, he or she shall either:

(1)     Return the WMP to the applicant marked “Denied,” including a statement of reasons, and so notify the building division, which shall then immediately stop processing the building or demolition permit application; or

(2)     Return the WMP to the applicant marked “Further Explanation Required.” (Ord. 1811 § 1, 2005)

 

6.09.100 Compliance with the WMP.
(a)     Documentation. Within sixty days after the completion of any covered project, the applicant shall submit to the WMP compliance official documentation that the applicant has met the diversion requirement for the project. The diversion requirement shall be that the applicant has diverted at least fifty percent by weight of the total C&D debris generated by the project via reuse or recycling, unless the applicant has been granted an infeasibility exemption pursuant to Section 6.09.110 of this chapter, in which case the diversion requirement shall be the maximum feasible diversion rate established by the WMP compliance official for the project. If there is an exclusive solid waste recycling franchise with the city in effect which guarantees fifty percent diversion, use of that exclusive franchise solid waste recycling service shall be deemed as complying with the fifty percent diversion requirement. Documentation shall include all of the following:

(1)     For applicants using the exclusive franchise solid waste recycling service:

(A)    The dates demolition and construction actually commenced;

(B)    Invoice bills indicating that all material was collected and processed by the exclusive franchise solid waste recycling service;

(C)    A copy of the previously approved WMP for the project;

(D)    Any additional information the applicant believes is relevant to determining its efforts to comply in good faith with this chapter.

(2)     For applicants using their own trucks to haul construction and demolition debris (note, if an exclusive solid waste recycling franchise with the city is in effect, the applicant may not hire another firm other than the exclusive franchise hauler to handle collection and processing of solid waste recycling):

(A)    The dates demolition and construction actually commenced;

(B)    The actual weight of construction and demolition debris, listed for each material;

(C)    The actual weight of construction and demolition debris that was diverted, listed for each material;

(D)    A specification of the method used to determine the weights and a certification that the method used was the most accurate, commercially reasonable method available;

(E)     Original receipts from all vendors or facilities which received each material showing the actual weight of that material;

(F)     A copy of the previously approved WMP for the project adding the actual weight of each material diverted and landfilled;

(G)    Any additional information the applicant believes is relevant to determining its efforts to comply in good faith with this chapter.

(b)     Weighing of Wastes. Applicants shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that all C&D debris diverted or landfilled are measured and recorded using an accurate method of measurement available. To the extent practical, all C&D debris shall be weighed by measurement on scales. Such scales shall be in compliance with all applicable regulatory requirements for accuracy and maintenance. Where weighing is not practical due to small size or other considerations, a volumetric measurement shall be used. For conversion of volumetric measurements to weight, the applicant shall use the standardized conversion rates approved by the city for this purpose.

(c)     Determination of Compliance and Release of Performance Security. The WMP compliance official shall review the information submitted under subsection (a) of this section and determine whether the applicant has complied with the diversion requirement, as follows:

(1)     Full Compliance. If the WMP compliance official determines that the applicant has fully complied with the diversion requirement applicable to the project, he or she shall cause the full performance security to be released to the applicant.

(2)     Good Faith Effort to Comply. If the WMP compliance official determines that the diversion requirement has not been achieved, he or she shall determine on a case-by-case basis whether the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter. In making this determination, the WMP compliance official shall consider the availability of markets for the C&D debris landfilled, the size of the project, and the documented efforts of the applicant to divert C&D debris. If the WMP compliance official determines that the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter, he or she shall release the performance security to the applicant.

(3)     Noncompliance. If the WMP compliance official determines that the applicant has not made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter, or if the applicant fails to submit the documentation required by subsection (a) of this section within the required time period, then the performance security or a portion thereof, may be forfeited to the city to satisfy any fines, civil penalties, late payment penalties, administrative costs and fees or other related charges. Any remaining performance security balance after deduction of all identified charges shall be released to the applicant within five years of receipt.

(4)     Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. The building official may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy prior to submittal by the applicant of all documentation required by this section. The certificate of occupancy may be finalized upon receipt of all documentation.

(5)     Refund of Performance Security. The WMP compliance official shall authorize the refund of any performance security if the building or demolition permit application is withdrawn or cancelled before any work has begun.

(6)     Release of Performance Security. No later than fifteen business days from the date complete compliance documentation is submitted, the WMP compliance official shall determine whether the applicant has complied with the requirements of this chapter, and the following shall occur:

(A)    On a determination of compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the performance security shall be returned to the applicant within ten business days of determination.

(B)    On a determination of noncompliance with the requirements of this chapter, the performance security shall be retained by the WMP compliance official pending any recommended prosecution or other administrative proceedings. The performance security shall be retained by the WMP compliance official pending the conclusion of all such proceedings.

(7)     All performance security funds retained by the city shall be used only for:

(A)    Payment of performance security refunds;

(B)    In the case of noncompliance, any administrative cost incurred by the city in processing, administrating and enforcing applications for covered projects under this chapter, including but not limited to, staff time, hearing officer fees, legal fees, etc.;

(C)    Any fines, civil penalties, late payment penalties or other charges related to processing, administrating and enforcing applications for covered projects under this chapter. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 2005)

 

6.09.110 WMP infeasibility exemption.
(a)     Application. If an applicant for a covered project experiences unique circumstances that the applicant believes make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement, the applicant may apply for an exemption at the time that he or she submits the WMP required under Section 6.09.060 of this chapter. The applicant shall indicate on the WMP the maximum rate of diversion he or she believes is feasible for each material and the specific circumstances that he or she believes make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement.

(b)     Meeting with WMP Compliance Official. The WMP compliance official shall review the information supplied by the applicant and may meet with the applicant to discuss possible ways of meeting the diversion requirement. Based on the information supplied by the applicant along with any other available evidence or documentation regarding the feasibility of diversion or fifty percent by weight of C&D debris, the WMP compliance official shall determine whether it is possible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement.

(c)     Granting of Exemption. The WMP compliance official may grant an exemption based on the following considerations:

(1)     Lack of storage space on site;

(2)     Contamination by hazardous substances;

(3)     Low recyclability of specific materials.

The WMP compliance official shall determine the maximum feasible diversion rate for each material and shall indicate this rate on the WMP submitted by the applicant. The WMP compliance official shall return a copy of the WMP to the applicant marked “Approved for Infeasible Exemption” and shall notify the building division that the WMP has been approved.

(d)     Denial of Exemption. If the WMP compliance official determines that it is possible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement, he or she shall so inform the applicant in writing. The applicant shall have thirty days to resubmit a WMP form in full compliance with Sections 6.09.050 through 6.09.070 of this chapter. If the applicant fails to resubmit the WMP, or if the resubmitted WMP does not comply with Sections 6.09.050 through 6.09.070 of this chapter, the WMP compliance official shall deny the WMP in accordance with Section 6.09.100 of this chapter. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 2005)

 

6.09.120 Appeal.
(a)     Each applicant shall have the right to appeal certain decisions made by the WMP compliance official to an administrative hearing officer selected by the city. All appeal requests shall be submitted to the deputy public works director, in writing, within thirty calendar days of the decision of the WMP compliance official and shall include payment of a two hundred twenty dollar appeal fee.

(b)     The appeal letter shall contain the following information:

(1)     A heading in the words: “Before the Construction and Demolition appeal board of the City of Glendora;”

(2)     A caption reading: “Appeal of __________” giving the names of all appellants participating in the appeal;

(3)     A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the appellants in the determination of the WMP compliance official;

(4)     A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant;

(5)     The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official mailing addresses;

(6)     The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of at least one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.

(c)     Scheduling and Noticing Appeal for Hearing. As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the deputy public works director shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal by the administrative hearing officer. Such date shall not be less than ten days nor more than sixty days from the date the appeal was filed with the deputy public works director. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by the city either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at the address shown on the appeal.

(d)     Effect of Failure to Appeal. Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this section shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and adjudication of the determination of the WMP compliance official or any portion thereof.

(e)     Determinations subject to appeal shall include, but not necessarily be limited to:

(1) The granting or denial of an exemption;

(2) Whether the applicant has acted in good faith; and

(3) The amount of security to be released. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 2005)

 

6.09.130 Enforcement.
The applicant shall pay the costs of any code enforcement activities, including attorneys’ fees, resulting from the violation of any conditions of approval or any provision of the Glendora Municipal Code.

Any violation of the construction and demolition waste management ordinance or any entitlement granted is considered a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars and/or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months. Each day or portion of a day during which any violation of the construction and demolition waste management ordinance occurs or continues, constitutes a separate offense and shall be punishable as provided. (Ord. 1811 § 1, 2005)

Title 7 (RESERVED)

Title 8 ANIMALS AND FOWL
Chapter 8.04 ANIMALS
Chapter 8.08 ANIMAL CONTROL
Chapter 8.12 PIGEONS
Chapter 8.16 FEEDING NONDOMESTICATED ANIMALS

Chapter 8.04 ANIMALS
8.04.010 Animals prohibited—Exception.
(a)     It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain or permit to be kept or maintained in any place within the city limits any animal or fowl or reptile of any kind or description except as specifically provided in this chapter.

(b)     No species of animals commonly referred to as wild as defined in Fish and Game Code Section 2116 may be kept or maintained on any property within the city.

(c)     Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1970 § 2, 2013)

 

8.04.015 Definitions.
The following words whenever used in this chapter shall have the meaning set forth in this section, unless the context indicates otherwise:

(1)     “Dog” means any male or female dog over the age of four months.

(2)     “Cat” means any male or female cat over the age of four months.

(3)     “City” means the city of Glendora.

(4)     “Grooming parlor” means any place of business where animals are groomed, clipped, bathed or otherwise conditioned as pets or for show or for both.

(5)     “Livestock” includes domestic fowl and animals. (Ord. 1431 § 1, 1984; Ord. 1252 § 1, 1976)

 

8.04.020 Household pets specified.
The hereinafter specified animals may be kept and maintained as household pets within the city limits, as follows:

(1)     Not more than three weaned dogs;

(2)     Not more than three weaned domestic cats;

(3)     Fish;

(4)     Canaries, finches, parrots and other nonpredatory birds, limited to a total of thirty birds, with the following exceptions:

(A)    The keeping of roosters is prohibited,

 

(B)    The number of barnyard poultry, consisting of chickens (hens only), turkeys, ducks, and geese shall not exceed two,

(C)    The number of game birds shall not exceed ten;

(5)     Mice, rats, turtles, guinea pigs, hamsters, nonpoisonous snakes, and rabbits; however, no one shall keep or maintain as household pets on any property more than four in number of each species of animals specified herein.

Nothing in this section to the contrary withstanding, offspring, litters and clutches of animals kept and maintained pursuant to this chapter are not prohibited provided that the same are removed within ten weeks from the time of birth. (Ord. 1970 § 4, 2013)

 

8.04.030 Keeping horses prohibited—Exception.
The keeping and maintaining of horses is permitted in the residential zones of E-6, E-7, R-A and RHR, in accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter, and, except as provided in this chapter, the keeping and maintaining of horses is specifically prohibited within the city limits. (Ord. 1217 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1006 § 1, 1966; prior code § 38C)

 

8.04.040 Land and stable requirements.
Not more than two horses shall be kept and maintained on any property containing the minimum area of not less than twenty thousand square feet and one additional horse shall be permitted for each additional fifteen thousand square feet of area in excess of the minimum lot area, but in no case shall more than five horses be permitted on any one parcel of property. In every instance where a horse is kept or maintained, a stable shall be constructed to maintain each such horse. (Ord. 1006 § 1, 1966; prior code § 38D)

 

8.04.050 Location of stables.
No stable or other structure constructed for the purpose of maintaining and keeping horses shall be located closer than one hundred twenty-five feet to any residence on any property adjacent to the parcel whereon horses are kept and maintained and such structure or stable shall not be located closer than thirty-five feet from any residence situated on the property whereon such horses are kept and maintained. All parcels maintaining and keeping horses shall be fully enclosed by fences, walls or equal. (Ord. 1006 § 1, 1966; prior code § 38E)

 

8.04.060 Location of corrals and pasture.
A minimum four-foot-high fence or wall for a corral or pasture shall be located no closer than seventy-five feet from any residence on any property adjacent to property whereon horses are kept and maintained and no corral or pasture shall be located closer than thirty-five feet from any residence on the property whereon such horses are kept and maintained. (Ord. 1006 § 1, 1966; prior code § 38F)

 

8.04.070 Setback of structure.
No stall, stable or other structure constructed for the purpose of maintaining horses or any corral or any pasture shall be situated on or located in any required front yard setback as may be required by any zoning ordinance of the city. (Ord. 1006 § 1, 1966; prior code § 38G)

 

8.04.080 Construction—Submitting plot plan.
Prior to the establishment of the keeping and maintenance of any horses in any zone wherein they are permitted, the property owner proposing to keep and maintain such horses shall submit a plot plan of the property showing the proposed location of all structures to be constructed for the purpose of keeping and maintaining the horses and the location of any proposed pasture or corral and the location of any other structures which are proposed to be constructed thereon and the location of any existing residence, buildings, streets, fences and boundaries. The plot plan shall be submitted to the planning commission of the city for plan review prior to the application for or issuance of a building permit and prior to the keeping and maintaining of any such horses. If such plot plan indicates that the proposed use and construction will be in conformance with the terms and provisions of this chapter, it shall be approved by the planning commission or approved subject to conditions deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and neighboring property values. The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council by written request of the applicant or by written request of any member of the city council. Such written request must be filed with the planning department within thirty days of the decision of the planning commission. Upon receipt of such a written request, the city council shall review the action of the planning commission and render a final decision as to whether the plot plan meets the intent and purpose of this chapter. It shall be incumbent upon the property owner maintaining horses pursuant to this chapter to maintain written evidence of official approval. (Ord. 1154 § 2, 1972; Ord. 1006 § 1, 1966; prior code § 38H)

 

8.04.090 Apiaries.
Apiaries are permitted in zone E-7 when provided with an ample water supply and located not less than five hundred feet from any residence on any adjacent properties. (Ord. 1006 § 1, 1966; prior code § 38I)

 

8.04.100 Conditional use permit—Standards.
The keeping and maintenance of any animals or poultry may be permitted upon the giving of a conditional use permit by the planning commission for any R-1, E-3, E-4, E-5, E-6, E-7, RHR, or R-A zone. In its determination of whether or not a conditional use permit shall be granted, the planning commission shall be guided by the following standards:

(1)     That the keeping and maintenance of animals shall not be for an unlimited term;

(2)     That the keeping and maintaining of animals shall not create a hazard to public health;

(3)     That the keeping and maintaining of animals shall not result in the creation of obnoxious sounds or odors or be detrimental to the appearance of properties in the general neighborhood wherein such animals are proposed to be kept or maintained.

Application for a conditional use permit to allow the keeping and maintenance of animals shall be made in the same manner as applications for all other conditional use permits as set forth in Chapter 21.54, and be accompanied by a filing fee as established by city council resolution. The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council by the applicant, any owner of property within a three-hundred-foot radius of the subject property, or any two members of the city council, jointly or separately, within fifteen days after the date of such decision of the planning commission. Any such appeal by the applicant or property owner shall be in writing, and shall indicate such grounds upon which the appeal is based, and shall be accompanied by a fee as established by a city council resolution, payable to the city of Glendora. There shall be no requirements for such an appeal by members of the city council other than to notify the city clerk by any means.

Upon receiving such appeal, the city council shall hold a public hearing thereon and shall take action either granting or denying the application for a conditional use permit, and the action of the city council shall be final.

Conditional use permits under this section shall be revocable as provided in Section 21.54.090. (Ord. 1576 § 1, 1990; Ord. 1561 § 1, 1989; Ord. 1293 § 1, 1978; Ord. 1286 § 1, 1977; Ord. 1006 § 1, 1966; prior code § 38J)

 

8.04.105 Variances.
The owner of any property in zones E-6, E-7, R-A and RHR desiring to keep horses may apply for a variance to the requirements of Sections 8.04.040 through 8.04.070 in the same manner and upon the same standards as is provided for variances in Chapter 21.56. (Ord. 1286 § 2, 1977)

 

8.04.110 Nonconformance—Termination.
Wherever animals are kept and maintained prior to June 8, 1966, and not in conformance with the terms and provisions of this chapter, and whenever animals are kept and maintained on properties that are not now within the corporate limits of the city and that are hereafter annexed to the city and if the keeping and maintenance of such animals is not in conformance with the terms and provisions of this title, then the keeping and maintenance of such animals in the circumstances as heretofore mentioned, shall be terminated on the first of the following events to occur:

(1)     Within ten years from June 8, 1966, for all properties that are within the corporate limits of the city, as of June 8, 1966, and within ten years after the annexation of those properties that are hereafter annexed to the city;

(2)     The failure to keep and maintain animals on any property as such nonconforming uses, for any continuous period of six months. (Ord. 1006 § 1, 1966; prior code § 38K)

 

8.04.120 Application of chapter.
Nothing in this chapter to the contrary withstanding, no terms or provisions of this chapter shall prohibit the keeping and maintenance of any animal excepting poisonous reptiles in connection with the conduct of a retail pet shop or veterinary hospital in the appropriate commercial zone. (Ord. 1006 § 1, 1966; prior code § 38L)

Chapter 8.08 ANIMAL CONTROL
8.08.005 Definitions.
Whenever a word which is defined in Chapter 8.04 is used in this chapter, it shall have the meaning set forth in Section 8.04.015, unless the context indicates otherwise. The following words, whenever used in this chapter, shall have the meaning set forth in this section, unless the context indicates otherwise:

(1)     “City manager designates,” “animal control officer,” “city’s animal control authority” and such other officers of the city, not otherwise defined in this chapter, mean employees or outside contractors designated by the city manager or city council to perform those duties provided for in this chapter.

(2)     “Dangerous animal” means any animal, except a dog kept or controlled by a police officer for law enforcement purposes, which has demonstrated any or all of the following behavior or characteristics:

(A)    An attack or any other behavior, without provocation, that causes bodily harm or constitutes a physical threat of bodily harm to a person in a place where such person is conducting himself or herself peaceably and lawfully;

(B)    An attack, without provocation, which requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury or property damage in a place where such person is conducting himself or herself peaceably and lawfully;

(C)    An attack, without provocation, on another animal or livestock which occurs off the property of the owner of the attacking animal;

(D)    Training to attack persons or other animals or to fight with persons or other animals;

(E)     Of a species, breed or kind, which in its wild or untamed condition is capable of and, if aroused, is likely to cause death or serious injury to a human being or which would cause serious fear or alarm to the average person if seen wandering at large in an inhabited community.

For the purposes of this subsection, a person is peaceably and lawfully upon property or in a place when he or she is on such property or in such place in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by the laws of this state or the city or county, or by the laws or postal regulations of the United States, or when he or she is on such property or in such place upon invitation, express or implied.

(3)     “Health officer” means the director of the health office of the county or representative.

(4)     “Police chief” means the police chief of the city or a person, other than the animal control officer or sheltermaster, designated by the police chief.

(5)     “Unlicensed dog” means any dog for which the license for the current year has not been paid or for which the tag for the current year is not attached. (Ord. 1970 § 6, 2013)

 

8.08.010 Tags required.
(a)     It is unlawful for an owner or custodian of any dog to have or keep the same within the city, unless there is attached to the dog a metal tag obtained from the animal control officer, as provided in this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, any person who harbors a dog for fifteen days or more shall be deemed its custodian.

Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b).

(b)     The provisions of this chapter do not require either a tag or a license for:

(1)     Any dog found within the city when the owner resides outside the city and such dog is wearing or has attached to it a license tag for the current year issued by the owner’s place of residence;

(2)     Any dog owned by, or in the charge of, any person who is a nonresident of the city and is traveling through the city or temporarily sojourning therein for a period of not exceeding thirty days;

(3)     Any dog brought into the city and kept therein for thirty days or less for the exclusive purpose of entering it in any bench show or dog exhibition or field trials or competition;

(4)     Any dog brought or sent into the city from any point outside of it for the exclusive purpose of receiving veterinary care in any animal hospital; provided, that such dog is kept at all times strictly confined within such hospital; and

(5)     Any dog wearing or having attached to it a license tag for the current year issued by the county or by another municipality within the county when the owner thereof has, within one year last past, moved his or her principal place of residence to the city; provided, that each dog found within the city, regardless of where the owner may reside, must have a city dog license and a license tag securely affixed to its collar while it is being used as a guard dog within the city. (Ord. 1416 § 7, 1983)

 

8.08.015 Duration of tag and license.
Dog tags and licenses shall be effective until the thirtieth day of the month and year specified on the tags. (Ord. 1970 § 8, 2013)

 

8.08.020 Furnishing tags and licenses—Fees.
(a)     Fee—General. Every person owning or harboring any dog over four months of age within the city shall annually pay to the city’s animal control authority an annual license fee as established by resolution of the city council.

(b)     Fees—New Residents in the City. The owner of any dog, when the owner moves into the city from another community, upon the presentation of a rabies vaccination receipt signed by a licensed veterinarian and a license receipt from another community for the current year, may be issued a license tag upon the payment of a fee to cover the cost of the tag.

(c)     The city shall furnish a tag and license to a disabled person owning a service dog without requiring the aforesaid fee. (Ord. 1970 § 10, 2013)

 

8.08.030 Delay in obtaining tag and license.
A penalty may be added to each license fee for failure to pay such fee within thirty days after such license fee shall fall due. The amount of penalty shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1970 § 13, 2013)

 

8.08.035 Replacement of lost or destroyed tags.
If any tag is lost or destroyed, the city shall furnish a replacement tag to the owner or custodian of the dog upon payment of a fee as established pursuant to resolution of the city council. The fee shall be for the processing of the replacement tag. Any replacement tag shall be used only for the dog for which the lost or destroyed tag has theretofore been issued. (Ord. 1536 § 7, 1989; Ord. 1416 § 7, 1983)

 

8.08.040 Vaccination.
Every person practicing veterinary medicine in the city who vaccinates a dog or cat with rabies vaccine shall issue to the dog or cat owner an original certificate and send a copy to the city’s animal control authority. (Ord. 1970 § 15, 2013)

 

8.08.045 Certificate of vaccination required for tag and license issuance.
No dog license or dog tag shall be issued by the city unless, at the time of making application for a dog license, the applicant holds a certificate of vaccination signed by a veterinarian, licensed as such in the state, certifying that the dog to be licensed has been vaccinated with canine rabies vaccine, approved by and in a manner prescribed by the state, which certificate must indicate that such dog’s rabies immunity extends throughout the entire year for which such dog license or dog tag is to be issued. (Ord. 1970 § 17, 2013)

 

8.08.050 Proof of spayed or neutered dogs.
A spayed or neutered dog shall not be considered sterile unless the applicant furnishes the city’s animal control authority a veterinarian’s certificate showing that the dog has been sterilized. (Ord. 1970 § 19, 2013)

 

8.08.055 Counterfeit or imitation tags—Transfer.
It is unlawful for any person to imitate or counterfeit any tag provided for in this chapter, or to employ or use any imitation or counterfeit of the tag for any dog, or to transfer a tag issued by the city for a dog to a different dog. (Ord. 1416 § 7, 1983)

 

8.08.060 Loud barking.
(a)     It is unlawful for any person to own, keep, harbor or otherwise maintain within the city any dog which, by barking, disturbs the peace and quiet of one or more persons from at least two residential dwelling units in the immediate neighborhood.

(b)     It is unlawful for any person to tease, torment or otherwise provoke a dog into barking.

(c)     “Barking” means barking, howling or baying by day or night at frequent intervals or for extended periods of time. For the purposes of subsection (a), barking shall not mean barking whenever a dog is in the act of protecting against or resisting any trespasser to the premises upon which the dog is kept, harbored or otherwise maintained. The burden of proof of such act of protection against, or resistance to, trespassers by a dog is upon the person owning, keeping, harboring or otherwise maintaining the dog.

(d)     Every person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1416 § 7, 1983)

 

8.08.065 Dogs restrained from running at large.
(a)     It is unlawful for any person who is the owner or custodian of any dog to keep the dog upon any premises under control of such person, unless such dog is restrained by a fence, cage, chain, leash or other physical means adequate and sufficient to prevent the dog from leaving the premises upon which it is kept.

(b)     Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1881 § 2, 2007)

 

8.08.070 Dogs required to be on leash.
(a)     It is unlawful for any owner or custodian of any dog to allow or permit any such dog to be off the premises of its owner or custodian, unless such dog is securely restrained by a leash not exceeding six feet in length, of sufficient strength to prevent the escape of such dog, and unless such dog is in the charge or control of a person capable of keeping the dog under the effective charge and control of such person.

(b)     Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1416 § 7, 1983)

 

8.08.075 Dogs prohibited on public property—Exceptions.
(a)     It is unlawful for any person to permit any dog owned by him or her, or then under his or her immediate control, to be in any public park, playground or recreation area or other public property upon which there is a posted sign giving notice that dogs are prohibited from use of such property, unless the dog is participating in a regularly organized pet show or animal training class approved by the public recreation director and then in progress.

(b)     The provisions of subsection (a) of this section and any similar requirement contained in the city’s animal control regulations shall not apply to the following:

(1)     Any dog used by a law enforcement agency;

(2)     A visually impaired person accompanied by a guide dog;

(3)     Dogs are allowed in all Glendora city public parks, except for Louie Pompei Memorial Sports Park, Manooshian Park, Sanburg Park and Glendora Arboretum and Botanic Garden.

(c)     In order to be subject to the exception set forth in subsection (b)(3) of this section, all persons shall comply with all requirements of law and the following rules and regulations:

(1)     All dogs must be securely restrained by a leash not exceeding six feet in length, of sufficient strength to prevent the escape of such dog.

(2)     All dogs must be in the care, custody and control of a person at least eighteen years old. Any person under eighteen years of age must be accompanied by and be under the direct supervision of an adult to enter the park with the on-leash dog. No adult may have more than one dog in the public park at any one time. All dogs must be under the voice control of their caretakers at all times. Dogs shall not be left unattended at any time.

(3)     All dogs must be at least four months of age, vaccinated for rabies, currently licensed by the city’s animal control authority and wear a collar with up-to-date tags while in the park. No dog that is sick, in heat, injured, or less than four months of age, or which displays aggressive behavior towards other dogs or humans is permitted in any public park.

(4)     Any person having care, custody or control of a dog in the public park shall quiet or remove the dog if it barks and shall promptly remove and properly dispose of any waste deposited by such dog. The owner or person in custody of the dog shall carry a suitable container or instrument for the removal and disposal of dog feces.

(5)     The designated hours of use for the public park shall coincide with the regular hours of the park.

(6)     All persons will otherwise comply with all rules governing city parks and all relevant parking regulations.

(7)     Dogs are not permitted in or around child play areas or organized sporting events.

(8)     Dogs shall not interfere with, bother or harass park users, groups, or other animals or wildlife.

(9)     The presence of a dog in the park shall constitute implied consent of the dog’s owner or any person having the care, custody or control of the dog, to strictly follow the rules of this section and shall constitute a waiver of liability to the city, its elected officials, officers, and employees, an assumption of all risks, and an agreement and undertaking to protect, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its elected officials, officers and employees, for any injury or damage to persons or property during any time that the dog is in the park.

(d)     Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 2021 § 1, 2017; Ord. 1865 § 2, 2007)

 

8.08.080 Nuisance prohibited.
(a)     It is unlawful for the owner or custodian of any dog to allow or permit that dog to defecate on any public property, except in the wilderness park areas of the South Hills Park and Dalton Canyon Park, or on any improved private property, other than that of the owner or custodian of the dog, or to otherwise commit a public nuisance on any public property or improved probate property including that of the owner or custodian of the dog.

(b)     Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1416 § 7, 1983)

 

8.08.085 General regulations relating to the care of animals.
It is unlawful for any person within the city, who owns or has custody of any animal or who owns, conducts, manages or operates any animal establishment, to fail to comply with each of the following conditions, and any act or omission of any employee in caring for an animal shall be assumed to be an act or omission of the owner, custodian or licensee:

(1)     Housing facilities for animals shall be structurally sound and shall be maintained in good repair to protect the animals from injury, to contain the animals, and to restrict the entrance of other animals.

(2)     All animals shall be supplied with sufficient good and wholesome food and water as often as their feeding habits require.

(3)     All animals and all animal buildings or enclosures shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.

(4)     No animals shall be without attention for more than twelve consecutive hours. Whenever an animal is left unattended at a commercial animal facility, the telephone number of the department of animal control or the name, address and telephone number of the responsible person shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the front of the property.

(5)     Every reasonable precaution shall be used to insure that animals are not teased, abused, mistreated, annoyed, tormented or in any manner made to suffer by any person or means.

(6)     No condition shall be maintained or permitted that is or could be injurious to the animals.

(7)     Animal buildings and enclosures shall be so constructed and maintained as to prevent escape of animals. All reasonable precautions shall be taken to protect the public from the animals and the animals from the public.

(8)     Every animal establishment shall isolate sick animals sufficiently so as not to endanger the health of other animals. Sick animals shall at all times be isolated from other animals.

(9)     Every building or enclosure wherein animals are maintained shall be constructed of material easily cleaned and shall be kept in a sanitary condition. The building shall be properly ventilated to prevent drafts and to remove odors. Heating and cooling shall be provided as required, according to the physical need of the animals, with sufficient light to allow observation of animals and sanitation.

(10)   Animals shall be taken to a veterinarian for examination or treatment if the animal control officer finds this is necessary in order to maintain the health of the animal and orders the owner or custodian to do so.

(11)   All animal rooms, cages, kennels and runs shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate and proper accommodations for animals kept therein.

(12)   Animals shall be provided proper shelter and protection from the weather at all times.

(13)   No animal shall be given any alcoholic beverages, unless prescribed by a veterinarian.

(14)   No animals which are natural enemies, temperamentally unsuited, or otherwise incompatible, shall be quartered together or so near each other as to cause injury, fear or torment. If two or more animals are so trained that they can be placed together and do not attack each other or perform or attempt any hostile act to the others, such animals shall be deemed not to be natural enemies.

(15)   No tack, equipment, device, substance or material that is, or could be, injurious or cause unnecessary cruelty to any animal shall be used or permitted to be used.

(16)   Working animals shall be given proper rest periods. Confined or restrained animals shall be given exercise proper for the individual animal under the particular conditions.

(17)   No animal which is overheated, weakened, exhausted, sick, injured, diseased, lame or otherwise unfit shall be worked, used or rented.

(18)   No animal which the animal control officer has suspended from use shall be worked or used until released by such officer.

(19)   No animal bearing evidence of malnutrition, ill health, unhealed injury, or having been kept in an unsanitary condition, shall be displayed.

(20)   No animal whose appearance is or may be offensive or contrary to public decency shall be displayed.

(21)   Animals shall not be allowed to constitute or cause a hazard or be a menace to the health, peace or safety of the community.

(22)   Every violation of an applicable regulation shall be corrected within a reasonable time to be specified by the animal control officer. (Ord. 1416 § 7, 1983)

 

8.08.090 Stray animals.
Every person, except the animal control officer or city’s animal control authority, taking up any stray animal or any animal which is running at large contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall within twenty-four hours thereafter give notice to the city’s animal control authority or to the police department:

(1)     The fact that he or she has such animal in his or her possession; and

(2)     The complete description of such animal; and

(3)     The license number of such animal, if any, and by what county or municipal corporation issued, or the fact that the animal has no license; and

(4)     The place where such animal is confined; and

(5)     The animal is scanned for a microchip implant by a veterinarian, pet store, grooming parlor, humane society, or animal control provider. (Ord. 1970 § 21, 2013)

 

8.08.095 Failure to exhibit certificate of vaccination.
It is unlawful for any person upon whom any demand is made under authority of this chapter for the exhibition of any dog rabies vaccination certificate or any dog license or tag, to fail or refuse to exhibit the same, if he or she has it in his or her possession. (Ord. 1416 § 7, 1983)

 

8.08.100 Reporting biting animal.
Any person who has been bitten by any animal, and any official of the city or any other person in the city having knowledge of any person injured through having been bitten by any animal shall as soon as possible report such occurrence to the city’s animal control authority or the police department, giving a description of the animal and the locality where confined. (Ord. 1970 § 23, 2013)

 

8.08.105 Bite—Obligation to report.
Whenever any person owning, harboring, controlling, maintaining, possessing or having charge of any dog in the city is informed by any person that such dog has bitten a human being, he or she shall inform or notify the animal control officer. Failure to make, or cause to be made, such report is unlawful. To “bite” means to bite with the teeth or jaws so as to enter, grip or tear any portion of the anatomy of human beings. It does not include the superficial breaking of the skin as from a nip or pawing with the feet of a dog. (Ord. 1416 § 7, 1983)

 

8.08.110 Bite—Notice to owner.
Whenever the animal control officer is informed that a dog has bitten a human being, the department shall notify, whenever possible, the person or custodian of the animal of such fact. A copy of any written notice shall be given or delivered to the health officer. (Ord. 1416 § 7, 1983)

 

8.08.115 Confinement—Order.
Any person who is the owner or custodian of a dog that has bitten a human being shall immediately confine such dog in a safe and humane manner, on such person’s premises or at the city animal shelter at charges stated in the resolution of the city council, for ten days upon written order of the health officer. During such period of confinement, the health officer or animal control officer or city animal control authority may enter the premises to inspect or test the dog for rabies. (Ord. 1970 § 25, 2013)

 

8.08.120 Interference with officer prohibited.
It is unlawful for any owner or custodian of any dog that has bitten a human being to interfere, delay or obstruct any health officer in conducting any test or observation for rabies of any dog. (Ord. 1970 § 27, 2013)

 

8.08.125 Confinement—Release after observation.
If, at the expiration of ten days of observation for rabies, it appears that the dog does not have rabies, then such observation and confinement shall cease. The health officer is empowered to shorten the period of confinement whenever in his or her judgment such dog does not have rabies. (Ord. 1970 § 29, 2013)

 

8.08.130 Destruction of afflicted dog.
(a)     Whenever any dog has rabies, the health officer or city agent shall cause the dog to be removed to the city animal shelter where it shall be destroyed. The certificate of a health officer shall be deemed sufficient to designate the dog as a dog afflicted with rabies. It is unlawful for any person within the city to harbor, maintain or cause to be maintained, have control of, or possess any dog that has rabies, and to refuse or neglect to comply with this chapter.

(b)     Every dog afflicted with rabies is declared to be a public nuisance dangerous to the public health and safety. The health officer, chief of police and the city’s animal control authority are directed to abate such nuisance. (Ord. 1970 § 31, 2013)

 

8.08.135 Transporting or moving of animals ordered confined.
No animal ordered confined shall be transported, taken or removed from the place of such confinement unless written authority to do so is first obtained from the health officer, which order shall specify the terms and conditions upon which such removal or transportation of such animal may be made. (Ord. 1416 § 7, 1983)

 

8.08.140 Authority of animal control officer.
(a)     The animal control officer shall have the authority to impound and take into custody all:

(1)     Unlicensed dogs;

(2)     Any other animal, wild or domestic, required to be licensed by this chapter, which is unlicensed;

(3)     Any animal being kept or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance or state statute;

(4)     Dogs and other animals running at large contrary to the provisions of the Agricultural Code or any other state statute or this chapter;

(5)     Animals which have exhibited behavior or characteristics described in subsection (2)(A), (B) or (C) of Section 8.08.005, provided that at the time of being impounded the animal poses an immediate threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;

(6)     Sick, injured, stray, unwanted or abandoned animals;

(7)     Dogs which are unvaccinated in violation of this chapter;

(8)     Animals delivered by the owners to the animal control officer, or all title and interest in which is abandoned by such owners;

(9)     Animals for which the owners or custodians are unable to care because of imprisonment, illness, bankruptcy, litigation or other contingency, or in cases in which the owners or custodians cannot be found;

(10)   Animals which have been determined to be dangerous in accordance with Section 8.08.215.

(b)     No person shall remove any animal from the custody of the animal control officer without first paying the necessary fees as determined by resolution of the city council or without receiving permission from the animal control officer to do so.

(c)     The animal control officer, and any peace officer, shall have the right to enter upon any public or private property in the city, except a building designated for and used for residential purposes, for the purpose of examining or capturing any dog thereon or therein. (Ord. 1548 § 1, 1989; Ord. 1431 § 4, 1984; Ord. 1416 § 7, 1983)

 

8.08.145 Interference with animal control officer.
It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, oppose, obstruct, delay or resist the animal control officer in the performance of any act authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 1416 § 7, 1983)

 

8.08.150 Employment of private veterinarian.
The animal control officer may employ a private veterinarian whenever he or she deems it necessary in order to properly care for and maintain any animal. When a veterinarian’s fee has been paid or incurred for the care or treatment of any animal, such animal shall not thereafter be redeemed without payment by the owner of such fee, in addition to any and all other fees, so as to reimburse the city for its cost for veterinarian service for such animal. (Ord. 1416 § 7, 1983)

 

8.08.155 Dead animals.
The animal control officer shall pick up and dispose of all dead animals on public highways and on public and private property within the city, where the owner is unknown, and also all dead dogs and cats that have been kept as pets. The city council may provide by resolution a fee for such service. (Ord. 1416 § 7, 1983)

 

8.08.160 Contract for city animal shelter.
The city council may by contract designate an agency which shall establish, maintain, conduct and operate a suitable enclosure to keep and safely hold all animals subject to impoundment, which enclosure shall be known as the city animal shelter. (Ord. 1970 § 33, 2013)

 

8.08.165 Sheltermaster—Office created.
The office of the sheltermaster is established. The city council may provide for appointment of a sheltermaster by contract or may delegate appointment by the city manager of a city employee as sheltermaster. (Ord. 1970 § 35, 2013)

 

8.08.170 Sheltermaster—Duties.
(a)     The sheltermaster shall maintain a suitable enclosure at the animal shelter for the keeping of all dogs and cats impounded as provided by this chapter.

(b)     The sheltermaster, designee or police officer shall seize and impound any and all dogs found running at large or being within the city in violation of this chapter, and shall keep such dogs at and in the public animal shelter until they shall have been either redeemed, adopted or humanely destroyed as provided by this chapter.

(c)     The sheltermaster shall keep a register in which shall be set forth a correct statement of all animals impounded by him or her, the date when each animal was impounded, the reason therefor, the description of each animal, the identifying information of the adoptee and/or the date of humanely destroying any animal. (Ord. 1970 § 37, 2013)

 

8.08.175 Impoundment and other fees.
The sheltermaster shall collect from the owner reclaiming any impounded animal such fees as are determined by resolution of the city council. When the owner or custodian requests disposal of his or her animal, he or she shall pay the fee determined by the city council for pick up of a dog or cat and reasonable costs as determined by the sheltermaster for any other animal. (Ord. 1970 § 39, 2013)

 

8.08.180 Release of dog.
The sheltermaster shall not release any dog which has been redeemed by the owner unless such dog does not have rabies, and:

(1)     The owner exhibits a certificate signed by a veterinarian licensed either by the state or by any other state to practice veterinary medicine that:

(A)    Such dog has been vaccinated with approved killed-virus vaccine less than eighteen months prior to date of release; or

(B)    Such dog has been vaccinated with approved live-virus vaccine less than thirty months prior to date of release; or

(C)    Such dog should not be vaccinated with rabies vaccine because such vaccination would jeopardize the health of such dog due to infirmity or other disability, which infirmity or disability and the estimated date of termination thereof is shown on the face of the certificate; or

(2)     Deposits sufficient funds with the sheltermaster for vaccination of such dog to be paid to the veterinarian upon proof of vaccination within five days. (Ord. 1970 § 41, 2013)

 

8.08.185 Destruction of animal.
After taking up and impounding for at least five days any animal found running at large or being maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter, unless it sooner is redeemed by its owner, the sheltermaster may adopt or destroy or sell such animal, unless the disposition of such animal is covered by some other section of this chapter. (Ord. 1970 § 43, 2013)

 

8.08.190 Notification.
When any animal is impounded pursuant to this chapter, the sheltermaster shall, by the next business day after receiving such animal, give notice either by telephone or by mail, first class, with postage fully prepaid thereon, to the person to whom the current license for such was issued, of the whereabouts of such animal. (Ord. 1970 § 45, 2013)

 

8.08.195 Notification to licensee in other locations.
Dogs and cats wearing a current valid license tag issued by the city or by the county, or by any municipality within the county, impounded pursuant to this chapter shall not be adopted, destroyed or otherwise disposed of unless:

(1)     The person to whom the current license for such dog or cat was issued so directs; or

(2)     Ten full days have elapsed since such person was notified of the whereabouts of his or her dog or cat by telephone; or

(3)     Five full days have elapsed since a letter, postage fully prepaid, addressed to such person at his or her last known address and informing such person of the whereabouts of his or her dog or cat has been deposited in the United States mail. (Ord. 1970 § 47, 2013)

 

8.08.200 Release to owner.
(a)     The sheltermaster shall not release any animal which has been redeemed by the owner or adopted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless the person to whom the animal is released provides satisfactory proof that the animal will be maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and any other applicable ordinance or statute.

(b)     Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section and in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.08.215 of this chapter, the sheltermaster may withhold the release of any animal which, in the opinion of the sheltermaster or animal control officer, has exhibited behavior or characteristics described in subsection (2)(A), (B) or (C) of Section 8.08.005. (Ord. 1970 § 49, 2013)

 

8.08.205 Notice—Adoption or disposal of impounded dog or cat.
When a dog or cat is impounded, the sheltermaster shall cause notice thereof to be posted at the animal shelter, and mailed to the animal’s owner or custodian, if known. Such notice shall contain a general description of the animal and shall set forth that, unless reclaimed within ten days from the posting of notice, or if the owner or custodian of the animal is known, ten days from the mailing and posting of such notice, the animal will be adopted or disposed of, and, if the animal is not reclaimed as herein provided before the time of adoption or disposal as specified in such notice, the sheltermaster shall proceed to adopt or dispose of the animal. (Ord. 1970 § 51, 2013)

 

8.08.210 Notice of adoption or disposal of other impounded animal.
When any other animal is impounded, the sheltermaster shall cause notice thereof to be posted at the animal shelter, and mailed to the animal’s owner or custodian, if known. Such notice shall contain a general description of such animal, and shall set forth that, unless reclaimed, the animal will be adopted or disposed of, which time shall be not less than ten days from the posting of the notice, or, if the owner or custodian of the animal is known, not less than ten days from the mailing and posting of such notice; and, if the animal is not reclaimed as herein provided before the time of adoption or disposal as specified in such notice, the sheltermaster shall proceed to adopt such animal, or shall dispose of the animal in a humane way. (Ord. 1970 § 53, 2013)

 

8.08.215 Control of dangerous animals.
(a)     Whenever an animal has exhibited behavior or characteristics described in Section 8.08.005(2) and the owner of the animal is known, or can be ascertained by reasonable diligence, the provisions of this section shall be applicable.

(b)     Notification of Hearing. The notification required by subsection (c) of this section shall be given by the animal control officer or sheltermaster to the owner of the animal and to any other person who has requested notice of the hearing and shall include the time and place of the hearing. If the animal has been impounded, the notification shall be given concurrently with, or within forty-eight hours after, any notification required by this chapter relative to the impoundment of the animal and shall include a statement that the time period within which to reclaim the animal shall be stayed until the decision of the police chief, or the hearing officer on appeal, has become final.

(c)     Hearing. Not less than five working days nor more than ten working days after the owner of an animal has been notified that the animal is suspected of being dangerous and the reasons therefor, the police shall conduct an investigation, hearing from the owner of the animal and any other interested person.

If the police chief determines that the animal is dangerous, he or she may order that the animal not be kept, maintained, caused to be maintained, harbored or possessed within the city or, if the police chief determines that the dangerousness of the animal can be abated, he or she shall impose conditions upon the maintenance or possession of the animal within the city. Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to, adequate and secure muzzling, adequate and secure yard fencing and gates, adequate warning of the dangerousness of the animal and adequate and secure control of the animal by a competent person when the animal is allowed onto places open to the public. If the police chief determines that the dangerousness of the animal cannot be abated or that the conditions previously imposed upon the maintenance or possession of the animal within the city have not eliminated the dangerousness of the animal or have not been complied with, and that no other location can be found where the animal could be kept without presenting a threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the police chief may order that the animal be destroyed.

(d)     Notification of Decision. Within twenty-four hours after the close of the hearing, the police chief shall notify the owner of the animal and any persons who testified at the hearing of his or her decision and the reasons therefor. The notification shall also state the procedure for appealing the decision to the hearing officer.

The decision of the police chief shall become final four working days after the police chief gives notice of his or her decision, unless the decision is sooner appealed to a hearing officer as set forth in subsection (e) herein. Notwithstanding the appeal period, the decision of the police chief shall be deemed final upon his or her receipt of a written waiver of the right to appeal from the owner of the animal and any person who testified at the hearing.

(e)     Appeal. The owner of the animal or any other person entitled to notice pursuant to subsection (d) of this section may appeal the decision of the police chief to a hearing officer to be hired by the city by filing a written statement of the grounds therefor with the city clerk. The hearing officer shall be a neutral person as designated by the city manager. The hearing officer shall demonstrate those qualifications, training, and objectivity prescribed by the city manager as are necessary and which are consistent with the duties and responsibilities of such hearing officer.

The hearing officer shall hear the appeal within fifteen days after the appeal is filed. Not less than five days prior to the hearing, the city clerk shall give notice of the time and place of the hearing to the owner of the animal and any person entitled to notice pursuant to subsection (d) of this section. The hearing officer may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the police chief and shall state the reasons therefor. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final when rendered.

(f)      Release and Impound Fee. If the animal has been impounded, the provisions of this subsection shall be applicable. The animal shall not be released, except in accordance with the final decision of the police chief, or the hearing officer on appeal, and upon a finding by the police chief, or the hearing officer on appeal, that the conditions imposed will be complied with by the owner or person in control of the animal.

The animal shall be released in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; provided that the impound fees shall be waived if:

(1)     The police chief decided that the animal is not dangerous;

(2)     On appeal by the owner of the animal, the hearing officer reverses the decision of the police chief that the animal is dangerous or, if the police chief decided that the animal is dangerous and imposed conditions, the hearing officer modifies the conditions under which the animal may be maintained or possessed; or

(3)     The appeal, if any, was filed by a person other than the owner or other person entitled to custody of the animal.

(g)     Notices. Notification required by this section shall be given in writing by personal service or United States Postal Service, certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the person to be notified at his or her last known address. The giving of notice shall be deemed to have occurred as of the date of personal service or as of the date of deposit in the course of transmission of the United States Postal Service. (Ord. 1970 § 55, 2013)

 

8.08.225 Attempting to remove animals from animal shelter.
No person shall remove or free, or attempt to remove or free, any animal from the possession of the city animal control officer, sheltermaster, or police officer, while conveying such animal to the animal shelter, or after such animal is confined in the animal shelter. (Ord. 1970 § 58, 2013)

 

8.08.230 Diseased animals.
All animals, taken into custody of the sheltermaster, which are infected with any dangerous or communicable disease or which are injured beyond recovery may be destroyed by the sheltermaster. No person being the owner or custodian of any animal infected with any infectious or contagious disease, such as glanders, farchy, anthrax or tuberculosis, shall permit or allow the same to go upon any street, alley or other public place, or to come in contact with any other animal not so infected. (Ord. 1970 § 60, 2013)

 

8.08.235 Sheltermaster—Records to be kept.
It is the duty of the sheltermaster to keep a record and description of all animals taken into his or her custody and impounded, showing the date and manner of their disposal, and if redeemed, reclaimed or purchased, and the amount of all fees received by him or her for taking up, impounding, redeeming, reclaiming or purchasing the same, as the case may be. (Ord. 1970 § 62, 2013)

 

8.08.240 Sheltermaster—Monthly report.
The sheltermaster shall file with the city a monthly statistics report for the preceding month containing a statement of service calls, hours and statistics. (Ord. 1970 § 64, 2013)

 

8.08.245 Enforcement.
The sheltermaster, the animal control officer, the health officer and all police officers of the city and their respective deputies or representatives are charged with enforcing the provisions of this chapter and to pursue, capture and impound any animals found or discovered in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, and each of them is authorized to enter upon any private property while engaged in the immediate discharge of the duties required of them, or any of them, under this chapter, for the purpose of enforcing its provisions. (Ord. 1970 § 66, 2013)

 

8.08.250 Violation.
It is unlawful for the owner or person in control of a dangerous animal to fail to surrender the dangerous animal into the custody of the city’s animal control authority when requested to do so in accordance with Section 8.08.140, or to fail to comply with all of the conditions imposed pursuant to the hearing held in accordance with Section 8.08.215. (Ord. 1970 § 68, 2013)

Chapter 8.12 PIGEONS
8.12.010 Purpose of chapter.
The purpose of this chapter is to permit, subject to proper regulation, the keeping and flying of racing homing pigeons as a recreational sport and hobby, and for no other purpose. (Prior code § 4.53)

 

8.12.020 Homing pigeon defined.
“Homing pigeon” means a pigeon trained to return home from a distance. Such homing pigeons can be identified by a seamless leg band issued by the American Racing Pigeon Union and marked with the letters AU and the figures designating the year issued and serial number. (Prior code § 4.54)

 

8.12.030 Permit required.
(a)     It is unlawful for any person to keep or liberate for exercise or racing any homing pigeon without first having obtained a permit from the city to do so and without complying with any and all applicable provisions of this chapter.

(b)     Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1416 § 1, 1983; prior code § 4.55)

 

8.12.040 Application—Filing fee.
Each application for a permit to keep and liberate for exercise and racing of homing pigeons shall be made upon forms to be furnished for that purpose by the city signed by the applicant and filed with the city. No such application shall be received for filing unless accompanied by a filing fee of five dollars. (Prior code § 4.56)

 

8.12.050 Prerequisites to issuance.
A permit to keep homing pigeons for exercise and racing shall be issued by the city subject to and upon compliance by the applicant with the following conditions:

(1)     The homing pigeons shall not be kept or raised for the market or other commercial purposes.

(2)     The homing pigeons shall not be kept or liberated for exercise or racing within twenty-five feet from any door, window or other opening of any dwelling on the same property, or within thirty-five feet of any dwelling on neighboring property.

(3)     All feed for such homing pigeons shall be stored in containers which offer protection against rodents.

(4)     All food scraps and droppings shall be removed from the premises at least once a week and be disposed of in a sanitary manner.

(5)     The lofts or pigeonhouses where such homing pigeons are kept shall be soundly constructed, properly maintained and adequately landscaped to blend with, and conform to, the surrounding area.

(6)     The lofts or pigeon houses shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and in compliance with the health regulations of the city and those promulgated by the state racing pigeon organization.

 

(7)     The city or its duly authorized representative shall have the right to inspect each loft and pigeon house at such times as it deems advisable.

(8)     No more than seventy-five pigeons, exclusive of nestlings, shall be kept on any one lot or parcel of ground located within the city. (Ord. 1416 § 1, 1983; prior code § 4.57)

 

8.12.060 Term—Renewal fee.
Each permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be valid for the period of one year and shall be renewable on the payment to the city of a renewal fee in the sum of five dollars annually. This fee shall be prorated over a calendar year in accordance with Section 5.08.030. (Ord. 1080 § 1, 1968; prior code § 4.58)

Chapter 8.16 FEEDING NONDOMESTICATED ANIMALS
8.16.010 Providing food for certain rodents and animals prohibited.
(a)     Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, no person shall feed or in any manner provide food to a nondomesticated rodent or a nondomesticated animal.

(b)     For purposes of this chapter:

(1)     “Rodent” means and includes ground squirrels;

(2)     “Nondomesticated animals” means and includes coyote, raccoon, fox, bear, peacock, opossum and feral cat. (Ord. 1970 § 70, 2013)

 

8.16.020 Feeding animals permitted when.
A person may feed or provide food to a nondomesticated rodent or a nondomesticated animal under the following instances:

(1)     When the person is the owner of such a rodent or nondomesticated animal, and such rodent or nondomesticated animal is kept under a valid certificate or permit issued by the state of California Department of Fish and Game;

(2)     When the person feeds or provides food to a trapped, injured or unweaned nondomesticated rodent or nondomesticated animal between the time the agency in charge of animal control or its designated agent is notified and picked up by such agency. (Ord. 1809 § 1, 2004)

 

8.16.030 Violation—Penalty.
Every person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1809 § 1, 2004)

Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND SAFETY
Chapter 9.06 BINGO GAMES
Chapter 9.08 BILLIARD AND CARDROOMS
Chapter 9.12 CURFEW HOURS FOR MINORS
Chapter 9.14 CONCEALABLE FIREARMS—RETAIL SALES
Chapter 9.16 FIREARMS, DANGEROUS OR DEADLY WEAPONS
Chapter 9.20 PARKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Chapter 9.22 PROHIBITION OF DRONES AND ELECTRONIC/MOTOR VEHICLES AT CITY PARKS AND FACILITIES
Chapter 9.24 SANITATION OF PRIVATE PREMISES
Chapter 9.28 WEEDS AND RUBBISH
Chapter 9.32 SWIMMING POOLS
Chapter 9.36 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES—PREMISES
Chapter 9.37 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES—VEHICLES
Chapter 9.40 REGISTRATION OF RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES IN FORECLOSURE
Chapter 9.44 NOISE REGULATION
Chapter 9.50 ADULT BUSINESS REGULATIONS ,
Chapter 9.51 DISPLAY OF MATERIAL WHICH IS HARMFUL TO MINORS—BLINDER RACKS REQUIRED
Chapter 9.52 PREVENTION AND REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI
Chapter 9.54 GATED COMMUNITY ACCESS REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 9.56 REGULATION OF SPECIFIC ACTS DURING SPECIAL EVENTS
Chapter 9.58 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Chapter 9.60 SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS
Chapter 9.62 FIREWORKS
Chapter 9.64 PROHIBITION OF MARIJUANA CULTIVATION, DISPENSATION OR DELIVERY
Chapter 9.66 ABANDONED SHOPPING CARTS

Chapter 9.06 BINGO GAMES
9.06.010 Organizations eligible for city license to conduct bingo games.
Organizations exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g and 23701L of the Revenue and Taxation Code and by mobilehome park associations and senior citizens organizations; and provided that the proceeds of the games are used only for charitable purposes, with specified exceptions, are eligible to apply for a license to conduct bingo within the city under the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code, and the provisions of the Glendora Municipal Code relating to bingo games. No license shall be issued unless the application conforms to the terms and conditions of this chapter. (Ord. 1392 § 1, 1982)

 

9.06.020 Definition of bingo.
As used in this chapter, “bingo” means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers and symbols selected at random. (Ord. 1392 § 1, 1982)

 

9.06.030 Application for license.
Eligible organizations desiring to obtain such license to conduct bingo games in the city shall file an application in writing therefor in the office of the finance director on a form to be provided by the finance director. The issuing authority shall be the chief of police. The license issued shall be for a term of not more than one year. All licenses are subject to renewal and annual fees. The fee for such license shall be as established pursuant to resolution of the city council, and if an application is denied, one-half of the fee shall be refunded to the organization. (Ord. 1536 § 8, 1989; Ord. 1392 § 1, 1982)

 

9.06.040 Contents of application.
Said application for a license shall contain the following:

(1)     The name of the applicant organization and the name and signature and addresses of all officers of the applicant organization.

(2)     The particular property within the city, including the street number, owned or leased by the applicant or property whose use is donated to the organization and which property is used by such applicant for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the applicant is organized, on which property bingo games will be conducted, together with the occupancy capacity of such place.

(3)     Proposed day of week and hours of day for conduct of bingo games.

(4)     A description of any security measures which are to be provided.

(5)     The applicant shall agree that other forms of gambling shall not be allowed on the premises; such activities shall constitute cause for license revocation.

(6)     The annual license fee shall accompany the application.

(7)     The applicant shall also submit with his or her application a certificate or determination of exemption under Section 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, or 23701L of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or a letter of good standing from the exemption division of the Franchise Tax Board in Sacramento, showing exemption under said Section 23701d. This subsection shall not be applicable to those requesting a permit as a mobilehome park association or senior citizen’s organization. (Ord. 1392 § 1, 1982)

 

9.06.050 Authority to investigate and inspect.
The chief of police shall determine if all the statements on the application are true and shall obtain the criminal record, if any, of the principal officers of the organization, each person who will be responsible for the operation of the bingo game and those persons who will provide assistance. He or she shall recommend the issuance of the license except:

(a)     In the event that he or she finds any of the statements on the application to be false, he or she may recommend against its issuance; and

(b)     In the event that he or she finds any officer of the organization or any person who will be responsible for the operation of the bingo game or any person who will assist therein to have been convicted within the last ten years of crimes involving lotteries, gambling, larceny, perjury, bribery, extortion or fraud, he or she shall recommend against its issuance. (Ord. 1392 § 1, 1982)

 

9.06.060 Other investigations.
The fire chief and development services director shall investigate the premises and surroundings for the safety of the structure and adequacy of parking facilities, and any other condition which might endanger the public health and safety. Should they find that such potential danger or nuisance exists, they may recommend against the issuance of the license or require the attachment of such conditions that will adequately safeguard the public health and safety. The chief of police shall deny issuance of the license if either of the foregoing department heads recommends against issuance. (Ord. 1392 § 1, 1982)

 

9.06.070 Contents of license.
Upon being satisfied that the applicant is fully qualified under the law to conduct bingo games in the city, the chief of police shall request that the finance director issue a license to said applicant, which shall contain the following information:

(1)     The name and nature of the organization to whom the license is issued.

(2)     The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted.

(3)     The occupancy capacity of the room in which bingo games are to be conducted.

(4)     Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

(5)     Such license shall be posted in the place where the bingo game is in operation, and shall be available for inspection by any city official.

(6)     The date of the expiration of such license. No license shall be issued for a period to exceed twelve months.

(7)     Such license cannot be used by any other than the named licensee or at any other location than at the address specified on the application. (Ord. 1392 § 1, 1982)

 

9.06.080 Changes in application information—Duty to report.
Any changes as to the staff operating or assisting in the operation of a bingo game, and any other changes in the information furnished in the application subsequent to its filing, shall be reported promptly to the chief of police for any further investigation deemed necessary and appropriate. (Ord. 1392 § 1, 1982)

 

9.06.090 Grounds for license denial, suspension or revocation.
(a)     In addition to those grounds specified in this chapter, or the laws of the state of California, applications may be denied, suspended or revoked whenever the licensee, applicant, or any person listed under Section 9.06.040 has been convicted of any public offense involving bingo, or enjoined from violation thereof, or has within the last ten years been convicted of any crime involving lotteries, gambling, larceny, perjury, bribery, extortion, fraud, or similar crimes involving moral turpitude.

(b)     The chief of police shall have the authority to summarily suspend the license and order the licensee to immediately cease and desist any further operation of any bingo game, whenever it appears that the game is operated in violation of this chapter.

(c)     Any person who continues to conduct a bingo game after any summary suspension thereof under subsection (b) shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.

(d)     The order issued under subsection (b) shall also notify the licensee that it shall have five days from the date of such order to request a hearing to determine whether such license shall be revoked.

(e)     Upon such request by the licensee whose license has been suspended under subsection (b) for a hearing to determine whether such license shall be revoked, the chief of police shall provide such a hearing within ten days after receipt of such request. (Ord. 1392 § 1, 1982)

 

9.06.100 Appeal of denial or revocation to city council.
(a)     Any applicant for a license whose application is denied under this chapter and any holder of a license whose license is revoked under this chapter shall have the right within ten days after receiving notice in writing of the denial or revocation to file a written appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall set forth the specific ground on which it is based. The city council shall hold a hearing on the appeal within thirty days after its receipt by the city, or at a time thereafter agreed upon and shall cause the applicant to be given at least five days written notice of such hearing. At the hearing the appellant or its authorized representative shall have the right to present evidence and a written or oral argument, or both, in support of the appeal. The determination of the city council on the appeal shall be final.

(b)     Any organization whose license is finally denied or revoked may not again apply for a license to conduct bingo games in the city for a period of one year from the date of such denial or revocation; provided, however, if the ground for the denial or revocation is cancellation of the exemption granted under Revenue and Taxation Code, as indicated in Section 9.06.010, such organization may again apply for a license upon proof of reinstatement of said exemption. (Ord. 1392 § 1, 1982)

 

9.06.110 Maximum amount of prize.
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars in cash or kind or combination thereof for each separate game which is held. (Ord. 1392 § 1, 1982)

 

9.06.120 Accounting and audit—Inspection of records.
The city, by and through its officers, shall have the right to examine and audit such record at any reasonable time and licensee shall fully cooperate with the city by making such record available. All records relating to bingo games shall be retained for a period of three years. (Ord. 1392 § 1, 1982)

 

9.06.130 Profits to be kept in separate fund or account.
All profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled within any other fund or account. The licensee shall compile full and accurate records of the income and expenses received and disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct, promotion, supervision, and any other phase of bingo games which are authorized by this chapter. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes except as follows:

(1)     Such proceeds may be used for prizes.

(2)     A portion of such proceeds not to exceed twenty percent of the proceeds before the deduction for prizes, or one thousand dollars per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property, overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment, administrative expenses, security equipment and security personnel.

(3)     Such proceeds may be used to pay license fees. (Ord. 1392 § 1, 1982)

 

9.06.140 Financial interest in licensee only.
No individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity except the licensee shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. (Ord. 1392 § 1, 1982)

 

9.06.150 Exclusive operation by licensee.
A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the licensee organization. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game. Only the licensee shall operate such game or participate in the promotion, supervision, or any other phase of such game. A minimum of one officer listed on the application shall be available on the premises any time a bingo game is in progress and shall be responsible for the operation of the games as indicated with this chapter. This subdivision does not preclude the employment of security personnel who are not members of the authorized organization at such bingo game by the organization conducting the game. (Ord. 1392 § 1, 1982)

 

9.06.160 Bingo games open to public.
All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to members of the licensee organization. No admission fee, purchase, or donation shall be required for entry onto the bingo premises. (Ord. 1392 § 1 part), 1982)

 

9.06.170 Size of game.
No bingo game shall be conducted except in a room wherein the persons drawing and calling out the letters and numbers are visible to every person playing the game without the aid of mechanical devices. (Ord. 1392 § 1 part), 1982)

 

9.06.180 Bingo games conducted only on licensee’s property.
A licensee shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, or property whose use is donated to the organization, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Attendance shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which the game is conducted. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by, or whose use is donated to the organization, be used or leased exclusively by, or donated exclusively to such organization. The license issued under this chapter shall authorize the holder thereof to conduct bingo games only on such property, the address of which is stated in the application. In the event the described property ceases to be used as an office and/or as a place for performance of the purposes for which the licensee is organized, the license shall have no further force or effect. A new license may be obtained by an eligible organization, upon application under this chapter, when it again owns or leases property used by it for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. (Ord. 1392 § 1, 1982)

 

9.06.190 Minors not to participate.
No person under the age of eighteen years of age shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. (Ord. 1392 § 1, 1982)

 

9.06.200 Intoxicated persons not to participate.
No person who is obviously intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. (Ord. 1392 § 1, 1982)

 

9.06.210 Hours of operation.
No licensee shall conduct any bingo game more than six hours, one day, per calendar week. No bingo game shall be conducted before ten-thirty a.m. nor after twelve p.m. of any day. (Ord. 1392 § 1, 1982)

 

9.06.220 Receipt of profit by a person a misdemeanor under state law.
It is a misdemeanor under Section 326.5(b) of the Penal Code of the state of California for any person to receive a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game authorized under this chapter, a violation of which is punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars, which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. Security personnel employed by the organization conducting the bingo game may be paid from the revenues of bingo games as provided in Section 9.06.130. (Ord. 1392 § 1, 1982)

 

9.06.230 Prizes and rules.
The licensee shall post the prizes and rules next to the permit during the bingo game. A record shall be kept by the licensee showing the name and signature, address, and phone number of the winner of each game, and prize. (Ord. 1392 § 1, 1982)

Chapter 9.08 BILLIARD AND CARDROOMS
9.08.010 Billiard rooms defined.
For the purpose of Sections 9.08.010 and 9.08.020, a public billiard room is defined to be any place open to the public where billiards, bagatelle or pool is played, or in which any billiard, bagatelle or pool table is kept and persons are permitted to play or do play thereon, whether any compensation or reward is charged for the use of such table or not; provided, however, that a public billiard room as used therein shall not include any place operated and maintained on the same premises with and strictly incidental to another lawful principal use of the premises, and only during the hours that such principal use is open to the public. (Prior code § 13.1-5)

 

9.08.020 Operator of public billiard room deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Every person who carries on, opens or causes to be opened, or who conducts, either as owner, tenant, licensee or employee any place in the city where billiard, pool or combination billiard and pool tables are kept for hire for public use is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 13.1-6)

 

9.08.030 Cardrooms and games.
Every person who carries on, opens or causes to be opened, or who conducts, either as owner, tenant, licensee or employee any place in the city, for the purpose of permitting or causing any game of cards, other than those named in Section 330 of the Penal Code of the state, to be played by the public for hire is guilty of a misdemeanor, and every person who plays at or against any of such prohibited games at any place mentioned in this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 13.1-7)

Chapter 9.12 CURFEW HOURS FOR MINORS
Note
*       Prior history; prior code Sections 13.2A through 13.2D as amended by Ords. 1032, 1095, 1609, 1613 and 1644.

 

9.12.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

“Curfew hours” includes the meanings of “darkness curfew hours” and “daytime curfew hours,” as defined below:

(1)     “Darkness curfew hours” means any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday from 11:00 p.m. until 5:00 a.m. of the following day; and any Saturday or Sunday from 12:01 a.m. until 5:00 a.m.

(2)     “Daytime curfew hours” means Monday through Friday when school is in session from 8:30 a.m. until 1:30 p.m.

“Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

“Establishment” means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit, to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.

“Guardian” means a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.

“Minor” means any person under eighteen years of age.

“Operator” means any individual, firm association, partnership or corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officer of a corporation.

“Parent” means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive or stepparent, or at least eighteen years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.

“Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to: streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.

“Remain” means to linger or stay, or fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.

“Serious bodily injury” means injury to a person which causes death or creates a substantial risk of: death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. (Ord. 1701 § 1, 1999)

 

9.12.020 Offenses.
Curfew Violation. A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. (Ord. 1701 § 1, 1999)

 

9.12.030 Defenses.
(a)     Darkness Hours. It is a defense to prosecution under subsection 9.12.020(a) of this chapter for a violation as defined in subsection 9.12.010(1) of this chapter, that a minor was:

(1)     Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;

(2)     On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;

(3)     Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;

(4)     Involved in an emergency;

(5)     On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if that neighbor or other neighborhood resident did not complain to the police department about the minor’s presence;

(6)     Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic or religious organization, or another similar entity, which takes responsibility for the minor; or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, such supervised activity;

(7)     Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right to peacefully assembly;

(8)     Emancipated pursuant to law; or

(9)     In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel.

(b)     Daytime Hours. It is a defense to prosecution under subsection 9.12.020(a) of this chapter for a violation as defined in subsection 9.12.010(2) of this chapter, that a minor, whose school is in session, was:

(1)     On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;

(2)     Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;

(3)     Involved in an emergency;

(4)     Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic or religious organization, or another similar entity, which takes responsibility for the minor; or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, such supervised activity;

(5)     Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right to peaceably assemble;

(6)     Emancipated pursuant to law;

(7)     In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;

(8)     The minor has permission to leave campus for lunch or a school-related activity and has in his or her possession a valid, school-issued, off-campus permit or is supervised by school personnel;

(9)     The minor is with a parent or guardian or has in his or her possession a written excuse from the minor’s parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult having the legal care or custody of said minor, which provides a reasonable explanation for the minor’s absence from school;

(10)   The minor is not subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuation education pursuant to the California Education Code or when the minor is authorized to be absent from his or her school pursuant to the provisions of California Education Code Section 48205, or any other applicable state or federal law. (Ord. 1701 § 1, 1999)

 

9.12.040 Enforcement.
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, an officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place or establishment during curfew hours. The officer shall not issue a citation under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in Section 9.12.030 of this chapter is present. (Ord. 1701 § 1, 1999)

 

9.12.050 Penalties.
A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, and each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted shall be a separate offense. (Ord. 1701 § 1, 1999)

Chapter 9.14 CONCEALABLE FIREARMS—RETAIL SALES
9.14.010 License required.
(a)     No person shall engage in the business of selling, transferring, advertising, offering, or exposing for sale or transfer, any pistol, revolver or other firearm capable of being concealed upon the person unless he or she has been issued a license pursuant to this chapter, in addition to any other permit or license required by this code.

(b)     A person who engages in the business of selling or transferring concealable weapons at more than one place of business shall be required to have a separate license for each such place of business. No license issued by another jurisdiction shall be valid in the city.

(c)     As used in this chapter, engaging in the business of selling or transferring concealable firearms does not include the infrequent sale or transfer, offering, exposing for sale, or advertising for sale any handgun at a gun show, swap meet or similar event. As used in this section, “infrequent” means occasional and without regularity.

(d)     The question as to whether a person is “engaged in the business,” as the term is used in this chapter, shall be resolved in light of the facts of each particular case. (Ord. 1383 § 1, 1982)

 

9.14.020 Application.
(a)     An application for a license under this chapter, or the renewal thereof, shall be filed with the finance department on forms provided by the city, together with a filing fee, as established by city council resolution. The information to be provided on the application shall include the applicant’s true name and aliases, if any, driver’s license number, date of birth, height, weight, color of hair and eyes, business and residence address and telephone number, state sales tax number, and such other information as the chief of police may deem necessary. The application shall be verified by the applicant.

(b)     A person who engages in the business of selling or transferring concealable weapons at more than one place of business shall be required to file a separate application for each such place of business. (Ord. 1383 § 1, 1982)

 

9.14.030 Investigation.
(a)     The chief of police shall conduct an investigation of the applicant to determine whether the license, or renewal thereof, shall be issued. The police chief may require information of the applicant which he or she deems necessary to conduct the investigation, in addition to the information contained in the application.

(b)     The chief of police shall complete his or her investigation and either issue the license or give written notice to the applicant by mail or personal service of the denial thereof, within thirty days after the application is filed. Every notice of denial shall include a statement of the findings therefor. (Ord. 1383 § 1, 1982)

 

9.14.040 Findings for approval.
(a)     The chief of police shall issue the license, or renewal thereof, if:

(1)     The place of business is in a zone that permits the sale of guns;

(2)     The applicant has not been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor involving the violation of any state law or any local ordinance relating to the owning, carrying, sale, use or registration of firearms or dangerous or deadly weapons;

(3)     The applicant’s character is not adverse to the safety or general welfare of the community;

(4)     The applicant maintains the security of the place of business, according to reasonable standards, which may be prescribed by the police chief; and

(5)     The applicant has not falsified any of the information contained in the application or otherwise reasonably required by the police chief.

(b)     As used in this section, “conviction” means a plea or verdict of guilty or a conviction following a plea of nolo contendere. (Ord. 1383 § 1, 1982)

 

9.14.050 Conditions of approval.
Every license, and renewal thereof, shall be issued subject to all of the conditions contained in Section 12071 of the California Penal Code. (Ord. 1383 § 1, 1982)

 

9.14.060 License.
(a)     Every license, or renewal thereof, shall be issued, personally to the applicant, in the form prescribed by the Attorney General of the state.

(b)     Every license shall expire:

(1)     One year after the date of issuance, or

(2)     Upon the cessation or change in the location of the place of business, whichever occurs first; provided, that an expired license may be renewed for additional one-year periods in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

(c)     The assignment or attempt to assign any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be unlawful and any such assignment or attempt to assign a permit shall render the license null and void. (Ord. 1383 § 1, 1982)

 

9.14.070 Revocation.
(a)     A license, or renewal thereof, shall be revocable by the chief of police upon a finding that:

(1)     There has been a change of fact relative to one or more of the findings upon which approval was granted pursuant to Section 9.14.040; or

(2)     There has been a violation of one or more of the conditions of approval imposed pursuant to Section 9.14.050.

(b)     A license which is revoked pursuant to this chapter shall be surrendered by the licensee to the chief of police. (Ord. 1383 § 1, 1982)

 

9.14.080 Appeal procedure.
(a)     The applicant shall have ten days from the date of mailing or of personal service of a notice of denial to file with the chief of police a written request for reconsideration. The request shall state the grounds therefor and shall include evidence or argument in opposition to the findings upon which the denial was based. The written request may include a request for a personal interview with the police chief. Within five days after the written request is filed or the interview is held, whichever is later, the police chief shall either issue the license, or renewal thereof, or give written notice to the applicant by mail or by personal service of his or her final determination of denial and the findings therefor.

(b)     The applicant shall have ten days from the date of mailing or of personal service of the final determination of denial to file with the city manager a written appeal. The appeal shall state the grounds therefor, and shall include evidence or argument in opposition to the findings upon which the final determination was based. The written appeal may include a request for a personal interview with the city manager. Within five days after the written appeal is filed or the interview is held, whichever is later, the city manager shall either cause the license to be issued or shall give written notice to the applicant by mail or by personal service of his or her decision of the denial thereof and the findings therefor. The decision of the city manager shall be final. (Ord. 1383 § 1, 1982)

Chapter 9.16 FIREARMS, DANGEROUS OR DEADLY WEAPONS
9.16.010 Discharge of weapons.
It is unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge any gun, pistol, BB gun, pellet gun or other firearm or any air gun, blow gun, spring gun or pistol; or, to use a crossbow of any type; or, to use a bow more than three feet in length; or, metal or pointed tipped arrows; or, to explode or discharge any dynamite, nitroglycerine, gunpowder or any such manufactured article within the city, not in necessary self defense or in the performance of official duty.

Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of explosives by persons engaged in lawful construction or demolition; provided, that a permit is first issued by the chief of police to insure the safety of persons and property.

Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of bows and arrows in the teaching of the art of archery by the city schools, parochial or private schools, or by the department of parks and recreation as a part of their regular program, or by an adult supervised commercial amusement or training business, or under the supervision of a responsible adult upon an archery range approved by the chief of police; nor the manufacturing, testing and sale of any of the articles mentioned in this section at wholesale by any person or bona fide firm in the city; nor the sale by mail order sales of any of the articles mentioned in this section to persons residing outside the city limits. (Prior code § 13.12)

Chapter 9.20 PARKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
9.20.010 Acts prohibited on city property.
(a)     No person shall do or perform or cause to be done or performed any of the hereinafter-mentioned acts on any of the hereinafter-described city property:

(1)     Drive, stop, park or leave standing any motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon any city property, except in driveways and parking facilities that are marked for, or clearly open to, public use; such prohibition shall not apply to any motor vehicle owned or operated by the city when being used in an authorized manner; nor shall such prohibition apply to any other motor vehicle when being used to deliver materials or supplies within the boundaries of the city property; provided, that a permit is first obtained from the director of parks and recreation;

(2)     Ride, drive, lead, stop or leave standing, whether attended or unattended, any horse, donkey, mule or other animal used for riding or driving purposes upon any city property, except within the equestrian park and on trails within the wilderness parks;

(3)     Possess any firearms, whether loaded or unloaded, upon any city property; such prohibition shall not apply to federal, state or local peace officers acting in accord with the rights or duties of their office, nor to persons permitted to carry a concealed firearm pursuant to Penal Code Section 12050;

(4)     Solicit in any manner or for any commercial purpose therein, or sell or offer for sale any goods, wares or merchandise therein, or distribute, or pass out any commercial handbill, advertising matter or commercial literature therein, or conduct any business, profession or service, unless such act is done pursuant to a permit authorized by the city.

(b)     For the purposes of this section, city property is any property under the direct control of the city; it includes, but is not limited to, the City Hall, library, police facility and civic center grounds, parks, and recreation buildings and facilities. For the purposes of this section, city property does not include public streets. (Ord. 1974 § 2, 2013)

 

9.20.020 Time for turning off lights.
Floodlights and other lighting systems used in connection with recreation facilities at public parks and recreation parks and school grounds shall be turned off prior to the hour of ten p.m. and shall not be turned on after the hour of ten p.m. or before sunrise each day. Nothing herein to the contrary withstanding, such lights and lighting systems may be used after the hour of ten p.m. if in use pursuant to a permit issued in accordance with the rules and regulations adopted by the parks and recreation commission. (Ord. 1076 § 1, 1968; prior code § 13.7)

 

9.20.030 Functions later than ten p.m.
Any activity occurring at any public park, recreation park or school ground pursuant to any permit issued by the parks and recreation commission and lasts past the hour of ten p.m., then all lights and lighting systems shall be turned off not later than thirty minutes after the termination of such activity and as prescribed by the terms of such permit. (Ord. 1076 § 2, 1968; prior code § 13.7)

 

9.20.040 Presence after lights out.
No person shall be upon the premises of any public park, recreation park or school ground, after sunset and before sunrise, after the lights and lighting systems used in connection with public activities at these places are turned off. Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1416 § 4, 1983; Ord. 1076 § 3, 1968; prior code § 13.7)

 

9.20.050 Presence on City Hall grounds between ten p.m. and seven a.m. prohibited.
(a)     No person shall be present on the grounds of the City Hall within the area bounded by the sidewalks surrounding City Hall between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. of the following day. For purposes of this section, City Hall is defined as including the City Hall, library, and police station, together with the land and parking lots where said structures are located.

(b)     The restrictions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any of the following persons:

(1)     City officers, employees, agents and contractors present on City Hall grounds to perform their official or employment duties, or to perform contract services requiring presence on City Hall grounds;

(2)     Persons present at the request or invitation of any person present on City Hall grounds pursuant to subsection (1) of this subsection;

(3)     Persons attending any public hearing or any official function of the city, or any event sponsored or permitted by the city, and such persons while directly going to or from such hearing, function or event;

(4)     Persons present at the police station for police related matters.

(c)     Nothing in this section shall prohibit the lawful use of the sidewalks and public right-of-way surrounding City Hall.

(d)     Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1871 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1870 § 1, 2007)

 

9.20.055 Prohibited acts on municipal or city-owned property.
(a)     Except as otherwise stated in this code, no person shall do any of the acts hereinafter specified on the grounds of any municipal building or city-owned property:

(1)     To camp or lodge in any park or upon the grounds above-specified, except in places designated for such purposes;

(2)     To make campfires in any other places than in stoves or pits provided by the city; provided however, that the director of community services may issue special permits for fires in the places or locations as may be deemed safe or which do not interfere with the public welfare;

(3)     To loiter or remain in the grounds above-specified at any time from dusk to dawn.

(b)     Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1871 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1870 § 1, 2007)

 

9.20.060 Drinking upon public streets.
No person shall consume any beer malt, spirituous or vinous liquor or other alcoholic beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume in or on any public street, alleyway, sidewalk or parkway, automobile parking lot, or upon any premises whereat a public dance is being conducted, or lobby or entranceway to any public building within the city. Further, no person shall enter, be or remain in any public park while in possession of, consuming, purchasing, selling or giving away any alcoholic beverage, as defined by this section, except that alcoholic beverages may be consumed, and possessed relative thereto, at city sponsored or cosponsored events, when duly authorized by the city council. Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1611 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1442 § 1, 1984; Ord. 1324 § 1, 1979; Ord. 1203 § 1, 1974)

 

9.20.070 Urinating in public unlawful.
No person shall urinate or defecate on private property in an area exposed to public view or on any public property, whether or not in public view, which is not specifically designated for such purpose. Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.10.110(b). (Ord. 1673 § 1, 1998)

 

9.20.080 Prohibition of smoking in public places.
(a)     As used in this section, the term “smoking” means possessing a lighted tobacco product, lighted tobacco paraphernalia, or any other lighted weed or plant, including, but not limited to, marijuana and marijuana by-products, whether natural or synthetic, including a pipe, cigar, hookah pipe, or cigarette of any kind intended for inhalation, in any form. “Smoke” includes the use of an electronic smoking device that creates an aerosol or vapor, in any manner or in any form, or the use of any oral smoking device for the purpose of circumventing the prohibition of smoking in a public place.

(b)     Smoking shall be prohibited within the boundaries of all public parks and facilities owned or operated by the city of Glendora. Parking lots and roadways are exempt from this prohibition. Glen Oaks Golf Course Clubhouse facility is included in this prohibition, but the golf course and parking lot shall be exempt from this prohibition.

(c)     Smoking, ingesting, or otherwise consuming marijuana or marijuana-infused products shall be prohibited on any public street, alleyway, sidewalk or parkway, automobile parking lot, or lobby or entranceway to any public building within the city. Further, no person shall enter, be or remain in any public place while in possession of, consuming, purchasing, selling or giving away any marijuana or marijuana-infused product, as defined by this section.

(d)     The community services department shall cause applicable no smoking signs to be posted at all public parks and facilities.

(e)     Violation—Penalty. Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b) and (c). (Ord. 2014 § 2, 2017; Ord. 1888 § 1, 2007)

 

9.20.090 Free passage shall not be obstructed or hindered.
(a)     No person or persons shall stand, sit, or linger on any street, alley, sidewalk, park or other public place, or in or about the entrance or exit of any business establishment or public building, either on foot or in an automobile or other vehicle, in such a manner as to obstruct or hinder the free passage of persons along such public way, or obstruct or hinder persons entering and exiting from any business establishment or public building.

(b)     No person in violation of this prohibition shall refuse or fail to disperse or move when directed to do so by a police officer or city employee. (Ord. 2052 § 2, 2020)

 

9.20.100 Bulky items, tents and storage of personal property in city pathways, sidewalks, passageways, parks, and other city property.
(a)     Purpose. City pathways, sidewalks, passageways, parks, and other city property should be accessible and available to residents and the public at large for their intended uses. Bringing bulky items, personal property, or tents in or onto such pathways, sidewalks, passageways, parks, and other city property, together with the use of such city pathways, sidewalks, passageways, parks, and other city property for the storage of personal property interferes with the rights of other members of the public to use the same for their intended purposes and can create a public health or safety hazards that adversely affects the users of such city facilities. The purpose of this section is to maintain such city pathways, sidewalks, passageways, parks, and other city property in a clean, sanitary, and accessible condition, to prevent harm to the health or safety of the public, and to promote the public health and safety by ensuring that such pathways, sidewalks, passageways, city parks, and other city property remain readily accessible for their intended uses.

(b)     Definitions. The definitions contained in this subsection shall govern the construction, meaning and application of words and phrases used in this section.

(1)     “Administrative procedure” means the city’s procedures as set forth in this section and in Sections 1.18.020, 1.18.040, 1.18.050(a), 1.18.060, 1.18.070(a) through (c), 1.18.080(a), and 1.18.100, of Chapter 1.18 of Title 1 of this code, entitled “Administrative Citations.”

(2)     “Bulky item” means any item that is too large or a group of items that cumulatively are too large to fit in one sixty-gallon trash container with the lid closed, including, but not limited to, a mattress, couch, chair or other furniture or appliance. The following items shall not constitute a bulky item: a portable, collapsible picnic chair or table, bicycle or any item approved for a city-authorized special event.

(3)     “Personal property” means any and all tangible property, and includes, but is not limited to, goods, materials, merchandise, tents, bedding, sleeping bags, hammocks, and personal items such as luggage, backpacks, clothing, documents, medication and household items.

(4)     “Store,” “stored” or “storing” means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location.

(5)     “Tent” means any tarpaulin, cover, structure or shelter, made of any material which is not open on all sides and which hinders an unobstructed view behind or into the area surrounded by the tarpaulins, cover, structure or shelter.

(c)     Prohibition on bulky items in or upon city pathways, sidewalks, passageways, parks, and other city property. No person shall bring in or upon city pathways, sidewalks, passageways, parks, and other city property any bulky item unless the city manager or city manager’s designee approves in writing the bulky item for a city-authorized special event.

(d)     Prohibition on Erecting a Tent In or Upon City Pathways, Sidewalks, Passageways, Parks, and Other City Property. Except for areas expressly designated for camping, no person shall erect, configure or construct a tent in or upon city pathways, sidewalks, passageways, parks, and other city property.

(e)     Prohibition on Attachments. No person shall erect any barrier against or lay string, thread, or filament or join any wires, ropes, chains or otherwise attach any personal property to any of the city’s real or personal property or trees or plants in a park, including, but not limited to, a building or portion or protrusion thereof, playground equipment, sports equipment, exercise equipment, fencing, netting, trash can, gazebo, pagoda, pole, post, bike rack, drinking fountain, sign, table, bench, tree, bush, shrub or plant, unless the city manager or city manager’s designee approves in writing the bulky item for a city-authorized special event.

(f)      Prohibition on Storage of Personal Property—Removal of the Same from City Pathways, Sidewalks, Passageways, Parks, and Other City Property. No person shall store personal property in or upon city pathways, sidewalks, passageways, parks, and other city property.

(g)     Citation, Seizure and Storage. Following the issuance of an administrative citation as provided for in Section 1.18.040 or 1.18.050(a), the city may remove bulky items, personal property, or tents from any city pathways, sidewalks, passageways, city, and other city property in violation of this section. This section shall not apply to bulky items or personal property that remains in or upon city pathways, sidewalks, passageways, parks, and other city property pursuant to statute, ordinance, regulation, permit, contract or other authorization by the city manager or city manager’s designee.

(h)     Summary Seizure and Destruction. In the event that bulky items, personal property, or tents placed in or upon city pathways, sidewalks, passageways, parks, and other city property in violation of this section that poses an immediate threat to the health or safety of the public, the city may remove and destroyed the same without prior compliance with Section 1.18.040 or 1.18.050(a).

(i)      Adoption of Administrative Procedures. Adoption of Sections 1.18.020, 1.18.040, 1.18.050(a), 1.18.060, 1.18.070(a) through (c), 1.18.080(a), and 1.18.100, of Chapter 1.18 of Title 1 of this code, entitled “Administrative Citations,” are hereby adopted as the administrative procedure for enforcing the provisions of this section.

(1)     Pre-Removal Notice. In the event that it is determined that any bulky items, personal property, or tents are being stored in or upon city pathways, sidewalks, passageways, parks, and other city property in violation of this section, an administrative citation shall be issued pursuant to Sections 1.18.040, 1.18.050(2), and 1.18.060 of Title 1 of this code which shall include, among other items noted in Section 1.18.060, a demand to remove the same from city pathways, sidewalks, passageways, parks, and other city property within the time specified in such citation. Service of such administrative citation shall be as provided in Section 1.18.070(a), (b), or (c) of Title 1 of this code.

(2)     Failure to Remove Stored Personal Property. Failure of any person to remove any bulky items, personal property, or tents are being placed or stored in violation of or upon city pathways, sidewalks, passageways, parks in violation of this section within the time specified in the notice provided in subsection (i)(1) shall result in the seizure and storage of the same by the city as provided hereinafter.

(3)     Repossession. The owner or other person entitled to possession, custody or control of any bulky items, personal property, or tents seized and stored as provided in subsection (i)(2), may repossess the same within sixty calendars of its seizure by providing proof to the reasonable satisfaction of the city manager or city manager’s designee of ownership of the same.

(4)     Abandonment. Bulky items, personal property, or tents seized and stored as provided in subsection (i)(2) not repossessed within the time specified in subsection (i)(3), or following the expiration of any appeal as provided in Section 1.18.100 of Title 1 of this code shall be deemed to have been abandoned.

(j)      Prohibition on Illegal Dumping. Nothing herein precludes the enforcement of any law prohibiting illegal dumping, including, but not limited to, California Penal Code Section 374.3, or any successor statutes proscribing illegal dumping.

(k)     Limitation on Applicability. This chapter is not intended to violate and shall not be applied or enforced in a manner that violates the United States or California Constitutions and applicable state or federal statutes.

(l)      Violations. Any person who violates this section shall be subject to administrative fines as set for in Section 1.18.080(a) of this code except that such administrative fines shall always be treated as an infraction and shall not be subject to citation or penalty as a misdemeanor. As an additional remedy, a violation of this section is hereby deemed to constitute a public nuisance, and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2052 § 3, 2020)

Chapter 9.22 PROHIBITION OF DRONES AND ELECTRONIC/MOTOR VEHICLES AT CITY PARKS AND FACILITIES
9.22.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases for the purpose of this chapter are defined and shall be construed as set out in this section:

“Agent” means the city manager or persons designated by the city council to establish regulations or grant permits for the carrying out of the provisions of this chapter.

“Motor vehicle” means a vehicle, which is self-propelled, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, golf carts, motorized bicycles, mopeds, and motor-driven cycles.

“Park” means any recreation area or facility, historic park or site, picnic area, reservoir, golf course, roadside rest area, riding or hiking trail, and any building, structure, or other facility located therein, owned, managed, operated or controlled by the city.

“Person” means any natural person other than a city employee, contractor, or concessionaire or employee or agent of the above performing services within the scope of said employment, contract, or concession.

“Public unmanned aircraft system (UAS)” means an unmanned aircraft or unmanned aircraft system that is used or operated on behalf of any government agency that meets the qualifications as defined in Section 40102 of Title 49 of the United States Code.

“Unmanned aircraft” means an aircraft that is operated without a human pilot onboard and without the possibility of direct human intervention from within or on the aircraft. This definition includes devices commonly referred to as drones. (Ord. 2032 § 2, 2018)

 

9.22.020 Motorized craft and unmanned aircraft.
(a)     No person shall operate any radio or remote controlled drone, cars, boats, rockets, model airplanes, or other similar motorized craft in any city park, except in an area specifically designated for such activity.

(b)     No person shall take off or land an unmanned aircraft in any city owned park, recreation area, facility and/or property.

(c)     No person shall take off or land an unmanned aircraft from the public right-of-way.

(d)     This section shall not apply to the use of a public unmanned aircraft system, the use of which is required to protect the public health and safety. (Ord. 2032 § 3, 2018)

 

9.22.030 Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply if the following exceptions exist:

(a)     Written authorization by the city manager or designee.

(b)     The landing of an emergency aircraft is authorized by the chief of police, or designee. (Ord. 2032 § 4, 2018)

 

9.22.040 Violations, penalties.
Any person, firm, entity, partnership or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter can lead to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2032 § 5, 2018)

Chapter 9.24 SANITATION OF PRIVATE PREMISES
9.24.010 Unsanitary condition of private property.
It is a nuisance and unlawful for any person to keep in the city, or suffer or permit to be kept at or upon any premises owned, controlled or occupied by him or her, any chicken coop, yard, cow house, stable, cellar, drain, vault, pool, sewer or sink in a foul, offensive, noxious or filthy condition; nor shall such person cause or suffer or permit the carcass of any animal to remain upon any lot, premises or place owned, controlled or occupied by him or her, for a period of more than twenty-four hours, or to cause, suffer or permit any animal or vegetable matter, garbage, filth, night soil, slops, swill, suds, stagnant water or other offense matter liable to become putrid, to collect or be deposited upon any lot, premises or place owned, controlled or occupied by him or her, except as to garbage where such garbage is collected or removed by authority of the city. (Prior code § 13.9)

Chapter 9.28 WEEDS AND RUBBISH
9.28.010 Weeds defined.
“Weeds” as used in this chapter refers to all those items enumerated in C. G. C. Section 39561.5. (Ord. 1017 § 1, 1966)

 

9.28.020 Rubbish defined.
“Rubbish” as used in this chapter means unusable or discarded matter having no substantial market value, which is exposed to the elements and is not enclosed in any structure or otherwise concealed from public view and which consists (without limitation or exclusion by enumeration) of such matter as:

(1)     Refuse, asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile, metal and glass containers and broken articles of any kind or description;

(2)     Trimmings from lawns, trees, shrubs and gardens, waste, combustible materials of any kind, pasteboard boxes, crates and cartons, rubber tires which are worn out or unfit for further use, discarded lumber, or any offal, filth, trash or any noisome, nauseous or offensive matter of any nature, kind or description;

(3)     Vehicle bodies and parts. (Ord. 1017 § 2, 1966)

 

9.28.030 Weeds, rubbish on public property.
(a)     It is unlawful and constitutes public nuisance for the owner or person in possession of private property to maintain or cause to be maintained on public sidewalks, parking areas or streets abutting his or her property any weeds or rubbish or any obstruction.

(b)     Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1416 § 1, 1983; Ord. 1017 § 3, 1966)

 

9.28.040 Dead vegetation, rubbish on private property.
(a)     It is unlawful and constitutes a public nuisance for any person to maintain or cause to be maintained on private property any weeds, dead shrubs, dead trees or rubbish.

(b)     Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1416 § 1, 1983; Ord. 1017 § 4, 1966)

 

9.28.050 Notice to owner.
Whenever a nuisance, as described in Sections 9.28.030 and 9.28.040, is found to exist within the city, that fact shall be communicated by the city engineer or his or her deputies, in writing, to the owner of the property abutting the public street or sidewalk whereon such nuisance exists, or to the owner of the private property whereon such nuisance exists. (Ord. 1061 § 1, 1968; Ord. 1017 § 5, 1966)

 

9.28.060 Form.
Notice provided for in Section 9.28.050 shall be in the following form:

 

“Notice is Hereby Given that a public nuisance exists due to the presence of weeds, rubbish, refuse, and/or dirt located on your property at ______ in the city of Glendora, California, being more particularly described in the attached legal description. This public nuisance must be abated by the removal and disposal of such weeds, rubbish, refuse and/or dirt, within fifteen (15) days of the date of this notice. If this nuisance is not abated, the City will have the required work accomplished and the cost of such abatement will be assessed upon the land, from which such weeds, rubbish, refuse and/or dirt are removed. Said cost will constitute a lien upon such land until paid.

All property owners having any objections to the proposed removal of the weeds, rubbish, refuse and dirt are hereby notified that they may demand a public hearing before the City Council of the City of Glendora, by giving written demand therefor to the City Clerk of the City of Glendora, within ten days of the date of this notice. Failure to make demand for such hearing shall be deemed a waiver thereof and a consent that the City may proceed to cause the removal of such nuisance.

Dated this ____ day of__________, 20_____.”

 

(Ord. 1086 § 1, 1969; Ord. 1017 § 6, 1966)

 

9.28.070 Mailing—Posting.
The notice provided for in Section 9.28.060 shall be mailed to each person to whom such described property is assessed in the last equalized assessment roll available on the date that the notice is given, or where such mailed notice is returned unopened such notice shall be posted on those properties as enumerated in C.G.C. Section 39564. the notice shall be dated the same date as it is mailed. (Ord. 1017 § 7, 1966)

 

9.28.080 Hearing.
If any property owner demands a hearing before the city council pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the same shall be held within two weeks after demand is made therefor, at which time the city council shall consider any evidence offered by the property owner as to whether or not a nuisance, in fact, exists. If the city council determines that no nuisance exists, the city shall take no further action with respect to the subject property. If the city council determines that a nuisance exists, the council shall order that the nuisance be abated by the owner within a reasonable period of time or that the city cause such abatement and assess the charge therefor against the real property. (Ord. 1017 § 8, 1966)

 

9.28.090 Notice of hearing.
The city clerk shall give written notice of the time and place when a hearing is held, pursuant to Section 9.28.080, to the property owner who has made a demand therefor, at least five days in advance of such hearing. Notice may be given by personal service or by depositing the same in the United States mail, postage prepaid. Such hearing may be continued from time to time, without further notice. (Ord. 1017 § 9, 1966)

 

9.28.100 Abatement of nuisance.
It shall be the duty of the owner, agent of the owner, or person in possession of any lot or premises in the city to abate the nuisance indicated in notification given in accordance with this chapter within fifteen days after notice when no appeal is made to the city council. Whenever an appeal is made to the city council and the city council determines that a nuisance in fact exists, the nuisance shall be abated by the owner, agent of the owner, or person in possession of the subject lot or premises within ten days of the determination of the city council or such other period of time as the city council may instruct. (Ord. 1017 § 10, 1966)

 

9.28.110 Failure to abate.
Whenever a nuisance is required to be abated in accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter and it is not abated within the time prescribed in the notice to abate or any other applicable time requirement, the city engineer or his or her deputies shall cause such nuisance to be abated and may enter upon private property for that purpose. (Ord. 1061 § 2, 1968; Ord. 1017 § 11, 1966)

 

9.28.120 City crews—Contractor.
The work of abatement of a nuisance may be done by city crews or by a private contractor. In the event of a private contractor, he or she shall keep an account and submit an itemized written report for each separate parcel of land whereon work is performed. (Ord. 1017 § 12, 1966)

 

9.28.130 Entering private property.
The contractor engaged by the city may enter upon private property to abate the nuisance. (Ord. 1017 § 13, 1966)

 

9.28.140 Account of cost.
The city engineer shall keep an account of the cost of abatement in front of, or on each separate parcel of land where work is done by the contractor engaged by the city or performed by the city. He or she shall submit the same to the city council for confirmation. (Ord. 1061 § 3, 1968; Ord. 1017 § 14, 1966)

 

9.28.150 Schedule of cost.
A copy of the schedule showing the cost of abatement as required by Section 9.28.140 shall be posted at least three days prior to the submission to the city council on or near the council chambers with notice of the date it will be submitted to the council. (Ord. 1017 § 15, 1966)

 

9.28.160 Submission of schedule to city council.
At the time fixed for receiving the schedule of account of the cost of abating nuisance, the council shall hear it and any objections to its submission and approval. The council may confirm, accept, modify or reject the schedule of account as it deems fair and necessary. Acceptance or modification shall be by resolution. (Ord. 1017 § 16, 1966)

 

9.28.170 Assessment deemed lien on property.
The cost of abatement in front of or on each parcel of land constitutes a special assessment against that parcel. After the assessment is made and confirmed, it is a lien on the parcel and shall remain a lien until paid. (Ord. 1017 § 17, 1966)

 

9.28.180 Resolution to be filed with county auditor.
A certified copy of the resolution confirming all or part of the cost of abatement as set forth in the schedule of account, shall be filed with the county auditor. The description of the parcel reported shall be those used for the same parcels on the county assessor’s map book for the current year. (Ord. 1017 § 18, 1966)

 

9.28.190 State law to apply.
State laws relating to the levy, collection and enforcement of county taxes apply to such special assessments, as are provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 1017 § 19, 1966)

 

9.28.200 Collecting assessment.
The amount of assessment shall be collected at the time and in the manner of the ordinary municipal taxes. If delinquent, the amount is subject to the same penalties and procedures of foreclosures and sale, as are provided for ordinary municipal taxes. (Ord. 1017 § 20, 1966)

Chapter 9.32 SWIMMING POOLS
9.32.010 Swimming pool defined.
“Swimming pool” means a tank or pool created by artificial means designed for the purpose of containing an outside body of water and offering the possibility of use for swimming, bathing or total bodily immersion by any person, any portion of which tank or pool exceeds thirty-six inches in depth and which pool or tank may or may not be portable in design or construction. (Prior code § 13.8)

 

9.32.020 Fencing required.
Every person in possession of land within the city, either as owner, purchaser under contract, lessee, tenant, licensee or otherwise upon which is situated a swimming pool, shall at all times maintain on the lot or premises upon which such pool is located and completely surrounding such pool, lot or premises, a fence or other solid structure not less than five feet in height with no opening therein, other than doors or gates, larger than six inches square. Such enclosure shall be maintained in good repair at all times.

All gates or doors opening through such enclosure shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device designed to keep and capable of keeping such door or gate securely closed at all times when not in actual use, and which self-latching device shall not be located at nor accessible from less than four feet six inches above grade; provided, however, that the door of any dwelling occupied by human beings and forming any part of the enclosure required in this section need not be so equipped. Driveway gates shall not be deemed to constitute part of the required enclosure. (Ord. 1487 § 1, 1986; prior code § 13.8)

 

9.32.030 Filling pools.
All fencing shall be in place and approved before water is run into the pool. (Prior code § 13.8)

 

9.32.040 Swimming pool clarity and sanitation.
It is a nuisance and unlawful for any person to keep in the city, or suffer or permit to be kept at or upon any premises in the city-owned, controlled or occupied by him or her, a swimming pool, spa or hot tub in a foul, noxious, filthy or stagnant condition. The water of all swimming pools, spas and hot tubs must be kept sufficiently clear that the bottom will be visible at all times. (Ord. 1487 § 1, 1986)

Chapter 9.36 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES—PREMISES
9.36.010 Maintenance of premises—Nuisances.
It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, renting, occupying or having charge or possession of any real property in the city:

(1)     Unsafe or Dangerous Structure. To maintain property containing an unsafe or dangerous building or structure as defined in Sections 3401.2 and A115 of the California Building Code and Section 17920 of the California Health and Safety Code as adopted in Title 19 or subsequent adopted editions;

(2)     Maintenance of Buildings, Structures or Property. To maintain such property in such a manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist thereon:

(a)     Openings into vacant buildings or structures, such as doors, vents and windows, which are unreasonably secured against entry by trespassers,

(b)     Painted buildings and walls, retaining walls, fences or structures that require repainting, or buildings, walls, fences, or structures upon which the condition of the paint has become so deteriorated as to permit decay, excessive checking, cracking, peeling, chalking, dry rot, warping or termite infestation,

(c)     Building(s), structure(s) or property that is, but not limited to, damaged, hazardous, unsanitary, broken, warping, dry rotted, blighted, infested, unsightly, unmaintained, decayed, defective, deteriorated, unsafe, dilapidated, in a state of disrepair, unsanitary, unfit for human habitation, in a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease or likely to cause injury to the health, safety or general welfare of those living, working, accessing or occupying within,

(d)     A violation of any city or county ordinance, rule, regulation and/or code adopted by reference by this code, or any violation of a state or federal law or regulation;,

(e)     Closed, vacant, abandoned or inoperative automobile service stations which shall include, but are not limited to the following: All buildings, pumps, pump islands, all underground storage tanks, pumps, mechanical equipment, wells, cesspools, septic tanks, foundations, all paving and any other materials originally placed in connection therewith on or at any depth beneath the surface of the real property which have been closed, vacant or inoperative for a period of one hundred eighty days,

(f)      The maintenance, for an unreasonable period of time, of an accumulation of dirt, litter, trash or debris in driveways, parking lots, vestibules, porches, patios, doorways or the adjoining sidewalks or walkway of a building,

(g)     Any premises, building or structure, wall, fence, pavement, or walkway which is painted in a garish manner, or in bright, fluorescent, or luminescent colors, which is out of harmony or conformity with the standards of adjacent properties,

(h)     Any building or structure, wall, fence, pavement, window, vehicle, or walkway upon which any graffiti, including paint, ink, chalk, dye, etchings, or other similar marking substances, is allowed to remain for more than twenty-four consecutive hours,

(i)      Any building or structure which is partially destroyed, damaged, abandoned, boarded up, dilapidated, or permitted to remain in a state of partial construction;

(3)     Maintenance of Landscaping. To maintain such property in such a manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist thereon except when in conflict with other provisions of the Glendora Municipal Code:

(a)     Vegetation and/or landscaping that is dead, diseased, dry, overgrown, likely to harbor such nuisances as vermin or rats, is in a condition to cause unsightliness, constitutes a fire or health hazard, reflects a lack of being maintained in a reasonable manner, creates a threat to the public health or welfare, or has a tendency to depreciate property values of surrounding properties;

(4)     Parking of Vehicles. To maintain such property in such a manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist thereon:

(a)     Single-Family or Multifamily Residential Zone. Parking a vehicle on the front yard or side yard or unpaved surface of any residential property, except in a driveway or an approved parking space. An approved parking space must be a paved surface that leads to a residential garage, parking space or carport. An approved parking space may be installed in the side and rear yard only upon obtaining the approval of the city,

(b)     All other Zones. Parking  a vehicle on an unpaved surface of the property,

(c)     “Paved surface” as defined in this chapter shall be concrete, asphalt or other material as approved by the city,

(d)     Parking a vehicle for an unreasonable period of time on an unimproved lot or parcel in any zone,

(e)     Parking a vehicle for an unreasonable period of time on grass, dirt, gravel, bark or any other material not permitted by the city,

(f)      Exemption. Recreational vehicles may be parked on any unpaved surfaces only if it is in compliance with Section 21.03.020(I) of this code;

(5)     Inoperative Vehicles. To maintain such property in such a manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist thereon: To cause or permit the accumulation or storage, for an unreasonable period of time, of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative automobiles; trailers, campers, boats, airplanes or other mobile equipment, or parts thereof, in yard areas or driveways visible from the public right-of-way or any adjoining properties;

(6)     Refuse, Waste and Illegal Storage.

(a)     Maintaining, storing or keeping, permitting or allowing to be maintained for an unreasonable period of time such as. but not limited to, machinery, equipment, or parts thereof, furniture, household appliances, construction material, lumber, wood, packing boxes, trash, paper, cardboard, debris, discards, rubbish, refuse, garbage, offal, feces, defecation, animal excrement, dead vegetation, remains of dead animals or other waste material visible from the public right-of-way or adjoining properties which are not in accordance with regulations of this code or other provisions of law,

(b)     Maintaining, storing or keeping whether permanently or temporarily storage bins, dumpsters or storage containers in public view or visible from adjoining properties except as permitted by the city;

(7)     Improper Maintenance of Premises. To maintain property in such condition as to be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare or in such manner as to constitute a public nuisance as defined by Civil Code Section 3480;

(8)     Attractive Nuisance. To maintain a property containing attractive nuisances which are dangerous to children or any person(s);

(a)     Abandoned, damaged, discarded, unused or broken equipment, machinery or household items, or

(b)     Unfenced, abandoned, uncovered or otherwise unprotected wells, swimming pools, spas, ponds, excavations or other openings;

(9)     Trash Cans in Public View. To maintain premises with garbage or trash containers stored in front or side yards and visible from the public right-of-way except when placed in places of collection at the times permitted and in full compliance with Section 6.08.030;

(10)   Nuisance Bees and Insects. To maintain any insects, including, but not limited to bees, hornets, wasps on any property in such a manner as to pose a threat, disturbance, danger, or menace to any person or property of another;

(11)   Nuisance Odor or Fumes. To store, keep, operate or maintain any equipment, machinery, vehicle, liquid or solid waste or any other device, which emits an objectionable odor or by reason of its dust, exhaust or fumes that creates a health or safety hazard to any person(s) or which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity;

(12)   Improper Maintenance of Exteriors. To maintain property including, but not limited to, building exteriors in such condition of deterioration or disrepair that the same causes an appreciable diminution of the property values of surrounding properties or is materially detrimental to proximal properties and improvements. This includes, but is not limited to, the keeping or disposing of or the scattering over the property or premises any of the following:

(a)     Lumber, junk, trash or debris,

(b)     Abandoned, discarded or unused objects, devices or equipment such as vehicles, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans or containers,

(c)     Stagnant water or excavations,

(d)     Any device, decoration, design, fence, structure or vegetation which is unsightly by reason of its condition or its inappropriate location,

(e)     Unmaintained, unsightly, deteriorated or dilapidated trash enclosures, loading areas and grease traps;

(13)   Unharmonious Property. To maintain property so out of harmony or conformity with the maintenance standards of adjacent properties as to cause substantial diminution of the enjoyment, or use or property values of such adjacent properties;

(14)   Illumination Nuisance. To maintain any type of illumination which directly shines onto adjacent or proximal properties causing substantial diminution of the enjoyment or use of such adjacent  or proximal property;

(15)   Noise Nuisance. To operate or maintain any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery such that the operation or maintenance causes noise or vibrations which cause discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity or endangers the comfort, repose, health or peace of the residents in the area;

(16)   Obscured Visibility. To maintain property in such a manner as to cause a hazard to the public by obscuring visibility of vehicle traffic or pedestrians at intersections, parkways, sidewalks and any other right-of-ways;

(17)   Maintenance of Adverse Topography. To maintain land, the topography, geology or configuration of which, whether in a natural state or as a result of grading operations, excavation or fill, causes erosion, subsidence, or surface water drainage problems of such magnitude as to be injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare or to adjacent properties. (Ord. 1909 § 2, 2008)

 

9.36.020 Abatement.
All or any part of any real property, or buildings or structures located thereon, found to constitute a public nuisance, as provided in this chapter, shall be abated by rehabilitation, repair, removal or clearing, or demolition pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1453 § 1, 1985)

 

9.36.030 Authorization of city manager.
The city manager is authorized to administer the provisions of this chapter. The city manager may appoint one or more members of the city staff to act as his or her designee(s) in carrying out these responsibilities. (Ord. 1453 § 1, 1985)

 

9.36.040 Declaration of nuisance.
Whenever the city manager or his or her designee finds that any real property within the city, or any building, improvement or structure located thereon, is being maintained contrary to one or more of the provisions of Section 9.36.010, and reasonably believes that such violation of said section constitutes a public nuisance under this chapter, he or she shall set the matter for a public hearing before the hearing officer. (Ord. 1453 § 1, 1985)

 

9.36.050 Notice of hearing to abate.
(a)     The city clerk shall give not less than ten days written notice to the owner of the affected property of the time and place of the public hearing by United States mail or by personal delivery, as such owner is shown on the latest assessment roll of Los Angeles County. The city manager may direct that additional notices as he or she may deem necessary or desirable be given. Such notice shall describe the property involved by street address and shall further describe the property by the Los Angeles County assessor’s property identification number, including the map book, page and parcel numbers as contained in the latest assessment roll of the county assessor. The notice shall include a brief description of the Conditions which are deemed to be contrary to the provisions of Section 9.36.010, and shall contain a detailed list of the needed corrections or abatement methods necessary to abate the cited conditions.

(b)     In addition, at least ten days prior to the date set for hearing, the city clerk shall cause a copy of such notice to be conspicuously posted on the affected property.

(c)     The failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings under this chapter. (Ord. 1453 § 1, 1985)

 

9.36.060 Abatement by owner prior to hearing.
Any owner shall have the right to abate the nuisance in accordance with the notice of hearing to abate at his or her own expense, provided the same is done prior to the time that the matter is set for public hearing before the hearing officer. On receipt of notice from the property owner that the nuisance has been abated in this manner, the city manager shall cause the same to be inspected to verify compliance. If he or she finds that compliance has been achieved, he or she shall terminate the proceedings. (Ord. 1453 § 1, 1985)

 

9.36.070 Hearing officer.
The hearing to determine whether a nuisance exists shall be conducted by the city manager or his or her duly authorized designee who shall act as hearing officer, and who shall herein be referred to as the “hearing officer.” The hearing officer is authorized to take testimony and decide upon evidence, and in the course of doing so is authorized to administer oaths or affirmations pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 2093(a) or any of its successor statutes. (Ord. 1521 § 1, 1988; Ord. 1453 § 1, 1985)

 

9.36.080 Hearing—Conduct.
The hearing to determine whether a nuisance exists shall be conducted by the hearing officer who shall consider all relevant evidence including, but not limited to, applicable staff reports, objections or protests relative to the existence of such alleged public nuisance, and the manner proposed for abatement of same. Such hearing may be continued from time to time.

Upon the conclusion of the public hearing, the hearing officer shall, on the basis of the evidence presented at such hearing, determine whether the premises, or any part thereof, as maintained, shall constitute a public nuisance, as defined herein. If the hearing officer finds that a public nuisance exists, he or she shall, by written notice, order the same abated in a reasonable period of time as set forth in the notice. The determination of the hearing officer shall be final unless appealed in the manner provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 1453 § 1, 1985)

 

9.36.090 Service on owner of order of abatement.
A copy of the hearing officer’s order of abatement of the nuisance shall be served upon the owner of the property in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.36.050 together with a detailed list of needed corrections or abatement methods. (Ord. 1453 § 1, 1985)

 

9.36.100 Appeal of hearing officer’s decision.
The owner of property or premises affected by the decision of the hearing officer, or any interested party, may appeal the decision of the hearing officer to the city council.

The appeal shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk within five working days following notice of the hearing officer. Such appeal shall state the grounds for the appeal. The city clerk shall, upon receipt of such appeal, set the matter for hearing before the city council not less than ten nor more than thirty days following the filing of the appeal. Notice of hearing shall be given in the manner provided for in Section 9.36.050. (Ord. 1453 § 1, 1985)

 

9.36.110 City council hearing.
At the time and place of hearing, the city council shall hear and consider all relevant evidence and information including, but not limited to, the report of the hearing officer, and testimony written or oral relative to the existence of the alleged public nuisance and the manner proposed for abatement of same. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

 

Upon the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council shall, on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing, determine whether the premises, or any part thereof, as maintained, constitute a public nuisance as defined in Section 9.36.010. If the council finds that a public nuisance exists, it shall, by resolution, order the same abated in a reasonable time to be set forth in the resolution. The determination of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 1453 § 1, 1985)

 

9.36.120 Service on owner of order of abatement.
A copy of the city council’s resolution ordering abatement of the nuisance shall be served upon the owner of the property by United States mail or by personal delivery together with a detailed list of needed corrections or abatement methods. (Ord. 1453 § 1, 1985)

 

9.36.130 Abatement after hearing.
Any owner shall have the right to abate the public nuisance in accordance with the city council’s resolution ordering abatement, at his or her own expense, provided the same is done prior to the expiration of the time set forth in the resolution. Upon compliance with the resolution by the owner, the proceedings hereunder shall be deemed terminated. If such nuisance is not completely abated by the owner, as directed, within the time set forth in the resolution, then the city manager shall cause the same to be abated by city forces or private contract, and entry upon the premises is expressly authorized for such purposes. (Ord. 1453 § 1, 1985)

 

9.36.140 Cost of abatement.
When the city manager causes the abatement of a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Section 9.36.130, he or she shall keep an accounting of the cost thereof, including incidental expenses of such abatement. Upon conclusion of such abatement, the city manager shall submit his or her itemized statement of costs to the city clerk. Upon receipt of such statement, the city clerk shall set the same for hearing before the city council. The city clerk shall cause notice of the time and place of the hearing to be given to the owner of the property to which the same relates, and to any other interested person who requests notice, by United States mail or by personal delivery, at least five days in advance of the hearing. The term “incidental expenses” includes, but is not limited to, the actual expenses and costs to the city in the preparation of reports and notices, specifications and contracts, inspection of the work, and costs of printing and mailing required under this chapter. (Ord. 1453 § 1, 1985)

 

9.36.150 Report—Hearing on assessment.
At the time and place set for receiving and considering the statement of costs, the city council shall hear and pass upon the statement together with any objections or protests raised by any of the persons liable to be assessed for the cost of abating the nuisance. Thereupon, the city council may make any such revision, correction or modification to the statement as it may deem just, after which the statement as submitted, or as revised, corrected or modified, shall be confirmed by resolution. Such hearing may be continued from time to time. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 1453 § 1, 1985)

 

9.36.160 Service on owner of statement of costs.
The city clerk shall give notice of the city council’s decision to the owner, or owners of the property in the manner set forth in Section 9.36.120. (Ord. 1453 § 1, 1985)

 

9.36.170 Assessment of costs lien against the property.
The cost of abatement of a nuisance, as confirmed by the city council, shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates, and after its recording, as thus made and confirmed, the same shall constitute a lien on the property in the amount of such assessment. After the confirmation of the statement, a copy thereof shall be transmitted to the assessor and tax collector for the city by the city clerk. Whereupon it shall be the duty of the assessor and tax collector to add the amount of such assessment, or assessments, to the next regular bills of taxes levied against the respective lot or parcel of land for municipal purposes, and thereafter the amount shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure for foreclosure and sale in the case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. (Ord. 1453 § 1, 1985)

 

9.36.180 Alternatives.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city council from ordering the city attorney to commence a civil action to abate a nuisance in addition to, alternatively to, or in conjunction with, the proceedings set forth in this chapter, nor shall anything in this chapter be deemed to prevent the city from commencing a criminal action with respect to, alternatively to, or in conjunction with, the proceedings set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1453 § 1, 1985)

 

9.36.190 Emergency abatement.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter with reference to the abatement of public nuisances, whenever the city manager determines that a property or any building or structure thereon is dangerous and constitutes a threat to human life or safety, he or she shall, without observing the provisions of this chapter with reference to abatement procedures, immediately and forthwith abate such public nuisance. Where such condition obtains, and the abatement is immediately required, the city manager shall comply with the provisions of Sections 9.36.140 to 9.36.170. (Ord. 1453 § 1, 1985)

 

9.36.200 Violations.
Any person who maintains any public nuisance as defined in this chapter, or who violates or fails to comply with an order of abatement made pursuant to Section 9.36.080 or 9.36.110 is guilty of a misdemeanor.

No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any representative of the city or with any owner, as defined in this chapter, of a property which has been ordered vacated, repaired, rehabilitated or demolished and removed, whenever such representative of the city or owner is engaged in vacating, repairing, rehabilitating or demolishing and removing any such building or premises pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or in performing any necessary act preliminary or incidental to such work as authorized or directed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1453 § 1, 1985)

 

9.36.210 Treble damages.
In addition to the penalties provided for in this chapter, upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period against an owner of a property responsible for a public nuisance and subject to this chapter, the city is authorized to request that the court order the owner to pay treble the costs of abatement, except if any such judgment relates to an abatement of conditions pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 17980. (Ord. 2057 § 2, 2021)

 

9.36.220 Recovery of attorneys’ fees.
(a)     The prevailing party in any action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding to abate a public nuisance, or in any appeal or other judicial action arising therefrom, shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorneys’ fees. Recovery of attorneys’ fees shall be limited to those actions or proceedings in which the city elects, at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorneys’ fees. In no action or proceeding shall an award of attorneys’ fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding.

(b)     In addition to the award of attorneys’ fees pursuant to the provisions of subsection A of this section, the prevailing party in any action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding to abate a public nuisance, or in any appeal or other judicial action arising therefrom, shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred in any post-judgment proceedings to collect or enforce the judgment. (Ord. 2057 § 3, 2021)

Chapter 9.37 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES—VEHICLES
9.37.010 Public nuisance—Motor vehicles.
The provisions of this chapter shall govern the abatement and removal of motor vehicles, or parts thereof, which are abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative. “Motor vehicle” as used in this chapter is defined as set forth in Section 670 of the Vehicle Code of the state of California. (Ord. 1158 § 2, 1972)

 

9.37.020 Declaration of nuisance.
Any motor vehicle, or any part thereof, which is abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative, located on any private property, or public property, excluding highways, in the city, is a public nuisance.

(1)     Abatement. Where such motor vehicle is found to constitute a public nuisance, by reason of its condition and location, as provided in this chapter, said nuisance shall be abated and the motor vehicle, and all parts thereof, shall be removed and disposed of as provided in this chapter;

(2)     Declaration. Whenever the city manager or his or her designee finds that any motor vehicle is being maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter by reason of its condition and location, he or she shall give the notice required hereinafter. (Ord. 1158 § 2, 1972)

 

9.37.030 Public hearing—Procedure.
(a)     Notice. Prior to removal of any such vehicle, or part thereof, the city manager shall give a ten-day notice of his or her intention to abate the nuisance, by removal; such notice shall contain the information required pursuant to Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code, and shall describe the vehicle involved, and the property whereon the same is located, including, but not limited to, the correct identification number and license number thereof, if available. Such notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in said Section 22660.

(b)     Request for Hearing. Within ten days after the mailing of said notice, the owner of the lot upon which such vehicle or part thereof is located, or the owner of the vehicle, may file a written request, as provided in said Section 22660, with the city clerk, requesting a hearing on such matter. If no such request is made, the city manager shall abate the nuisance as provided in the notice relating thereto.

(c)     Hearing. Upon receipt by the city clerk of a request for a hearing, the clerk shall set the same for hearing before the city council, if said request is received within ten days after the mailing of notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle. The city clerk shall give notice of the hearing by registered mail at least five days before the hearing to the owner of the vehicle and the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll of Los Angeles County. At the time of said hearing, the city council shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. Said facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof, and the circumstances concerning its location on the said private property or public property. The city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence.

The city council may impose such conditions and take such other action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, if, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing the city council shall, on the basis of the evidence presented at such hearing, determine whether the vehicle or a part thereof, as maintained, constitutes a public nuisance as defined herein. The city council may find that the vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative, on private or public property, and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided, and determine that the administrative costs and the cost of removal be charged against the owner of the land. If the council finds that a public nuisance exists, it shall, by resolution, order the same abated within a reasonable time, to be set forth in said resolution. The determination of the city council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 1158 § 2, 1972)

 

9.37.040 Abatement of public nuisance.
After a final determination that a motor vehicle, or parts thereof, constitutes a public nuisance within the meaning of this chapter, the owner of the motor vehicle, and/or the owner of the property whereon the same is located, shall abate the said public nuisance by removing the same in the time set forth in the order of abatement relating thereto. If such person or persons fail to abate such public nuisance, the city manager shall abate the same by city forces or private contract in the time and manner permitted by Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code and the state of California. (Ord. 1158 § 2, 1972)

 

9.37.050 Abatement by city.
Where the abatement of a public nuisance pursuant to this chapter is accomplished by city forces, the provisions of Sections 9.36.090 through 9.36.120, inclusive, shall be applicable to such proceedings. (Ord. 1158 § 2, 1972)

 

9.37.060 Administration.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the city manager. (Ord. 1158 § 2, 1972)

 

9.37.070 Disposal of vehicles.
Motor vehicles or parts thereof, declared to be a public nuisance pursuant to this chapter, shall be disposed of in the manner provided by Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code of the state of California; provided that, after a motor vehicle has been declared to be a public nuisance, and has been removed from the premises where located, the same shall not be reconstructed or otherwise made operable. (Ord. 1158 § 2, 1972)

 

9.37.080 Identification of vehicle.
Within five days after the date of removal of a vehicle or part thereof, the city manager shall cause to be forwarded to the Department of Motor Vehicles of the state of California notice identifying the vehicle or part thereof, and any evidence of registration available, including, but not limited to, registration certificates of title or license plates on any such vehicle. (Ord. 1158 § 2, 1972)

 

9.37.090 Exception.
This chapter shall not apply:

(1)     To a vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner, where the same is not visible from the street or other public or private property; and/or

(2)     To a vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in conjunction with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junk yard; provided, however, that this latter exception shall not authorize the maintenance of any premises contrary to the provisions of this code. (Ord. 1158 § 2, 1972)

Chapter 9.40 REGISTRATION OF RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES IN FORECLOSURE
9.40.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to establish a property registration program for residential properties in foreclosure to protect residential neighborhoods from becoming blighted as a result of inadequate maintenance and security of abandoned properties. (Ord. 1913 § 1, 2008)

 

9.40.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

“Abandoned” means a real property that is vacant and is under a current notice of default or notice of trustee’s sale, pending tax assessor’s lien sale, a real property that has been subject to a foreclosure sale where the title in the real property was retained by the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure sale and a real property transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale.

“Beneficiary” means a lender under a note secured by a deed of trust.

“Days” means consecutive calendar days.

“Deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale” means a recorded document that transfers ownership of a property from the trustor to the holder of a deed of trust upon the consent of the beneficiary of the deed of trust.

 “Deed of trust” means an instrument by which title to real estate is transferred to a third party trustee as security for a real estate loan.  This definition applies to any and all deeds of trust, i.e., second trust deed, third trust deed, etc., regardless of their relative recording dates.

“Default” means the failure to fulfill a contractual obligation, whether monetary or conditional.

“Evidence of vacancy” means any condition or conditions present on real property which would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant.  Such conditions include, but are not limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and mail, past due and disconnect utility notices, accumulation of trash, junk and debris, the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds and/or shutters, the absence of furnishings and personal items consistent with residential habitation, and statements based on observations by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents or government employees that the property is vacant.

“Foreclosure” means the process by which a property, placed as security for a loan, is sold at a sale, trustee’s sale, auction or other means to satisfy the secured debt if the trustor (borrower) defaults.

“Notice of default” means a recorded notice that a default has occurred under a deed of trust and that the beneficiary intends to proceed with a trustee’s sale.

“Out-of-area” means in excess of ten miles from the city limits.

“Owner” means any person, partnership, co-partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or any other legal entity having a legal or equitable title or any interest in any real property.

“Property” means any unimproved or improved real property or portion thereof, situated in the city and includes the buildings or structures located on the property regardless of condition.

“Trustee” means the person, partnership, co-partnership, association, corporation, or fiduciary holding a deed of trust on a property.

“Trustor” means a borrower, under a deed of trust, who deeds property to a trustee as security for the payment of a debt.

“Vacant” means a building or structure that is not legally occupied. (Ord. 1913 § 1, 2008)

 

9.40.030 Recordation of transfer of loan/deed of trust/assignment of rents.
Within ten days of the purchase or transfer of a note, loan or deed of trust secured by residential property situated in the city, a new beneficiary or trustee shall record, with the Los Angeles County recorder’s office, an assignment of rents, or similar document, that lists the name (whether a corporation, individual or other legal entity), the mailing address and contact phone number of the new beneficiary or trustee responsible for receiving payments associated with the loan or deed of trust. (Ord. 1913 § 1, 2008)

 

9.40.040 Registration.
(a)     Any beneficiary or trustee who holds a deed of trust on a residential property located within the city of Glendora shall perform an inspection of the property that is the security for the deed of trust upon default by the trustor and prior to recording a notice of default with the Los Angeles County recorder’s office. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it is, by this chapter, deemed abandoned and the beneficiary or trustee shall, within ten days of the inspection, register the property with the city on forms provided by the city. The beneficiary or trustee shall continue inspections of the property on a weekly basis until title to the property is sold at a trustees sale or until the property is no longer vacant. If the residential property is occupied but remains in default, the property shall be inspected by the beneficiary or trustee or his designee on a monthly basis to determine if the property is legally occupied or vacant. The findings of the monthly inspection shall be reported to the city on forms provided by the city. This inspection requirement shall continue until:

(1)     The trustor or other party remedies the default; or

(2)     The property is found to be vacant or show evidence of vacancy, at which time it is deemed abandoned and the trustee shall, within ten days of that inspection, register the property with the code enforcement office on forms provided by the city.

(b)     Any new owner of residential property located within the city of Glendora that is the subject of a foreclosure sale wherein title has been transferred to the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure shall perform an inspection of the property within ten days of the transfer of title. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it is, by this chapter, deemed abandoned and the beneficiary or trustee shall, within ten days of the inspection, register the property with the code enforcement office on forms provided by the city. The owner of these properties under this subsection shall continue inspections of the property on a weekly basis until the property is legally occupied to ensure that the property remains in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations.

(c)     Any new owner of residential property located within the city of Glendora wherein title has been transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure or trustees sale shall perform an inspection of said property within ten days of the transfer. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it is, by this chapter, deemed abandoned and the new owner, beneficiary or trustee shall, within ten days of the inspection, register the property with the city on forms provided by the city.  The owner of the properties under this subsection shall continue inspections of the property on a weekly basis until the property is legally occupied to ensure that the property remains in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations.

(d)     The registration required by this chapter shall contain the name of the owner of legal title, beneficiary and trustee, the direct street office mailing address of the owner, beneficiary and trustee, a direct contact name and phone number for the owner, beneficiary and trustee, and, in the case of a corporation, entity, or out-of-area owner, beneficiary and trustee, the local property management company responsible for the security, maintenance, and marketing of the property.

(e)     A registration fee shall accompany the registration form(s). The registration fee shall be set by resolution of the city council.

(f)      Any person or legal entity that has registered a property under this chapter shall make a written report to the city of any change in information provided in the registration form within ten days of the change. (Ord. 1913 § 1, 2008)

 

9.40.050 Retention of management company.
(a)     If both the beneficiary and trustee of a vacant residential property upon which a notice of default has been recorded reside or are located out-of-area, the beneficiary and trustee shall at his, her or its own expense hire a property management company that will be responsible for the inspection, maintenance and security of the property. The property management company shall be licensed to do business in the city. The property management company shall inspections of the property on a weekly basis until the property is legally occupied to ensure that the property remains in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations.

(b)     If the owner of a vacant residential property located within the city that is the subject of a foreclosure sale resides or is located out-of area, said owner shall retain, at his, her or its own expense, a property management company that will be responsible for the inspection, maintenance and security of the property. The property management company shall be licensed to do business in the city. The property management company shall conduct inspections of the property on a weekly basis until the property is legally occupied to ensure that the property remains in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations.

(c)     If the new owner of vacant residential property located within the city wherein title has been transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale resides or is located out-of-area, said owner shall retain, at his, her or its own expense, a property management company that will be responsible for the inspection, maintenance and security of the property. The property management company shall be licensed to do business in the city. The property management company shall conduct inspections of the property on a weekly basis until the property is legally occupied to ensure that the property remains in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations.

(d)     Properties for which the retention of a property management company is required under this chapter shall be posted with the name and twenty-four hour contact phone number of the property management company in accordance with the standards established by the city. (Ord. 1913 § 1, 2008)

 

9.40.060 Maintenance and security requirements.
All properties subject to the requirements of this chapter shall comply at all times with all applicable state and local laws, including without limitation, the provisions of Chapter 9.36, “Abatement of Nuisances—Premises” of the Glendora Municipal Code, the California Building Code and the California Fire Code. (Ord. 1913 § 1, 2008)

 

9.40.070 Violation—Penalty.
Every person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1913 § 1, 2008)

Chapter 9.44 NOISE REGULATION
9.44.010 Declaration of policy.
It is the policy of the city to prohibit unnecessary, excessive and annoying noises from all sources subject to its police power. At certain levels noises are detrimental to the health and welfare of the citizenry and in the public interests shall be proscribed. For example, public and private gatherings or parties that are loud and/or disorderly interfere with the public peace. Furthermore, gatherings that require repeated police responses increase the cost of public safety services and deter the police department and the city from addressing other public safety matters. (Ord. 1655 § 1, 1996; Ord. 1173 § 1, 1972)

 

9.44.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, the words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

“Alcohol” means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced.

“Alcoholic beverage” includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.

“Ambient noise” means the all-encompassing noise associated with a given environment, being usually a composite of sounds from many sources near and far. For the purpose of this chapter, ambient noise level is the level obtained when the noise level is averaged over a period of fifteen minutes without inclusion of noise from isolated identifiable sources, at the location and time of day near that at which a comparison is to be made.

“Commercial purpose” means and includes the use, operation or maintenance of any sound amplifying equipment for the purpose of advertising any business, or any goods, or any services, or for the purpose of attracting the attention of the public to, or advertising for, or soliciting patronage or customers to or for any performance, show, entertainment, exhibition, or event, or for the purpose of demonstrating such sound equipment.

“Decibel (dB)” means a unit of level which denotes the ratio between two quantities which are proportional to power; the number of decibels corresponding to the ratio of two amounts of power is ten times the logarithm to the base ten of this ratio.

“Emergency work” means work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service.

Frequency. “Frequency” of a function periodic in time means the reciprocal of the period. The unit is the hertz or cycle per second.

“Gathering or party” includes a gathering or party of two or more persons or activity attended by a group of persons on public or private property.

“Loud and/or disorderly gathering or party” includes a loud and/or disorderly activity attended by a group of persons on public or private property which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity. Loud and/or disorderly gathering or party shall not include any city sanctioned uses and/or functions.

“Microbar” means a unit of pressure commonly used in acoustics and is equal to one dyne per square centimeter.

“Noncommercial purpose” means the use, operation or maintenance of any sound equipment for other than a “commercial purpose.” “Noncommercial purpose” means and includes, but is not limited to, philanthropic, political, patriotic and charitable purposes.

“Period” of a periodic quantity means the smallest increment of time for which the function repeats itself.

“Periodic quantity” means oscillating quantity, the values of which recur for equal increments of time.

“Person” means a person, firm, association, copartnership, joint venture, corporation or any entity, public or private in nature.

“Person responsible” means the person responsible for a loud and/or disorderly gathering or party or gathering and/or party where alcoholic beverages are furnished, given, obtained, possessed, or consumed by any person under twenty-one years of age, shall be deemed to be, in order of priority:

(1)     The owner(s) of the premises where the loud and/or disorderly gathering or party, or gathering and/or party where alcoholic beverages are furnished, given, obtained, possessed, or consumed by any person under twenty-one years of age, takes place, if the premises are owner-occupied property;

(2)     The tenant(s) of the premises where the loud and/or disorderly gathering or party or gathering and/or party where alcoholic beverages are furnished, given, obtained, possessed, or consumed by any person under twenty-one years of age, takes place, if the premises are tenant-occupied property;

(3)     The person(s) who organized, sponsored or is hosting the loud and/or disorderly gathering or party or gathering and/or party where alcoholic beverages are furnished, given, obtained, possessed, or consumed by any person under twenty-one years of age.

(4)     The parent or legal guardian of any person responsible who is a minor shall be liable for any public safety service expenses and fine(s) imposed upon the minor pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Any such public safety service expenses and fine(s) may be collected from the minor, parent or guardian.

“Public address equipment” means any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound, when used outdoors or indoors in places of public assembly.

Sound level. “Sound level” (noise level), in decibels (dB), is the sound measured with the “A” weighting and slow response by a sound level meter.

“Sound level meter” means an instrument including a microphone, or an amplifier, an output meter and frequency weighting networks for the measurement of sound levels which satisfies the pertinent requirements in American Standard Specifications for sound level meters S1 4-1971 or the most recent revision thereof.

“Sound truck” means any motor vehicle, or any other vehicle regardless of motive power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon, or attached thereto, any public address equipment.

“Special security assignment” means the assignment of police officers, equipment and other services during a second or subsequent call to a location within a twelve-month period to disband the loud and/or disorderly gathering or party, or gathering and/or party where alcoholic beverages are furnished, given, obtained, possessed, or consumed by any person under twenty-one years of age, after providing a written warning that the loud and/or disorderly gathering or party violates the law. (Ord. 1936 § 2, 2010)

 

9.44.030 Sound level measurement criteria.
Any sound level measurement made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be measured with a sound level meter using the “A” weighting. (Ord. 1173 § 1, 1972)

 

9.44.040 Ambient noise base level.
When “ambient noise level” is referred to in this chapter, it means the higher of the following:

(1)     Actual measured ambient noise level; or

(2)     Ambient base level (see chart below).

 

 

 

 

Time

 

Zone

7 a.m. to 7 p.m.

7 p.m. to 10 p.m.

10 p.m. to 7 a.m.

Single-Family Residential

 

 

 

R-1

55 dBA

50 dBA

45 dBA

R-A

55 dBA

50 dBA

45 dBA

E-3

55 dBA

50 dBA

45 dBA

E-4

55 dBA

50 dBA

45 dBA

E-5

55 dBA

50 dBA

45 dBA

E-6

55 dBA

50 dBA

45 dBA

E-7

55 dBA

50 dBA

45 dBA

 

 

 

 

Multifamily Residential

 

 

 

A-2

55 dBA

55 dBA

50 dBA

R-2

55 dBA

55 dBA

50 dBA

R-3

55 dBA

55 dBA

50 dBA

G-A

55 dBA

55 dBA

50 dBA

M.H.P.

55 dBA

55 dBA

50 dBA

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Commercial

 

 

 

C-1

65 dBA

65 dBA

60 dBA

C-2

65 dBA

65 dBA

60 dBA

C-3

65 dBA

65 dBA

60 dBA

C-M

65 dBA

65 dBA

60 dBA

 

 

 

 

Manufacturing

 

 

 

M-1

70 dBA

70 dBA

70 dBA

M-1A

70 dBA

70 dBA

70 dBA

 

 

 

 

Special Zones

 

 

 

MS

55 dBA

50 dBA

45 dBA

 

Wherever two different zones are contiguous, the lower ambient noise level at the common property line shall apply. (Ord. 1180 § 3, 1973; Ord. 1173 § 1, 1972)

 

9.44.050 Radios, television sets and similar devices.
(a)     Use Restricted. It is unlawful for any person within any residential zone of the city to use or operate any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, television set or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring residents or any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area.

(b)     Prima Facie Violation. Any noise level exceeding the ambient level at the property line of any property (or, if a condominium or apartment house, within any adjoining apartment) by more than five decibels shall be deemed to be prima facie evidence of violation of the provisions of this section. (Ord. 1173 § 1, 1972)

 

9.44.060 Hawkers and peddlers.
It is unlawful for any person within the city to sell anything by outcry within any area of the city zoned for residential uses. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the selling by outcry of merchandise, food and beverages at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses and other similar licensed public entertainment events. (Ord. 1173 § 1, 1972)

 

9.44.070 Drums.
It is unlawful for any person to use any drum or other instrument or device of any kind for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise within the city. This section shall not apply to any person who is a participant in a school band or duly licensed parade or who has been otherwise duly authorized to engage in such conduct. (Ord. 1173 § 1, 1972)

 

9.44.080 Schools, hospitals and churches.
It is unlawful for any person to create any noise on any street, sidewalk or public place adjacent to any school, institution of learning or church while the same is in use or adjacent to any hospital, which noise unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets, sidewalk or public place, as determined and specified by the public works department, indicating the presence of a school, church or hospital. (Ord. 1173 § 1, 1972)

 

9.44.090 Animals and fowl.
No person shall keep or maintain or permit the keeping of, upon any premises owned, occupied or controlled by such person, any animal or fowl otherwise permitted to be kept which, by any sound, cry or behavior, shall cause annoyance or discomfort to a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness in any residential neighborhood. (Ord. 1173 § 1, 1972)

 

9.44.100 Machinery, equipment, fans and air conditioning.
It is unlawful for any person to operate any machinery, equipment, pump, fan, air conditioning apparatus or similar mechanical device in any manner so as to create any noise which would cause the noise level at the property line of any property to exceed the ambient noise level by more than five decibels. (Ord. 1173 § 1, 1972)

 

9.44.110 Construction of buildings and projects.
It is unlawful for any person within a residential zone, or within a radius of five hundred feet therefrom, to operate equipment or perform any outside construction or repair work on buildings, structures or projects or to operate any pile driver, power shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, power hoist or any other construction type device (between the hours of nine p.m. of one day and seven a.m. of the next day) in such a manner that a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area is caused discomfort or annoyance unless beforehand a permit therefor has been duly obtained from the city. No permit shall be required to perform emergency work as defined in Section 9.44.020(c). (Ord. 1173 § 1, 1972)

 

9.44.120 Vehicle repairs.
It is unlawful for any person within any residential area of the city to repair, rebuild, or test any motor vehicle (between the hours of nine p.m. of one day and seven a.m. of the next day) in such a manner that a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area is caused discomfort or annoyance. (Ord. 1173 § 1, 1972)

 

9.44.130 Motor-driven vehicles.
It is unlawful for any person to operate any motor-driven vehicle within the city in such a manner that a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area is caused discomfort or annoyance; provided, however, any such vehicle which is operated upon any public highway, street or right-of-way shall be excluded from the provisions of this section. (Ord. 1173 § 1, 1972)

 

9.44.140 Constitutional rights.
The council enacts this legislation for the sole purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, safety and welfare of its citizenry. While recognizing that the use of public address equipment is protected by the constitutional rights of freedom of speech and assembly, the council nevertheless feels obligated to regulate reasonably the use of public address equipment in order to protect the correlative constitutional rights of the citizens of this community to privacy and freedom from public nuisance of loud and unnecessary noise. (Ord. 1173 § 1, 1972)

 

9.44.150 Registration required.
It is unlawful for any person, other than personnel of law enforcement or governmental agencies, to install, use or operate within the city a loudspeaker or public address equipment in a fixed or movable position or mounted upon any sound truck for the purposes of giving instructions, directions, talks, addresses, lectures or transmitting music to any persons or assemblages of persons in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park, place or public property without first filing a registration statement and obtaining approval thereof as set forth in Section 9.44.160. (Ord. 1173 § 1, 1973)

 

9.44.160 Registration—Requirements and duties.
(a)     Registration Statements—Filing. Every user of public address equipment shall file a registration statement with the police chief five days prior to the date on which the public address equipment is intended to be used, which statement shall contain the following information:

(1)     The name, address and telephone number of both the owner and the user of the public address equipment;

(2)     The maximum sound producing power of the public address equipment which shall include the wattage to be used, the volume in decibels of sound which will be produced, and the approximate distance for which sound will be audible from the public address equipment;

(3)     The license and motor number if a sound truck is to be used;

(4)     A general description of the public address equipment which is to be used; and

(5)     Whether the public address equipment will be used for commercial or noncommercial purposes.

(b)     Registration Statements—Approval. The police chief shall return to the applicant an approved certified copy of the registration statement unless he or she finds that:

(1)     The conditions of the motor vehicle movement are such that in the opinion of the police chief use of the equipment would constitute a detriment to traffic safety; or

(2)     The conditions of pedestrian movement are such that use of the equipment would constitute a detriment to traffic safety; or

(3)     The registration statement required reveals that the applicant would violate the provisions set forth in Section 9.44.190, or any other provision of this code.

(c)     Disapproval. In the event the registration statement is disapproved, the police chief shall endorse upon the statement his or her reasons for disapproval and return it forthwith to applicant. (Ord. 1173 § 1, 1972)

 

9.44.170 Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by disapproval of a registration statement may appeal to the city council by filing with the city clerk a written notice of appeal within ten days from the date of the disapproval. If such an appeal is filed within the required time, the city council shall, within a reasonable time, review the matter at a public hearing. At the conclusion of said hearing the city council shall determine whether or not the registration statement complies with the provisions of Section 9.44.190 and other provisions of this code, and its decision shall be final. (Ord. 1173 § 1, 1972)

 

9.44.180 Fees.
Prior to the issuance of the registration statement, a fee in the amount of ten dollars per day, or any portion thereof, shall be paid to the city, if the loudspeaker or public address equipment is to be used for commercial purposes. No fee shall be required for the operation of a loudspeaker or public address equipment for noncommercial purposes. (Ord. 1173 § 1, 1972)

 

9.44.190 Regulations.
The commercial and noncommercial use of public address equipment shall be subject to the following regulations:

(1)     The only sounds permitted shall be either music or human speech, or both;

(2)     The operation of public address equipment shall only occur between the hours of seven a.m. and nine p.m. each day except on Sundays and legal holidays. No operation of public address equipment for commercial purposes shall be permitted on Sundays or legal holidays. The operation of public address equipment for noncommercial purposes on Sundays and legal holidays shall only occur between the hours of seven a.m. and nine p.m.;

(3)     Sound level emanating from public address equipment shall not exceed fifteen decibels above the ambient noise level;

(4)     Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (3) of this section, public address equipment shall not be operated within two hundred feet of churches, schools, hospitals or city or county buildings;

(5)     In any event, the volume of sound shall be so controlled that it will not be unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness within the area of audibility. (Ord. 1173 § 1, 1972)

 

9.44.195 Duty to maintain public peace.
Each person who organizes, hosts, or sponsors a gathering or party, or allows his or her property to be utilized for a gathering or party, shall maintain such a gathering in a quiet and orderly fashion so as to protect the public peace. Any loud and/or disorderly gathering or party which necessitates more than one police response within a twelve-month period to disband the loud and/or disorderly gathering or party is a violation of this duty and constitutes a public nuisance in accordance with Section 9.44.220 of this chapter. Any gathering or party where alcoholic beverages are furnished, given, obtained, possessed, or consumed by any person under twenty-one years of age which necessitates more than one police response within a twelve-month period to disband the gathering or party where alcoholic beverages are furnished, given, obtained, possessed, or consumed by any person under twenty-one years of age is a violation of this duty and constitutes a public nuisance in accordance with Section 9.44.220 of this chapter. (Ord. 1936 § 4, 2010)

 

9.44.196 Procedure for purposes of cost recovery.
(a)     A police officer appearing at a loud and/or disorderly gathering or party or gathering or party where alcoholic beverages are furnished, given, obtained, possessed, or consumed by any person under twenty-one years of age shall take such actions and give such direction as necessary to abate the loud and/or disorderly gathering or party or gathering or party where alcoholic beverages are furnished, given, obtained, possessed, or consumed by any person under twenty-one years of age. The officer shall advise the responsible party in a written notice that:

(1)     The loud and/or disorderly gathering or party or gathering or party where alcoholic beverages are furnished, given, obtained, possessed, or consumed by any person under twenty-one years of age, violates the law;

(2)     That if a second or subsequent law enforcement response is required to abate the condition within a twelve-month period, the responsible party shall be cited for a violation of Section 9.44.195 of this chapter and such second or subsequent response shall be deemed a special security assignment; and

(3)     The responsible party shall be assessed a civil fine and held responsible for the costs of providing such special security assignment pursuant to Sections 9.44.197, 9.44.198 and 9.44.199 of this chapter.

(b)     The police chief or designee shall mail a notice to the property owner as the owner’s name and address are recorded by the county assessor stating in substance that should any response to provide police services, whether for a first or subsequent response, be required as a result of a loud and/or disorderly gathering or party or gathering or party where alcoholic beverages are furnished, given, obtained, possessed, or consumed by any person under twenty-one years of age on the property designated in the notice, the property owner to whom notice is mailed shall be liable to pay to the city the cost of police services required for any such response. The property owner shall, ten days after mailing of said notice, be liable to the city for the cost of police services on any first or subsequent response occasioned by a party, gathering or event occurring on the subject property.

(c)     Should a second or subsequent law enforcement response be required to abate the condition at a loud and/or disorderly gathering or party or gathering or party where alcoholic beverages are furnished, given, obtained, possessed, or consumed by any person under twenty-one years of age within a twelve-month period, the responsible party shall be cited for a violation of Section 9.44.195 of this chapter and such second or subsequent response shall be deemed a special security assignment, and the responsible party shall be assessed a civil fine and the costs of providing law enforcement services for any police responses to the location for loud and/or disorderly gatherings or parties, or gathering or party where alcoholic beverages are furnished, given, obtained, possessed, or consumed by any person under twenty-one years of age pursuant to Sections 9.44.197, 9.44.198 and 9.44.199 of this chapter, within the twelve-month period following the issuance of the written notice. (Ord. 1936 § 6, 2010)

 

9.44.197 Cost of police response.
When a loud and/or disorderly gathering or party or gathering or party where alcoholic beverages are furnished, given, obtained, possessed, or consumed by any person under twenty-one years of age occurs, the person(s) responsible will be held jointly and severally liable for payment of the public safety service expenses for any special security assignments. (Ord. 1936 § 8, 2010)

 

9.44.198 Billing of public safety expenses.
(a)     For the purposes of this chapter, the city’s finance department shall cause the person responsible for a loud and/or disorderly gathering or party or gathering or party where alcoholic beverages are furnished, given, obtained, possessed, or consumed by any person under twenty-one years of age to be billed the actual cost for the public safety service expenses for special security assignments provided in responding to the loud and/or disorderly gathering or party or gathering or party where alcoholic beverages are furnished, given, obtained, possessed, or consumed by any person under twenty-one years of age and any other city and/or public safety expenses incurred. These costs shall include, but shall not be limited to, damages to city property and/or injuries to city personnel, and city administrative costs. The police officer issuing the citation to the person responsible shall accumulate the costs of all services provided in responding to the disturbance and forward same to the finance department within fifteen days of the issuance of the citation for billing. Such bills shall be due and payable within thirty days after the billing date.

(b)     Additionally, the city’s finance department shall include in any bill sent pursuant to subsection (a) the cost of the following fines:

(1)     One hundred fifty dollars for a second response required within a twelve-month period, after written notice as described in Section 9.44.196 of this chapter has been provided;

(2)     Three hundred dollars for a third response required within a twelve-month period, after written notice as described in Section 9.44.196 of this chapter has been provided;

(3)     Four hundred fifty dollars for a fourth response required within a twelve-month period, after written notice as described in Section 9.44.196 of this chapter has been provided.

(c)     Money due to the city pursuant to this section and Section 9.44.199 of this chapter shall be a debt to the city by all persons responsible for the loud and/or disorderly gathering or party or gathering or party where alcoholic beverages are furnished, given, obtained, possessed, or consumed by any person under twenty-one years of age and may be collected in an appropriate civil action. Alternatively, once a responsible party has exhausted the administrative procedures provided in Section 9.44.199 of this chapter, any costs still owing may be collected as a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which those costs relate, as described in Section 9.36.170 of this title. (Ord. 1936 § 10, 2010)

 

9.44.199 Appeal process for loud and/or disorderly gathering or party assessments.
(a)     Any person receiving a bill for public safety expenses and civil fines, as described in Section 9.44.198 of this chapter, may, within fifteen days after the billing date, file a written request appealing the imposition of such charges with the city clerk. Any billing sent pursuant to said Section 9.44.198 shall inform the billed party of the right to appeal said billing. All appeals shall be made in writing, shall state the ground for such appeal, shall specify the factual basis for the appeal and shall contain a signature verifying the truth of all matters asserted.

(b)     Any appeal regarding such billing shall be heard by the chief of police, or by designee. Notice of the hearing shall be sent by certified mail to the appellant (unless such mail is refused or unclaimed, then the city shall subsequently send the mail via first class postage prepaid mail and such mailing shall be deemed actual service). Within ten days after the hearing, the chief of police, or designee, shall give written notice of the decision to the appellant by certified mail to the appellant (unless such mail is refused or unclaimed, then the city shall subsequently send the mail via first class postage prepaid mail and such mailing shall be deemed actual service).

(c)     Upon the filing of a request for an appeal, payment of the bill for the police and other public safety services rendered shall be suspended until notice of the decision of the hearing officer is sent as described above. If the appeal is denied in part or in full, all amounts due to the city shall be paid within thirty days after notice of the decision of the hearing officer is sent.

(d)     The decision of the chief of police, or designee, may be appealed to a hearing officer by filing a written appeal stating the grounds therefor with the city clerk within fifteen days of the mailing of the police chief’s, or designee’s, notice. The appeal of the decision of the police chief, or designee, shall be conducted within a reasonable time, but not less than thirty days, at a de novo public hearing before a neutral hearing officer designated by the city manager. The hearing officer shall demonstrate those qualifications, training, and objectivity prescribed by the city manager as are necessary and which are consistent with the duties and responsibilities of such hearing officer. Not less than five days prior to the hearing, the city clerk shall give notice of the time and place of the hearing. The hearing officer may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the police chief and shall state the reasons therefor. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final when rendered. Within thirty days of the public hearing, the hearing officer shall notify the appellant of the decision, which shall be final, in writing in the manner prescribed above. If the hearing officer denies the appeal in part or in full, all amounts due to the city shall be paid within thirty days of the hearing officer’s decision being sent. If the hearing officer’s decision is not appealed, it shall be final. Any appeal of the hearing officer’s decision to the Superior Court shall require the appellant to deposit the full payment of the bill for the police and other public safety services rendered and fine(s) assessed with the city prior to filing the court action. If the court grants the appeal in part or in full, all amounts due to the appellant shall be refunded by the city within thirty days of notice of the court decision. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the hearing officer may seek judicial review of the hearing officer’s decision by filing an appeal with a court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with the timelines and provisions set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4. The aggrieved person filing the appeal shall be responsible for paying the statutory filing fee to the Superior Court when the appeal is filed. The person or responsible person shall serve upon the city clerk either in person or by first class mail a copy of the notice of appeal. If the person or responsible person fails to timely file a notice of appeal with the court, the hearing officer’s decision shall be deemed confirmed. (Ord. 1936 § 12, 2010)

 

9.44.200 General noise and party regulations.
(a)     Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, and in addition thereto, it is unlawful for any person willfully to make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area.

The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

(1)     The level of the noise;

(2)     The intensity of the noise;

(3)     Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;

(4)     Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;

(5)     The level and intensity of the background noise, if any;

(6)     The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities;

(7)     The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;

(8)     The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates;

(9)     The time of the day or night the noise occurs;

(10)   The duration of the noise;

(11)   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; and

(12)   Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity.

(b)     Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, and in addition thereto, it is unlawful for any person willfully to host, conduct or allow, or cause to host, conduct or allow, any gathering and/or party where alcoholic beverages are furnished, given, obtained, possessed, or consumed by any person under twenty-one years of age. (Ord. 1936 § 14, 2010)

 

9.44.205 Vibration.
In the CM Zone or in any C zone or in any M zone, no activity shall cause or create a steady state of impact vibration on the lot line or on a boundary line between any of such zones and a residential zone with a vibration displacement by frequency bands in excess of that indicated in the table below as measured by the vibration measuring device standardized by the American Standards Association:

 

 

Frequency (Cycles Per Second)

Vibration Displacement (In Inches)

 

Steady State

Impact

Under 10

0.0005

0.0010

10—19

0.0004

0.0008

20—29

0.0003

0.0006

30—39

0.0002

0.0004

40 and over

0.0001

0.0002

 

This section shall not apply to railroads. (Ord. 1180 § 4, 1973)

 

9.44.210 Violations—Misdemeanors.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as set forth in Section 1.01.110 of this code. (Ord. 1173 § 1, 1972)

 

9.44.220 Violations—Additional remedies—Injunctions.
As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provision of this chapter, which operation or maintenance causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness or endangers the comfort, repose, health or peace of residents in the area, is a public nuisance, and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 1173 § 1, 1972)

 

9.44.230 Severability.
If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or applications of the provisions of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are severable. (Ord. 1173 § 1, 1972)

Chapter 9.50 ADULT BUSINESS REGULATIONS ,
Note
*       Prior ordinance history; Ord. 1714.

**    See also Title 5, Chapter 5.22 of this code.

 

9.50.010 Definitions.
“Adult bookstore/adult video store/adult novelty store” means any establishment which on a regular and substantial basis sells or rents, or offers for sale or rental, for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following:

(1)     Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, sculptures, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other visual representations which are characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” and/or “specified anatomical areas.”

(2)     Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with “specified sexual activities,” including goods which are replicas of, or which simulate “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities,” and goods which are designed to be placed on or in “specified anatomical areas.”

“Adult business” means a business which is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and as to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage, either by law and/or by the operators of such business, and which is characterized by an emphasis on “specified sexual activities” and/or “specified anatomical areas.” Adult also means and includes any adult motion picture theater, adult bookstore/adult video store/adult novelty store, adult cabaret, adult dance studio, adult hotel or motel, adult theater, sexual encounter establishment, nude modeling studio, adult tanning salon, sex supermarket/sex mini-mall, and any other business or establishment that, on a regular and substantial basis, offers its patrons entertainment or services which involve, depict, describe or relate to “specified sexual activities” and/or “specified anatomical areas.”

“Adult cabaret” means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, bottle shop, or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which, on a regular and substantial basis, features:

(1)     Persons or entertainers who appear on stage;

(2)     Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas;” or

(3)     Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”

“Adult dance studio” means any business or commercial establishment which provides for members of the public a partner for dance where the partner, or the dance, is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter involving, depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” and/or “specified anatomical areas.”

 

“Adult motel or hotel” means a motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which, on a regular and substantial basis:

(1)     Provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” and/or “specified anatomical areas;” and/or

(2)     Offers, rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a ten hour period; or

(3)     Offers or allows a tenant or occupant to rent or subrent a sleeping room for a period of less than ten hours.

“Adult motion picture theater” means any establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more motion picture projectors, videocassette players, slide projectors or similar machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are used on a regular and substantial basis to show films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions characterized by an emphasis on material depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” and/or “specified anatomical areas.”

“Adult-oriented business or sexually oriented business” shall have the same meaning in all respects as adult business and shall be subject to all conditions and requirements of an “adult business” as defined herein.

“Adult tanning salon” means a business establishment where patrons receive tanning services in groups of two or more and where patrons or employees of the establishment expose specified anatomical areas. “Adult tanning salon” or “tanning parlor” shall also include a business establishment where a patron and an employee of the establishment are nude or expose “specified anatomical areas.” An “adult tanning salon” or “tanning parlor” shall also include a business establishment where the employees thereof are nude or expose “specified anatomical areas” for any form of consideration.

“Adult theater” means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment which, for any form of consideration, and on a regular and substantial basis, features live performances which are characterized by an emphasis on “specified anatomical areas” and/or “specified sexual activities.”

“Advertise” means public notice or announcement of items or services through the use of newspaper, handbills, radio, television, or other means of public communication.

“Employee of an adult business” means a person who works or performs, as an employee or as an independent contractor, in and/or for an adult business, regardless of whether said person is paid a salary, wage, or other compensation by the business.

“Entertainer” or “live entertainer” means any person who is an employee or independent contractor of an adult business, or any person who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs live entertainment for patrons of an adult business.

“Escort” means any person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a “striptease” for another person. “Escort” shall not include any person hired by a state licensed school for purposes of modeling in any art education class while such person acts in that capacity or any federal, state and/or city licensed limousine or taxi service.

“Escort agency” means a person or business entity which furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for any form of consideration.

“Establishment of an adult business” includes any of the following:

(1)     The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;

(2)     The conversion of an existing business, whether or not it is a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;

(3)     The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or to another existing nonsexually oriented business, with or without expansion of floor area;

(4)     The relocation of any sexually oriented business; or

(5)     The substantial enlargement of the premises of an adult business.

“Figure model” means any person who, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire, or reward, poses in a nude modeling studio to be observed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculpted, photographed or otherwise depicted.

“Notice” means written notice given by personal service upon the addressee, or given by the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his or her last known address. Service of such notice shall be effective upon the completion of personal service, upon placing the same in the custody of the United States Postal Service.

“Nude modeling studio” means a business which provides, for compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, display “specified anatomical areas” to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons paying such consideration. “Nude modeling studio” does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education, or any classroom of any school licensed under state law to provide art education while such classroom is being used in a manner consistent with such state license. “Nude modeling studio” further does not include a studio or similar facility owned, operated or maintained by an individual artist or group of artists, and which does not provide, permit or make available “specified sexual activities.”

“Nudity” or “state of nudity” means the showing or display of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered genitals in a discernable turgid state.

“Off-premises” means any business where the primary services or entertainment are provided at a location or locations other than the premises of the subject business.

“Operate an adult business” means the supervising, managing, inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling or in any way being responsible for or in charge of the conduct of activities of an adult business or activities within an adult business.

“Operator of an adult business” includes the owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator, or person in charge of any permitted or licensed business.

“Private viewing area” means an area or areas in a sexually oriented business designed to accommodate no more than five or fewer patrons or customers for purposes of viewing or watching a performance, picture, show, film, videotape, slide, movie, or other presentation.

“Public nudity” means “nudity” or a “state of nudity” that occurs in a business open to the public, whether or not a fee is charged for admission to such business.

“Public park” means a park, playground, swimming pool, athletic field, or similar recreational facility within the city which is under the control, operation or management of the city or any other public agency.

“Regular and substantial basis” means an activity or performance shall be deemed to be on a regular or substantial basis when it constitutes more than twenty five percent of the total performance time, stock-in-trade, revenue, floor space, advertisement or similar element of the business. For purposes of this definition, “revenue” shall include gross revenue generated by the business, including revenue received by entertainers and others who work as independent contractors. For purposes of this definition, the “floor space devoted to a regulated activity” shall include all the area devoted to the activity, including, but not limited to, display area, sales area, performance areas, viewing areas, dressing rooms, and all aisles and pathways between and within such areas.

“Religious institution” means a structure which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities, including, but not limited to, a church, chapel or similar place of worship.

“Residential use” or “residential zone” means property which is zoned for a residential use and/or a single-family dwelling, duplex, townhouse, multiple-family dwelling or mobilehome park/subdivision or recreational vehicle park, but not including a caretaker’s/security house or trailer, or a legal nonconforming residential use as permitted by this code.

“School” means any childcare facility, or an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which offers instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code or which is maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. This definition includes, but is not limited to, a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school or middle school, senior high school or any special institution of education within the city.

“Seminude” means a state of dress in which clothing, including supporting straps or devices, covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areolae of the female breast.

“Sex supermarket/sex mini-mall” means the establishment or operation of more than one type of sexually oriented business or use as defined in this chapter within the same building.

“Sexual encounter establishment” means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration, a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort in connection with “specified sexual activities” and/or the exposure of “specified anatomical areas.” This definition does not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in sexual therapy.

“Specified anatomical areas” includes any of the following:

(1)     Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae; or

(2)     Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

(3)     Any device, costume or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in subsection (1) or (2) of this definition.

“Specified sexual activities” includes any of the following:

(1)     The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals for purpose of sexual arousal, or fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic region, anus, or female breasts;

(2)     Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral/anal copulation, bestiality, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship;

(3)     Masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or ejaculation of human or animal, actual or simulated;

(4)     Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or

(5)     Excretory functions, urination, vaginal or anal irrigation as part of or in connection with any of the activities described in subsection (1) through (4) of this definition.

“Substantial enlargement of an adult business” means an increase or expansion, over the lifetime of an adult business, of more than ten percent or one hundred square feet, whichever is less in the portion of the floor area of the business which is devoted to products, services or entertainment with an emphasis on material depicting, describing or relating to “specified anatomical areas” and/or “specified sexual activities.”

“Transfer of ownership or control of an adult business” includes any of the following:

(1)     The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;

(2)     The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or

(3)     The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal devise which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership of control. (Ord. 1716 § 4, 2000)

 

9.50.020 Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to regulate adult businesses which, unless closely regulated, tend to have serious negative secondary effects on the community, which effects include, but are not limited to, the following: depreciation of property values and increase in vacancies in residential and commercial areas in the vicinity of adult businesses; interference with residential property owners’ enjoyment of their property when such property is located in the vicinity of adult businesses as a result of increases in crime, litter, noise and vandalism; higher crime rates in the vicinity of adult businesses; and blighting conditions such as low-level maintenance of commercial premises and parking lots, which thereby have a deleterious effect upon adjacent areas. Special regulation of these businesses is necessary to prevent these adverse effects and the blighting or degradation of the neighborhoods in the vicinity of the adult businesses.

It is neither the intent nor the effect of this chapter to impose limitations or restrictions on the content of any communicative material. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor the effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to communication materials or to deny access by the distributors or exhibitors of adult businesses to their intended market.

Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize, legalize or permit the establishment, operation or maintenance of any business, building or use which violates any city ordinance or any statute of the state regarding public nuisances, unlawful or indecent exposure, sexual conduct, lewdness or obscene or harmful matter or the exhibition or public display thereof.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, the regulations set forth under this chapter shall apply specifically to adult businesses. (Ord. 1716 § 4, 2000)

 

9.50.030 Applicability and exceptions.
This chapter shall apply to the establishment of an “adult business”, as defined in Section 9.50.010 of this chapter.

This chapter shall not apply to any of the following businesses or activities:

(1)     Any massage parlor or massage practitioner holding a valid current license issued pursuant to Chapter 5.10 of this code.

(2)     Any treatment administered in good faith in the course of the practice of any healing art or profession by any person holding a valid license or certificate issued by the state to practice any such art or profession under the provisions of the State Business and Professions Code or any other state law. (Ord. 1716 § 4, 2000)

 

9.50.040 Establishment of an adult business.
The establishment of an adult business shall be permitted only in the C-2 (Limited Retail Business), C-3 (Retail Commercial), and M-1 (Light Manufacturing) Zones, located along the right-of-way of Arrow Highway, between Barranca Avenue and a point 805.7 east of Sunflower Avenue. Additionally, no adult business shall be permitted on property within four hundred feet of the rights-of-way of Grand Avenue, Glendora Avenue or Sunflower Avenue, subject to the following regulations:

(1)     An adult business shall not be established or located within two hundred feet of:

(A)    Any religious institution, including a church, synagogue, mosque, temple, mortuary, cemetery, or building or portion of a building or structure which is used for religious worship or related religious activities, where a construction or use approval has been issued by the city prior to the city’s receipt of an application for an adult business permit;

(B)    The boundary of any residentially zoned land, whether in the city, in an adjoining city or within an unincorporated area;

(C)    Any residential use or residential zone;

(D)    Any public park or recreational area or property zoned, planned or otherwise designated for such use, including, but not limited to, a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, or other similar public land;

(E)     Any public or private educational facility including, but not limited to, child daycare facilities, libraries, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, and special education schools, where a construction or use approval has been issued by the city prior to the city’s receipt of an application for an adult business permit. This category of uses does not include vocational or professional institutions of higher education including, but not limited to, community or junior colleges, colleges, and universities.

The uses and zones set forth in subsections (1)(A) through (1)(E) of this section shall be collectively known as “sensitive uses.”

(2)     An adult business shall not be established or located within five hundred feet of another adult business, whether in the city, in an adjoining city or within an unincorporated area.

(3)     If two or more existing adult businesses are located in closer proximity to each other than five hundred feet, in determining which of the businesses is nonconforming, preference shall be given in the order of the respective lengths of continuous uninterrupted operation of the businesses.

(4)     Where two or more adult business applications are submitted for businesses which would be located in closer proximity to each other than five hundred feet, the application which was accepted first in time shall be processed by the city, with any later submitted applications deemed nonconforming until such time as a determination is made by the city on the initial application.

(5)     The locational standards set forth in subsections (1) through (3), inclusive, of this section shall pertain to legally established land uses in adjacent jurisdictions.

(6)     Each such adult business must, prior to commencement or continuation or substantial enlargement of such business, first apply for and receive an adult business license in accordance with the provisions of Title 5, Chapter 5.22 of this code. (Ord. 1716 § 4, 2000)

 

9.50.050 Measurement of distance.
For the purposes of this section, the distance between any two adult businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to the boundaries of the city and to intervening structures, from the closest point of each business. The distance between any adult business and any residential use, religious institution, school, public park or other sensitive use shall also be measured in a straight line, without regard to the boundaries of the city and to intervening structures, from the nearest portion of the property line of the lot where such adult business is conducted, to the nearest property line of a residential use, religious institution, school, public park or sensitive use. (Ord. 1716 § 4, 2000)

 

9.50.060 Misdemeanor offenses.
In addition to all other offenses specified in this chapter, this code and state statutes, an adult business shall be subject to the following restrictions:

(1)     Notwithstanding that it is not a criminal offense for a person to operate or cause to be operated an adult business to be in violation of the nudity limitation set forth in Title 5, Chapter 5.22 of this code, it is unlawful and a misdemeanor to establish, substantially enlarge or operate an adult business within the city without first complying with the provisions of this chapter.

(2)     It is unlawful and a misdemeanor to operate or cause to be operated an adult business outside of the zones specified in this chapter.

(3)     It is unlawful and a misdemeanor to operate or cause to be operated an adult business in violation of the locational standards set forth in Section 9.50.040 of this chapter.

(4)     It is unlawful and a misdemeanor to cause or permit the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one adult business within the same building, structure or portion thereof, or to cause the increase of floor area of any adult business in any building, structure or portion thereof containing another adult business.

(5)     It is unlawful and a misdemeanor to cause or permit the operation, establishment or maintenance of a “sex supermarket/sex mini-mall” as defined herein. (Ord. 1716 § 4, 2000)

 

9.50.070 Violations, penalties.
Any firm, corporation or person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and any conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any violation of the provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day during which such violation is committed, permitted, caused or continued. (Ord. 1716 § 4, 2000)

 

9.50.080 Civil injunction.
The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be contrary to the public interest and shall, at the discretion of the city, create a cause of action for injunctive relief. (Ord. 1716 § 4, 2000)

 

9.50.090 Public nuisance.
In addition to the penalties set forth above, any adult business which is operating in violation of this chapter or any provision thereof, or Title 5, Chapter 5.22 of this code, or any provision thereof, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and, as such, may be abated or enjoined from further operation. (Ord. 1716 § 4, 2000)

 

9.50.100 Administrative penalties.
In addition to the civil remedies and criminal penalties set forth above, any person that violates the provisions of this chapter may be subject to administrative penalties, as set forth by city ordinance. (Ord. 1716 § 4, 2000)

 

9.50.110 Amortization and regulation of nonconforming uses.
(a)     Establishment of Nonconforming Use. Any adult business which was legally established and lawfully operating prior to April 14, 1998, shall be deemed a nonconforming use, and shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise provided herein.

(b)     Amortization. Any use of real property existing on April 14, 1998, which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, but which was constructed, operated and maintained in compliance with all previous regulations, shall be regarded as a nonconforming use which may be continued until April 14, 2003, after which time all such nonconforming uses shall be terminated unless an extension of time has been approved by the director of planning and redevelopment or his or her designee, pursuant to Section 9.50.120 of this chapter.

(c)     Abandonment. Notwithstanding the above, any discontinuance or abandonment of the use of any lot or structure as an adult business for a period of one hundred eighty days shall result in a loss of legal nonconforming status of such use.

(d)     Amortization—Annexed Property. Any adult business which was a legal use at the time of annexation of the property and which is located in the city, but which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter shall be terminated within one year of the date of annexation, unless an extension of time has been approved by the planning director in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.50.120 of this chapter.

(e)     Alteration, Enlargement. Any nonconforming adult business shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use.

(f)      Conflicting Adult Businesses. If two or more adult businesses are within five hundred feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the adult business which was first established and has continually operated at the particular location is the conforming use and the later established business(es) is nonconforming.

(g)     Subsequent Approvals. Any adult business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of an adult business permit and/or license, of a school, public park, religious institution, public building likely to be frequented by minors, residential or other sensitive use within two hundred feet of the adult business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid permit and/or license and does not apply when an application for a permit and/or license is submitted after a permit and/or license has expired or has been revoked. (Ord. 1716 § 4, 2000)

 

9.50.120 Extension of time for termination of nonconforming use.
The owner or operator of a nonconforming use as described in subsection 9.50.110(b) or (d) of this chapter may apply under the provisions of this section to the director of planning and redevelopment, or designee for an extension of time within which to terminate the nonconforming use, as follows:

(1)     Time and Manner of Application. An application for an extension of time within which to terminate a use made nonconforming by the provisions of this chapter may be filed by the owner of the real property upon which such use is operated, or by the operator of the use. such application must be filed with the director of planning and redevelopment, or designee, at least sixty days but no more than one hundred eighty days prior to the expiration of the time established in Section 9.50.110 of this chapter for termination of such use.

(2)     Content of Application; Fees. The application shall state the grounds for requesting an extension of time. The filing fee for such application shall be the same as that for a variance as is set forth in the schedule of fees established by resolution from time to time by the city council. An application which fails to state a basis upon which an extension may be granted, as set forth in subsection (4) of this section shall be returned to the applicant, as nonresponsive, together with the application fee less any administrative costs of processing the application.

(3)     Hearing Procedure. The director of planning and redevelopment shall appoint a hearing officer to hear the application. The hearing officer shall set the matter for hearing within twenty business days of receipt of the application. All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; may be represented by counsel; and shall have the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and subject to judicial review pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8.

(4)     Approval of Extension; Findings. An extension under the provisions of this section shall be for a reasonable period of time commensurate with the investment involved, and shall be approved only if the hearing officer makes all of the following findings or such other findings as are required by law:

(A)    For uses which are rendered nonconforming by virtue of their proximity to other uses, pursuant to Sections 9.50.110 and 9.50.040 of this chapter:

(i)      The applicant has made a substantial investment (including, but not limited to, lease obligations) in the property or structure on or in which the nonconforming use is conducted; such property or structure cannot be readily converted to another use; and such investment was made prior to April 14, 1998, or prior to the date of annexation; and

(ii)     The applicant will be unable to recoup said investment as of the date established for termination of the use; and

(iii)   The applicant has made good faith efforts to recoup the investment and to relocate the use to a location in conformance with Section 9.50.040 of this chapter.

(B)    For uses which comply with the requirements of Section 9.50.040 of this chapter, but whose business operations must be modified in order to comply with other provisions of this chapter:

(i)      The applicant has made a substantial investment (including, but not limited to, lease obligations) in the property or structure on or in which the nonconforming use is conducted; such property or structure cannot be readily converted so as to comply with the requirements of this chapter within the time period provided in Section 9.50.110 of this chapter; and such investment was made prior to April 14, 1998, or prior to the date of annexation; and

(ii)     The applicant will be unable to recoup said investment as of the date established for modification or termination of the use; and

(iii)   The applicant has made good faith efforts to recoup the investment and has filed plans with the city which demonstrate the ability and intent to comply with the requirements of this chapter within a reasonable time, but needs additional time within which to make the required modifications. This finding shall be made with respect to each aspect of compliance, and no extension shall be granted for modifications which are required by this chapter and which can be made without additional time. (Ord. 1716 § 4, 2000)

Chapter 9.51 DISPLAY OF MATERIAL WHICH IS HARMFUL TO MINORS—BLINDER RACKS REQUIRED
9.51.010 Definitions.
Unless otherwise stated, words and terms are defined as follows:

“Exhibit” means to show.

“Harmful material” means matter, taken as a whole, which to the average person, applying contemporary statewide standards, appeals to the prurient interest, and is matter which taken as a whole, depicts or describes in a patently offensive way sexual conduct and which, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value for minors.

“Knowingly means being aware of the character of the matter or material.

“Material” or “matter” means any book, magazine, newspaper, video recording, or other printed or written material or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, or other pictorial representation or any statue or other figure, or any recording, transcription, or mechanical, chemical, or electrical reproduction or any other articles, equipment, machines or material. Material also includes live or recorded telephone message when transmitted, disseminated, or distributed as part of a commercial transaction.

“Minor” means any natural person under eighteen years of age.

“Person” means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, or other legal entity. (Ord. 1725 § 1, 2000)

 

9.51.020 Display of material which is harmful to minors: requirement of blinder racks.
(a)     Display of material which is harmful to minors, as defined in Chapter 7.6 of Title 9 of the California Penal Code, in a public place, other than a public place from which minors are excluded, is prohibited unless a device commonly known as a “blinder rack” is placed in front of such material, so that the lower two thirds of the material is not exposed to view.

(b)     “Blinder rack” is defined as an opaque cover, blocking from the view the lower two-thirds of the material, and secure from the reach of minors, in the place where such material is sold, distributed or displayed whether with or without consideration. (Ord. 1725 § 1, 2000)

 

9.51.030 General penalty.
(a)     A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, except as otherwise provided herein.

(b)     Except in cases where a different punishment is specifically prescribed elsewhere in this chapter, every misdemeanor offense is punishable by imprisonment in the city or county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or by both; provided, that where the city attorney determines that such action would be in the interest of justice, the city attorney may specify in the accusatory pleadings that the offense shall be an infraction.

(c)     Except as otherwise prescribed in this chapter, every offense specifically declared to be an infraction is punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same provision within one year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional infraction violation of the same provision within one year. An infraction is not punishable by imprisonment. A person charged with an infraction shall not be entitled to a trial by jury and shall not be entitled to have the public defender or other counsel appointed at public expense to represent him or her unless he or she is arrested and not released on his or her written promise to appear, his or her own recognizance, or a deposit of bail. However, any person who has previously been convicted two or more times during any twelve-month period for any offense made punishable as an infraction shall be charged with a misdemeanor upon subsequent violation(s).

(d)     Payment of any penalty herein provided shall not relieve a person, firm, corporation, or any other entity from the responsibility of correcting the condition resulting from the violation. In addition to the above penalties, the court may order that the guilty party reimburse the city for all of its costs of investigation, analysis and prosecution of the enforcement action against the guilty party; and the court shall fix the amount of any such reimbursements upon submission of proof of such cost by the city. (Ord. 1725 § 1, 2000)

Chapter 9.52 PREVENTION AND REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI
9.52.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined and shall be construed as hereinafter set out, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning was intended:

“Aerosol container” means any aerosol-based container, bottle, spray device, or other mechanism, six ounces or less which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint, ink, dye, or other similar substance.

“Bona fide evidence of majority and identity” means any documents evidencing the age and identity of an individual which has been issued by a federal, state, or local government entity, and includes, but is not limited to, a motor vehicle operator’s license, a registration certificate issued under the Federal Selective Service Act, or an identification card issued by a member of the armed forces.

“Felt-tip marker” means any indelible marker, pen, or similar implement which contains a fluid which is not soluble in water and has a flat, pointed, or angled tip which at its broadest width is greater than one-eighth inch.

“Graffiti” means the unauthorized application of paint, ink, chalk, dye, or the use of any other instrument capable of defacing, damaging, or destroying public and private buildings, structures, or any portion thereof.

“Graffiti implement” means an aerosol container, a felt-tip marker, paint stick, etching instrument, or any other device containing paint, ink, chalk, dye, or similar substance which when used or applied is capable of defacing glass, metal, concrete, stucco, or wood.

“Graffiti stick or paint stick” means any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance that is not water soluble and is capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, leaving a mark at least one-eighth inch in width. (Ord. 1619 § 2, 1993)

 

9.52.020 Graffiti prohibited.
(a)     It is unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any public or privately owned structure located on public or privately owned real property within the city.

(b)     It is unlawful for any owner, lessee, occupant, or other person having present possession of a lot or parcel of land within the city which has graffiti or other inscribed material, capable of being viewed from the public right-of-way to: (1) permit graffiti to remain upon such lot or parcel of land, or (2) to maintain any structure or sign affixed to such lot or parcel of land with graffiti on such structure or any portion thereof, for a period in excess of forty-eight hours following service by the city of a notice to abate graffiti.

(c)     The parents or legal guardian of a minor violating this chapter shall be jointly and severally liable for payment of civil damages, including court costs and attorneys’ fees to the prevailing party, resulting from the willful misconduct of the minor that results in the defacement of city property as authorized by the provisions of California Civil Code Section 1714.1, and any amendments thereto, or any other applicable legal authority. (Ord. 1935 § 1, 2010; Ord. 1619 § 2, 1993)

 

9.52.030 Possession of graffiti implement.
No person under the age of eighteen years and not in the presence of a parent or legal guardian shall have in his or her possession a “graffiti implement,” as defined while in any public park, playground, swimming pool, public recreational facility, or any public right-of-way in the city unless necessary in order to participate in any city-sponsored function. This section shall not apply to the authorized agents or contractors under contract with the city. (Ord. 1619 § 2, 1993)

 

9.52.040 Removal by city with consent of property owner.
(a)     Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, whenever the director of public works or the director’s designee determines that graffiti or other inscribed material is located on public or private property so as to be capable of being viewed from any public right-of-way within the city and the public entity having jurisdiction over, or the owner of, such property consents to the removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material by the city and executes such documents as the city may provide relative to such removal, the city may remove the graffiti or other inscribed material or cause the same to be removed by an authorized contractor.

(b)     If the city removes or causes to be removed, the graffiti or other inscribed material, it shall not undertake or authorize the painting or repair of any more extensive an area of the property than where the graffiti or other inscribed material is located.

(c)     Prior to the removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material, the city or its contractor shall obtain written consent of the public entity having jurisdiction over the property, in the case of publicly owned property, or the owner of the property, in the case of private property, and the public entity or owner shall execute a release and waiver in a form acceptable to the city. (Ord. 1619 § 2, 1993)

 

9.52.050 Sale of graffiti implements.
(a)     It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to sell or give any graffiti implement, as defined by this chapter, to any individual under the age of eighteen years, who is not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, without first obtaining bona fide evidence of majority and identity.

(b)     Any person, firm or corporation offering for sale to the public any graffiti implement or other aerosol spray paint shall keep, store, and maintain such material in a place that is locked and secure, or otherwise inaccessible except by special request.

(c)     Any person, firm, or corporation engaged in the retail sale of any graffiti implement, as defined by this chapter, must display at a conspicuous location a legible sign with letters at least three-eighths inch in height which states:

 

It is unlawful for any person to sell or give to any individual under the age of eighteen years, who is not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, any graffiti implement capable of being used to deface property. Any person who maliciously defaces real or personal property is guilty of vandalism which is punishable by a fine, imprisonment, or both.

 

(d)     Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, it is unlawful, pursuant to Section 594.1 of the California Penal Code, for any person, firm, or corporation, except a parent or legal guardian, to tell or give or in any way furnish to another person, who is under the age of eighteen years, any aerosol container containing six ounces or more of paint, without first obtaining bona fide evidence of majority and identity.

(e)     Any person, firm, or corporation that violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1619 § 2, 1993)

Chapter 9.54 GATED COMMUNITY ACCESS REQUIREMENTS
9.54.010 Definitions.
(a)     “Chief of police” means the chief of the Glendora police department or designee.

(b)     “Emergency call” means a report of a situation where immediate assistance is deemed to be reasonably necessary to prevent injury, protect life or property.

(c)     “Emergency personnel” means police officers, employees, officers and agents of the city responding to an emergency call, or police officers responding to a non-emergency call and actively engaged in the performance of their duties.

(d)     “Gated community” means any residential neighborhood where accessibility is controlled by means of a gate, barrier or other similar improvement within or across privately maintained rights-of-way.

(e)     “Master key” means a key specified by the city that activates automatic gates, barriers, doors or other devices or opens a locked Knox box where an access key is kept.

(f)      “Radio control device” means a radio control system permitting the activation of automatic gates or barriers by use of a radio transmitter and receiver system. For purposes of this section, this device will be a separate and distinct system used solely by emergency personnel for public safety access. The assigned and restricted code will not be issued to resident(s) of the gated community nor any other person, except by written authorization of the chief of police. (Ord. 1724 § 1, 2000)

 

9.54.020 Application.
This chapter shall apply to all gated communities. For gated communities where final subdivision maps have been approved, or in the case of multi-family housing where a valid certificate of occupancy has been issued, compliance shall be mandatory within twelve months after the effective date of this chapter. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to any requirements of the Los Angeles County fire department. (Ord. 1724 § 1, 2000)

 

9.54.030 Gated community—Required access.
Each gated community shall install and maintain in good working order emergency public safety access devices at all times, as follows:

(a)     Where automatic gates or other vehicle barriers exist:

(1)     A radio control device as specified by the chief of police; and

(2)     A master key as specified by the chief of police for activating automatic gates or other vehicle barriers in the event of the failure of the radio control device.

(b)     In apartment houses where locked pedestrian access doors or gates bar entry:

(1)     Master key box as specified by the chief of police where a key to the door or gate is kept.

(c)     Where more than one vehicle gate or barrier exists or more than one pedestrian access door or gate is maintained, the chief of police shall determine if more than one vehicle or pedestrian access point shall have a radio control device and/or master key. (Ord. 1724 § 1, 2000)

 

9.54.040 Public nuisance.
Any gated community maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be declared a public nuisance under Chapter 9.36 of this code and shall be handled according to the processes contained therein. (Ord. 1724 § 1, 2000)

 

9.54.050 Damage in response to emergency call.
Should responding emergency personnel responding to the report of an emergency, whether or not a true emergency exists, find it necessary to force entry into a gated community because the provisions of this chapter are not in full compliance or the gate fails to open for any reason, the city, its police officers, employees, officers or agents shall not be held responsible for such damage. (Ord. 1724 § 1, 2000)

 

9.54.060 Unauthorized access.
Any person who uses a radio control device transmitter unless authorized by the chief of police, or uses a master key except as authorized by the chief of police or the owners or agents of a gated community, to access, open or activate a gate, door or barrier of a gated community is guilty of a misdemeanor. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person from such entry in the event of an actual emergency situation involving the risk of injury or death to any person within a gated community. (Ord. 1724 § 1, 2000)

 

9.54.070 Unauthorized possession of master key or radio transmitter.
(a)     No person shall possess a master key unless specifically authorized by the chief of police.

(b)     No person shall possess a transmitter programmed to open the access gate to a gated community, by using the radio control device, unless specifically authorized by the chief of police. (Ord. 1724 § 1, 2000)

 

9.54.080 Penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1724 § 1, 2000)

 

9.54.090 Duties and obligations not created.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impose upon the city or any police officer, officer or employee of the city, any duty or obligation of any kind to any person. (Ord. 1724 § 1, 2000)

Chapter 9.56 REGULATION OF SPECIFIC ACTS DURING SPECIAL EVENTS
9.56.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this section, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meaning given herein.

(1)     “City” means the city of Glendora.

(2)     “Special event” means any event, parade, exposition, carnival, fair or procession which has been properly permitted under the codes of the city, and which is staged in or upon public places or sidewalks, for which city services are required because of interference with normal vehicular traffic, pedestrian traffic or which will reasonably be expected to generate an extraordinary need for public safety services, sanitation or other city services. “Special event” shall also mean any event, parade, exposition, carnival, fair or procession which has been properly permitted under the codes of the city, and which is staged in or upon private property, wherein the public is invited to participate and for which city services are required because of interference with normal vehicular traffic, pedestrian traffic or which will reasonably be expected to generate an extraordinary need for public safety services, sanitation or other city services. “Special event” shall also include any event which has received a permit, or is required to obtain a permit, pursuant to Chapter 5.32.

(3)     “Public place” means any and all public streets, alleyways, sidewalks, parkways, buildings and property owned or operated by the city of Glendora, public parking lots, gutters or other public rights-of-way public buildings, parks, squares and grounds. (Ord. 1757 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1754 § 1, 2002)

 

9.56.020 Interference with special event prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, disrupt or impede a permitted special event as specified herein. The following acts are prohibited by this section when done for the purpose of or with knowledge that an effect thereof is to interfere with or disrupt the ability of the permittee to carry on the special event:

(1)     To block, obstruct or impede the passage of participants, attendees, vehicles or animals in the special event or along the special event route;

(2)     When not participating in the special event with the permission of the permit holder, to run, operate a skateboard, ride any wheeled vehicle/toy, rollerblade or roller skate through, between, with or among the participants, attendees, vehicles or animals in the special event, except in cases of bona fide emergency;

(3)     To drop, roll, throw, toss, squirt or propel any gaseous, liquid, semisolid or solid substance or object toward or among the participants, attendees, vehicles or animals in the special event;

(4)     To grab, take hold of, strike, hit, pull or push any participant, attendee, vehicle or animal in the special event, or to mount any vehicle in the special event, except with the permission of the permittee or in cases of bona fide emergency;

(5)     To generate, amplify or broadcast any noises or sounds using any loudspeaker, amplifier, instrument or device other than sounds generated solely by the human voice or body unaided by any such amplifier, device or instrument upon any sidewalk or public place. This restriction shall apply only along the special event route or area while the special event is in progress at that location, and shall not apply to any participant in the special event acting with the permission of the permittee.

(6)     Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding one thousand dollars or imprisoned in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1757 § 2, 2002; Ord. 1754 § 2, 2002)

Chapter 9.58 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
9.58.010 Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the state of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the city of Glendora adopts the following floodplain management regulations. (Ord. 1846 § 1, 2007)

 

9.58.020 Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:

(1)     Protect human life and health;

(2)     Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

(3)     Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

(4)     Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

(5)     Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

(6)     Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage;

(7)     Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

(8)     Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 1846 § 1, 2007)

 

9.58.030 Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

“Area of special flood hazard” means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.

“Base flood” means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “one hundred-year flood”). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter.

“Building.” See “Structure.”

“Development” means any man made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

“Flood or flooding” means:

(1)     A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined herein and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current.

(2)     The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined herein.

“Floodplain or flood prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See “Flooding.”

“Floodplain administrator” is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.

“Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.

“Floodplain management regulations” means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.

“Governing body” is the local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.

“Historic structure” means any structure that is:

(1)     Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

(2)     Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

(3)     Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or

(4)     Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved programs.

“Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”

“Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

“New construction,” for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

“One hundred year flood” or “100 year flood.” See “Base flood.”

“Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

(1)     Built on a single chassis;

(2)     Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

(3)     Designed to be self propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and

(4)     Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

“Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

“Structure” means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.

“Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

“Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

(1)     Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

(2)     Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.” (Ord. 1846 § 1, 2007)

 

Article 1. General Provisions
9.58.040 Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas identified as flood-prone within the jurisdiction of the city of Glendora. (Ord. 1846 § 1, 2007)

 

9.58.050 Basis for establishing flood-prone areas.
The floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood data available from other federal or state agencies or other source to identify flood-prone areas within the jurisdiction of the city of Glendora. This data will be on file at City Hall, in the department of public works. (Ord. 1846 § 1, 2007)

 

9.58.060 Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the term of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 1846 § 1, 2007)

 

9.58.070 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 1846 § 1, 2007)

 

9.58.080 Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

(1)     Considered as minimum requirements;

(2)     Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

(3)     Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 1846 § 1, 2007)

 

9.58.090 Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city of Glendora, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 1846 § 1, 2007)

 

Article 2. Administration
9.58.100 Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained for all proposed construction or other development in the community, including the placement of manufactured homes, so that it may be determined whether such construction or other development is within flood-prone areas. (Ord. 1846 § 1, 2007)

 

9.58.110 Designation of the floodplain administrator.
The director of public works is appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. (Ord. 1846 § 1, 2007)

 

9.58.120 Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following:

(1)     Permit Review. Review all development permit applications to determine:

(A)    Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;

(B)    All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; and

(C)    The site is reasonably safe from flooding.

(2)     Review and Use of Any Other Base Flood Data. The floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood data available from other federal or state agency or other source. (Ord. 1846 § 1, 2007)

 

Article 3. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
9.58.130 Standards of construction.
If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial improvements, including manufactured homes, shall:

(1)     Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

(2)     Be constructed:

(A)    With materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;

(B)    Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;

(C)    With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. (Ord. 1846 § 1, 2007)

 

9.58.140 Standards for subdivisions or other proposed new development.
If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, is in a flood-prone area, any such proposals shall be reviewed to assure that:

(1)     All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the floodprone area;

(2)     All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and

(3)     Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (Ord. 1846 § 1, 2007)

 

9.58.150 Standards for utilities.
(a)     All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:

(1)     Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and

(2)     Discharge from the systems into flood waters.

(b)     On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 1846 § 1, 2007)

Chapter 9.60 SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS
9.60.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

“Child or children” means any person(s) under eighteen years of age.

“Duplex” means a residential land use for a building containing two dwelling units.

“Hotel” or “motel” means a commercial land use for the rental of six or more guest rooms or suites for primarily temporary residency, for a period of not more than thirty consecutive days.

“Inn” means a commercial land use for the rental of five or fewer guest rooms or suites, primarily for temporary residency, for a period of not more than thirty consecutive days.

“Mobilehome” means a structure with dimensions larger than eight feet by forty feet or size larger than three hundred twenty square feet designed for human habitations, transported over streets and highways to a permanent occupancy site, and installed on the site either with or without a permanent foundation.

“Mobilehome park” or “park” means a manufactured housing community as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18801 or an area of land in the city of Glendora where five or more mobilehome spaces are rented or leased out for mobilehomes used as residences. Mobilehome park does not include developments which sell lots for mobilehomes or manufactured housing, or which provide condominium, community apartment or stock cooperative ownership, even if any homes in the development are rented or leased out. Mobilehome park includes trailer park.

“Mobilehome space” means that portion of a mobilehome park designated for the location of one mobilehome for the purposes of leasing said portion by the owner to a mobilehome tenant.

“Multifamily dwelling” means a building designed for permanent residency for three or more families living independently of each other. This includes apartment houses and condominiums, but does not include hotels, motels or inns.

“Park” means an open space intended for recreational use that has playground equipment, sports fields, courts, ramps, or other recreational equipment intended for a child’s use.

“Permanent resident” means any person who, as of a given date, obtained the right to occupy a dwelling, including, but not limited to, a single-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling, duplex dwelling, hotel, motel or inn for more than thirty consecutive days.

“Prohibited location” means park, or school and any location where residency is prohibited by California Penal Code Section 3003.5.

 

“Residential unit” means a single-family home, mobilehome, a unit in a multifamily complex including apartments or condos, a unit in a duplex, and a single room in a hotel, motel, or inn.

“School” means the buildings and grounds of any public or private school used for the education of children in kindergarten or in grades 1 through 12, inclusive.

“Sex offender” means any person for whom registration is required pursuant to California Penal Code Section 290, and is on parole.

“Single-family dwelling” means one permanent residential dwelling located on a single lot, with yard areas that separate that dwelling from other dwellings.

“Temporary resident” means any person who, for a period of thirty days or less, obtained the right to occupy a dwelling, including, but not limited to, a hotel, motel or inn. (Ord. 2025 § 2, 2017)

 

9.60.020 Residency restriction.
No sex offender shall reside within two hundred fifty feet of the nearest property line of any prohibited location. This restriction is measured from individual unit, not the multifamily complex or mobilehome park property-line. Further, no sex offender shall reside in a residential unit already occupied by a sex offender, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage or adoption. (Ord. 2025 § 2, 2017)

 

9.60.030 Sex offender violation—Single-family dwellings.
No sex offender shall be a permanent or temporary resident in a single-family dwelling already occupied by a sex offender, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage or adoption. (Ord. 2025 § 2, 2017)

 

9.60.040 Sex offender violation—Multifamily dwellings.
No sex offender shall be a permanent or temporary resident in a multifamily dwelling unit already occupied by a sex offender, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage or adoption. (Ord. 2025 § 2, 2017)

 

9.60.050 Sex offender violation—Duplex dwellings.
No sex offender shall be a permanent or temporary resident in a duplex dwelling unit already occupied by a sex offender, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage or adoption. (Ord. 2025 § 2, 2017)

 

9.60.060 Sex offender violation—Hotel, motel or inn room.
No sex offender shall be a permanent or temporary resident in a guest room of a hotel, motel or inn already occupied by a sex offender, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage or adoption. (Ord. 2025 § 2, 2017)

 

9.60.070 Sex offender violation—Mobilehome space.
No sex offender shall be a permanent or temporary resident in a mobilehome space already occupied by a sex offender, unless those persons are legally related by blood, marriage or adoption. (Ord. 2025 § 2, 2017)

 

9.60.080 Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply in any of the following circumstances:

(a)     For any residence not prohibited by California Penal Code Section 3003.5, but prohibited by this chapter, where the sex offender established residency prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified by this chapter.

(b)     For any residence prohibited by California Penal Code Section 3003.5 and by operation of this chapter, where the sex offender established residency prior to the effective date of Penal Code Section 3003.5(b).

(c)     The sex offender established the residency prior to the initial operation of the prohibited location.

(d)     The sex offender has a disability that significantly limits their ability to re-offend, or is housed in a senior care facility where there is likely no contact with children.

(e)     On a case-by-case basis, where it is supported by circumstances found in the sex offender’s criminal history and there is a clearly articulated justification, the city may grant an exception to the residency restrictions of this chapter. (Ord. 2025 § 2, 2017)

 

9.60.090 Offenses constituting nuisances.
Any duplex, hotel, motel, inn, multifamily dwelling, or single-family dwelling operated or maintained in a manner inconsistent with the occupancy requirements of this chapter or the restrictions of California Penal Code Section 3003.5 is declared to be unlawful, and is defined as and declared to be a public nuisance per se that is injurious to the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2025 § 2, 2017)

 

9.60.100 Nuisances—Recovery of abatement expenses.
(a)     In any civil action or proceeding, administrative or special proceeding, including, but not limited to, those brought to abate a public nuisance, the city shall be entitled to recovery of all costs, attorneys’ fees and expenses; provided that attorneys’ fees will only be available in those actions or proceedings in which the city has provided notice, at the commencement of such action or proceeding, that it intends to seek and recover its own attorneys’ fees. In no action or proceeding will an award of attorneys’ fees exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding.

(b)     Moneys due the city pursuant to this chapter may be recovered in an appropriate civil action. Alternatively, such liability may be enforced by special assessment proceedings against the parcel of land upon which the nuisance existed, which proceedings must be conducted in a manner consistent with the proceedings prescribed in Section 9.36.140 et seq., of this code, relating to assessments for abatement of property nuisances. (Ord. 2025 § 2, 2017)

 

9.60.110 Penalties.
Every person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in Section 1.01.110. Each day that such violation exists shall be deemed a new and separate offense. (Ord. 2025 § 2, 2017)

 

9.60.120 Criminal penalties do not satisfy administrative or civil actions.
Neither the arrest, prosecution, conviction, imprisonment or payment of any fine for the violation of this chapter shall satisfy or diminish the authority of the city to institute administrative or civil actions seeking enforcement of any or all of its provisions. (Ord. 2025 § 2, 2017)

 

9.60.130 Timing of application of this chapter.
(a)     Excepting anything to the contrary contained herein, this chapter shall apply to all sex offenders who locate within the city after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(b)     Nothing in this chapter is intended to limit the obligations of a sex offender to comply with the requirements of state law, including, but not limited to, California Penal Code Section 3003.5. (Ord. 2025 § 2, 2017)

Chapter 9.62 FIREWORKS
9.62.010 Fireworks prohibited—Exception.
(a)     Subject to the exception set forth in subsection (b) of this section, it is unlawful for any person, firm, entity, partnership or corporation to sell, use or discharge any fireworks within the city, including, but not limited to, “safe and sane” fireworks as that term is defined in Part 2 of Division 11 of the California Health and Safety Code, as the same may be amended from time to time hereafter.

(b)     Exception. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the presentation of a licensed public display of fireworks including, but not limited to, “safe and sane” fireworks. (Ord. 1938 § 1, 2010)

 

9.62.020 Civil nuisance.
The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided for by law for the abatement of nuisances. (Ord. 1938 § 1, 2010)

 

9.62.030 Violation, penalty.
Any person, firm, entity, partnership or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and any conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day during which such violation is committed, permitted, caused or continued. (Ord. 1938 § 1, 2010)

Chapter 9.64 PROHIBITION OF MARIJUANA CULTIVATION, DISPENSATION OR DELIVERY
9.64.010 Statutory authorization.
California Health and Safety Code Article 2.5 (Medical Marijuana Program) Section 11362.83 states, “Nothing in this article shall prevent a city or other local governing body from adopting and enforcing laws consistent with this article.”

California Health and Safety Code Article 2.5 Section 11362.2(a) states, “A city may enact and enforce reasonable regulations of the personal cultivation of marijuana plants kept within a person’s private residence, or upon the grounds of that private residence (e.g., in an outdoor garden area), that are located in a locked space, and are not visible by normal unaided vision from a public place but may not completely prohibit persons engaging in planting, cultivating, harvesting, drying, and processing not more than six marijuana plants inside a private residence, or inside an accessory structure to a private residence located upon the grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secure. (Ord. 2014 § 2, 2017; Ord. 2004 § 2, 2016)

 

9.64.020 Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, as follows:

“Cultivation” means the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, trimming, and processing of marijuana plants.

“Marijuana dispensary” means any facility or location, whether fixed or mobile, where marijuana or marijuana-infused products such as tinctures, baked goods, or other consumable products are cultivated, manufactured, processed, or by any means transported or delivered, or arranged to be transported or delivered, made available to or distributed by or distributed to a person.

“Operation” means any effort to locate, operate, own, lease, supply, allow to be operated, or aid, abet or assist in the operation of a marijuana dispensary.

“Person” means any qualified patient or primary caregiver of qualified patients pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5, firm, corporation, association, club, society, or other organization. The term person shall include any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer or salesperson. (Ord. 2014 § 2, 2017; Ord. 2004 § 2, 2016)

 

9.64.025 Marijuana cultivation restrictions.
(a)     Outdoor cultivation of marijuana shall be prohibited upon the grounds of a private residence.

(b)     Indoor Cultivation Registration and Permit. A person shall obtain an indoor cultivation permit from the police department prior for the cultivating marijuana with a private residence. Applications for permits shall be made on forms provided by the police chief and shall be accompanied by a fee, as established by city council resolution. The following information shall be required with the initial registration application and subsequent annual renewals:

(1)     The applicant shall be twenty-one years of age or older;

(2)     A signed, notarized affidavit of any landlord or property owner, other than the applicant, shall be provided acknowledging and granting permission for marijuana cultivation to occur at the subject property;

(3)     The names of each person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge of any premises where marijuana will be cultivated shall be provided;

(4)     The applicant shall complete a LiveScan with the California Department of Justice, at the applicant’s own cost;

(5)     The applicant shall not have any felony convictions for the illegal possession for sale, manufacture, transportation, or cultivation of a controlled substance within the last five years;

(6)     The applicant shall not have any pending code enforcement actions with the city;

(7)     The applicant shall have no outstanding payments due to the city; and

(8)     The applicant shall provide a signed consent to enter form acceptable to the city, authorizing city staff and its representatives, including, but not limited to, the police department, and the Los Angeles County fire department, to conduct inspections of the residence upon twenty-four-hours’ notice, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the standards and requirements for indoor marijuana cultivation.

(c)     Indoor Cultivation Requirements. Indoor cultivation of no more than six live marijuana plants for personal use shall be subject to the following standards, consistent with state law:

(1)     The applicant shall reside full-time on the premises where the marijuana cultivation occurs;

(2)     The residence shall not include more than one cultivation area;

(3)     The residence shall not be used for any of the following activities:

(A)    Day care,

(B)    Youth center,

(C)    Group home, or

(D)    Any facility that does not allow cultivation of marijuana by law or policy;

(4)     Cultivation shall only be conducted within a single private residence or inside an accessory structure to a private residence located upon the grounds of a private residence that is fully enclosed and secure via a mechanical locking or electronic security system to prevent access by persons under twenty-one years of age;

(5)     A floor plan and description of the cultivation area shall be provided;

(6)     A cumulative area of no more than fifty square feet shall be used for marijuana cultivation purposes;

(7)     The cultivation area shall be accessible by only one lockable door. Any window(s), skylight(s), ventilation, or other opening shall be lockable;

(8)     The residential structure shall remain at all times a legal residence, with legal and functioning cooking, sleeping, and sanitation facilities, with proper ingress and egress. Marijuana cultivation shall not impede, obstruct or otherwise prevent these areas for use of cooking meals, sleeping or bathing;

(9)     The garage of the residential structure shall not be used for marijuana cultivation and shall remain free and clear of cultivation equipment and marijuana plants;

(10)   No exterior evidence of marijuana cultivation shall be visible from public view;

(11)   The cultivation area shall not produce odors, sounds, or other emissions that are sensible from any adjacent properties and may indicate marijuana cultivation;

(12)   A portable fire extinguisher, compliant with the standards adopted by the State Fire Marshal, shall be kept in the same area as the marijuana cultivation;

(13)   All indoor cultivation areas shall comply with the California Building, Electrical, and Mechanical Codes, as amended by the city of Glendora, and Los Angeles County Fire Codes;

(14)   Indoor lights required for marijuana cultivation shall not exceed an aggregate of one thousand two hundred watts and shall comply with all applicable building code regulations; and

 

(15)   Gas products (including, but not limited to, CO2, butane, propane, and natural gas) or generators shall not be used for the marijuana cultivation. (Ord. 2014 § 2, 2017)

 

9.64.030 Marijuana dispensaries prohibited.
Marijuana dispensaries are prohibited in the city of Glendora. No person shall locate, operate, own, allow to be operated or aide, abet or assist in the operation of any marijuana dispensary within the city. (Ord. 2004 § 2, 2016)

 

9.64.040 Marijuana delivery prohibited.
(a)     No person shall deliver marijuana to any location within the city from a marijuana dispensary, regardless of where the marijuana dispensary is located, or engage in any operation for this purpose.

(b)     No person shall deliver any marijuana-infused product such as tinctures, baked goods or other consumable products, to any location within the city from a marijuana dispensary, regardless of where the marijuana dispensary is located, or engage in any operation for this purpose. (Ord. 2004 § 2, 2016)

 

9.64.050 Public nuisance declared.
(a)     Operation of any marijuana dispensary within the city in violation of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to all available remedies.

(b)     Any marijuana cultivation that does not comply with the restrictions, standards, and requirements set forth herein shall be declared a public nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to all available remedies. (Ord. 2014 § 2, 2017; Ord. 2004 § 2, 2016)

 

9.64.060 Violations.
Violations of this chapter may be enforced by any applicable law. Notwithstanding any other provision of the code, a violation of this chapter is not subject to criminal penalties. (Ord. 2004 § 2, 2016)

Chapter 9.66 ABANDONED SHOPPING CARTS
9.66.010 Findings and purpose.
The city of Glendora finds that abandoned shopping carts in the city create potential hazard to the health and safety of the public, and interfere with pedestrian and vehicular traffic and create a public nuisance. The accumulation of abandoned carts on public and private property tends to create conditions that reduce property values, and promote blight and deterioration that result in a public nuisance. This chapter is intended to ensure that measures are taken by the owners of shopping carts to prevent the removal of the shopping carts from the owner’s premises, to make removal of the shopping cart without the owner’s approval a violation of this code, and to facilitate the retrieval of abandoned shopping carts in a manner consistent with state law.

Retail establishments owning any shopping carts are subject to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2051 § 1, 2020)

 

9.66.020 Definitions.
“Abandoned shopping carts” means any cart that is located outside the premises or parking lot of a retail establishment which owns the cart, except a cart that is in the physical possession of a person who has the express written consent of the cart’s owner.

“Business license” means that license for operation of a retail establishment required under Title 5 of this code.

“Cart owner” means every business or person who, in connection with the conduct of a retail establishment owns, rightfully possesses, or makes any cart available to patrons and/or the public. This shall include the owner’s agent or authorized representative.

“City” means the city of Glendora or its designated representatives.

“Code” means the Glendora Municipal Code unless otherwise specified.

“Commencement date” shall mean the date that the implementation, enforcement and applicability of this chapter to cart owners and retail establishments starts. The “commencement date” shall be six months following the day this chapter takes effect following adoption by the city council.

“Contractor” means an authorized independent person approved by the city council for the purpose of effecting the removal of abandoned shopping carts.

“Director” means the city’s director of public works or other employee designated by the director of public works or the city manager to enforce or carry out the provisions of this chapter.

“Effective containment program” means a system selected by the retail establishment that results in no more than five shopping carts being removed without the owner’s consent from the business premises or parking area within the twelve month period commencing with the issuance of a business registration or the renewal of the business registration (minimum of five carts in a twelve month time period). An effective containment program may include one or more of the following measures:

(1)     Disabling devices on all shopping carts which prevent them from being removed from the business premises by locking the wheels or otherwise preventing the movement of the carts.

(2)     An on-site security guard to deter customers who attempt to remove carts from the business premises.

(3)     Bollards and chains around the business premises to prevent cart removal, if permitted by the fire marshal.

(4)     Any other measure approved by the director in writing as a means to contain carts on the premises.

“Effective retrieval program” means no more than five abandoned shopping carts are collected by the city or its contractor within the city limits and returned to the retail establishment within the twelve month period commencing with the issuance of a business registration or the renewal of the business registration (minimum of five carts in a twelve month time period). There is a rebuttable presumption that a cart found abandoned somewhere off the premises of the cart’s owner was removed from the premises without the owner’s consent and that if the city or its contractor removes it and returns it to the retail establishment, the cart was abandoned for more than forty-eight hours.

“Effective shopping cart nuisance abatement” means the retail establishment’s ongoing activities to prevent the theft and abandonment of shopping carts from their parking area, combined with the retail establishment’s ongoing activity to retrieve any abandoned shopping cart owned by the retail establishment from public or private property within the city within forty-eight hours.

“Identified cart” means a shopping cart that has a permanently affixed sign that identifies, in accordance with California Business and Professions Code Section 22435.1, the owner of the cart or the retailer, or both; notifies the public of the procedure to be utilized for authorized removal of the cart from the owner’s premises; notifies the public that the unauthorized removal of the cart from the cart owner’s premises or cart owner’s parking area or the unauthorized possession of the cart, is a violation of state law; and lists a valid telephone number or address for returning the cart to the owner or retailer. If the cart owner operates more than one store, the sign shall identify the location of the store where the cart is used.

“Parking area” means a parking lot or other property provided by a retail establishment for use by a customer for parking an automobile or other vehicle. In a multi-store complex or shopping center, “parking area” includes the entire parking area used by or controlled by the complex or center.

“Person” means a natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation, limited liability company, or other entity.

“Private property” means any property not owned by the city, its successor agency, library, or other such sub-agencies or boards acting under the authority of the city of Glendora.

“Public property” means property owned by the city, its successor agency, library, or other such sub-agencies or boards acting under the authority of the city of Glendora.

“Retail establishment” means any trade establishment selling articles, commodities, services, or any line of merchandise where shopping carts are made available for and used by patrons and/or the public.

“Shopping cart” or “cart” means a basket that is mounted on wheels or a similar device generally used in retail establishments by a patron and/or the public for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind. Shopping cart also includes a cart used in a coin-operated laundry or dry-cleaning retail establishment for purposes of transporting clothes and necessary cleaning materials.

“Unidentified cart” means a shopping cart that is not an identified cart, as defined above.

For the purpose of this chapter, words and phrases not expressly defined in this section  shall be given their customary and usual meanings and shall be interpreted and construed accordingly. (Ord. 2051 § 1, 2020)

 

9.66.030 Declaration of a public nuisance.
The city council finds and determines that any abandoned shopping cart is declared to constitute a public nuisance that could impede emergency services, interfere with pedestrian and vehicular traffic, reduce property values, promote blight and deterioration, comprise an attractive nuisance and create other hazards to the health, safety, and general welfare of the community by having a tendency to degrade the appearance of the community and thereby decrease property values. (Ord. 2051 § 1, 2020)

 

9.66.040 Mandatory cart markings and signage.
As of the commencement date, all carts shall be maintained as identified carts, including:

(1)     The cart owner shall provide signage on their premises in a conspicuous location notifying cart users that removal of carts from the premises or parking area is prohibited without the written consent of the retail establishment.

(2)     The owner of a retail establishment shall mark all carts used in its business by its customers as required by California Business and Professions Code Section 22435.1. The owner shall permanently affix a sign to each cart that identifies the owner of the cart or the retailer, or both; notifies the public of the procedure to be utilized for authorized removal of the cart from the cart owner’s premises; notifies the public that the unauthorized removal of the cart from the cart owner’s premises or cart owner’s parking area or the unauthorized possession of the cart is a violation of state law; lists a valid telephone number, or address for returning the cart to the cart owner. (Ord. 2051 § 1, 2020)

 

9.66.050 Unlawful possession of carts prohibited—Power to contract.
(a)     Unlawful Possession. It is unlawful for any person other than a cart owner or its authorized representative to do any of the following acts:

(1)     To remove or cause to be removed any cart from a retail establishment or a parking area without the prior written consent of the owner.

(2)     To possess any cart that has been removed from a parking area without the prior written consent of the cart owner or retail establishment, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner of possession of the cart.

(3)     To alter, convert, or tamper with any cart, or remove any part or portion thereof, or to remove, obliterate, or alter any identification, including, but not limited to, any serial numbers, or to possess any cart that has been altered, converted, or tampered with or whose identification has been removed, obliterated, or altered, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart without the prior written consent of the cart owner.

(4)     To abandon or leave any cart, which has been removed from a business establishment or a parking facility, upon any public property or upon any private property that is not the premises of the retail establishment or the parking facility.

(5)     For purposes of all provisions in this chapter, any person removing a cart from the retail business or parking area with consent of the cart owner shall carry a copy of such written consent on their person.

(b)     Engagement of Contractor. The city may, in accordance with the applicable city policies and as approved by city Council, cause the city to engage a contractor to retrieve abandoned carts and such contractor shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and applicable state law including, but not limited to, Business and Professions Code Section 22435.10 et seq. (Ord. 2051 § 1, 2020)

 

9.66.060 Effective cart nuisance abatement program.
As of the commencement date, it is unlawful for any person owning a retail establishment located in the city where carts are available for customer use not to implement and maintain an effective cart nuisance abatement program. Effectiveness is measured by the performance of the retail establishment’s effective cart nuisance abatement program in compliance with this section. Any cart owner shall implement and use any reasonable means in any combination to: (i) prevent the removal or theft of their carts from their premises and parking area and subsequent abandonment of their carts within the city limits; and (ii) if such prevention measures are not one hundred percent effective, cart owners shall retrieve any and all their abandoned shopping carts from within the city boundaries within forty-eight hours.

(a)     Elements of an Effective Cart Nuisance Abatement Program. Within the timeframes set forth in subsection 9.66.060(b) below, all retail establishments/cart owners must: (i) notify the director that they own carts for the use of their customers on their premises; and (ii) submit a written plan for the implementation of an effective cart nuisance abatement program. The program shall include, but is not limited to, the following:

(1)     A customer outreach process under which the cart owner shall cause additional notice to be provided to customers in addition to the standard signage and marking of the shopping cart as per subsections (1) and (2) of this subsection that the removal of carts from the premises is prohibited and is a violation of state and local law. This customer outreach notification may include, but is not limited to: flyers distributed at the premises, warnings on shopping bags, direct mail, announcements using intercom systems at the premises, website communication, and other available information tools. It may also include marketing to customers their own personal cart for use in lieu of the retail establishment’s shopping cart. The exact means and frequency of this outreach is to be determined by the retail establishment.

(2)     Either an “effective containment program” or an “effective retrieval program” as each is defined in Section 9.66.020, or both.

(3)     If a retail establishment has a valid and operational contract with a contractor recognized by the city to retrieve abandoned shopping carts and return them to the retail establishment on an ongoing and regular basis of at least three times per week, then the owner is presumptively deemed to have an effective cart nuisance abatement program, which presumption may be rebutted if the cart retrieval contractor fails to meet the standards for “effectiveness” set forth in this section. Nothing in this section waives or limits compliance with the signage and cart marking mandates in Section 9.66.040.

(b)     Submission of Plans for Implementing Effective Cart Nuisance Abatement Program; Annual Renewal. As of the commencement date: (i) any new retail establishments shall submit their initial plans for implementing an effective cart nuisance abatement program at least thirty days prior to the retail establishment’s original business license application; or (ii) for retail establishments operating as of the commencement date, the initial plan for implementing an effective cart nuisance abatement program shall be submitted with their first business license renewal application due following the commencement date. Once an initial plan implementing an effective cart nuisance abatement program is approved, such plan shall be re-submitted for renewal every two years at least thirty days prior to the retail establishment’s business license renewal application. for The proposed plan for an effective cart nuisance abatement program shall contain the following information:

(1)     That the retail establishment owns carts for the use of their customers on their premises and parking areas;

(2)     The address of the retail establishment and identity of associated parking areas utilized directly for its carts;

(3)     A contact phone number at the retail establishment in Glendora for the person or persons, or job title of the person, who will be responsible for accepting all carts retrieved by the city and returned to the retail establishment during its normal hours of business;

(4)     The type, color and number of carts owned;

(5)     Whether the retail establishment is subject to a valid and operational contract with a contractor recognized by the city to retrieve abandoned shopping carts and return them to the retail establishment on an ongoing and regular basis of at least three times per week, and if so a copy of such contract;

(6)     Photographic proof of compliance with the signage and cart marking mandates in Section 9.66.040; and

(7)     A narrative description, and any plans, photographs or other evidence demonstrating the implementation of an effective cart nuisance abatement program as defined in Section 9.66.020 and in compliance with this section.

Approved plans for an effective cart nuisance abatement program shall be updated annually and resubmitted to the director for renewal, based on the same findings for issuance, every two years at least thirty days prior to the retail establishment’s business license renewal in that year.

(c)     Director Review and Approval; Timeframes for Compliance. The director shall review the plan for the proposed effective cart nuisance abatement program and approve or deny the plan within thirty days of its receipt. If the program plan is approved, the cart owner/retail establishment shall implement the approved effective cart nuisance abatement program within thirty days from the date of approval. If the plan is incomplete, the director shall notify the cart owner in writing to revise the plan and resubmit it within fifteen days of director’s notice. The director may deny a plan for a proposed effective cart nuisance abatement program based upon one or more of the following grounds:

(1)     Implementation of the plan would violate one or more provisions of this code or of any county, state, or federal law or regulation;

(2)     The proposed program fails to include all of the information required by this chapter;

(3)     The proposed plan is insufficient or inadequate to qualify as an effective cart nuisance abatement program as defined in Section 9.66.020 and in compliance with this section;

(4)     The proposed program fails to address any special or unique conditions to the geographical location of the business establishment or parking facility as such conditions relate to cart removal prevention; or

(5)     Implementation of the proposed program would violate a term or condition of any agreement between the city on the one hand, and the retail establishment, or owner of the parking area, or cart owner, on the other hand.

The director’s denial of a plan for an effective cart nuisance abatement program shall be the final administrative decision unless such denial is appealed to the city manager in writing within five business days. The city manager shall review the director’s decision and render a decision, which shall be the final administrative decision.

(d)     Noncompliance. A cart owner who fails to submit an effective cart nuisance abatement program, or whose program is denied, or whose program is approved but who then does not comply with the terms of the approved program, shall be subject to enforcement of these requirements as set forth in Section 9.66.120. Each day during which a retail establishment/cart owner has not complied with the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 2051 § 1, 2020)

 

9.66.070 Right of entry.
For purpose of enforcing this chapter, the director may enter public or private property as allowed by law, or with the consent of the property owner, or by warrant, to examine a cart or to cause the removal of such cart if authorized pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2051 § 1, 2020)

 

9.66.080 Abandoned carts—Abatement and storage.
(a)     Removal. The director shall have the authority to remove any abandoned cart on public or private property, other than from the property of the cart owner, under the following conditions:

(1)     Identified Carts. If the abandoned cart is an identified cart, removal may occur three business days after the director gives the cart owner actual notice of the cart’s discovery and location. A cart owner is deemed to have actual notice three days after the deposit of written notice in the United States mail, posted first-class to the address indicated on the cart or the cart owner’s last known address. If actual notice is provided by telephone, the director shall maintain a record of the time, date, and name of the person notified.

(2)     Unidentified Carts. If the abandoned cart is an unidentified cart, but other information on the cart provides sufficient information as to the identification of the cart owner, removal may occur either after the director notifies the owner by telephone of the cart’s discovery and location and grants a reasonable period of time, not to exceed twenty-four hours, for the cart owner to retrieve such cart, or immediately after reasonable efforts by the director to notify the owner by telephone have failed. The director shall maintain a record of the time, date, and name of the person notified or attempted to be notified. If the owner cannot be determined from information on the cart, the cart shall be deemed an “unidentified cart” subject to Section 9.66.090.

(b)     Storage. Any abandoned cart removed from public or private property by the director shall be stored for thirty days at the department of public works in the city, or at a location designated by the director, which is reasonably convenient to the cart owner and open for business at least six hours of each business day.

(c)     Fees for Actual Costs Payable to City. Any abandoned cart removed from public or private property and stored pursuant to this section shall be released to the lawful cart owner if claimed within thirty days after such removal and upon payment of a redemption fee. The redemption fee for the removal and storage of any abandoned cart under this section shall be established by city council resolution and shall cover the actual costs of removal, storage, and related administrative procedures. The schedule for such fees shall remain on file and be available in the office of the director and the office of the city clerk.

(d)     Fines. In addition to any redemption fee for which a cart owner is liable, owner shall also be liable for a fine in an amount established by resolution of the city council for each occurrence in excess of three during any six-month period for failure to retrieve a cart in accordance with Section 9.66.090(a)(4). As used herein, an “occurrence” includes all of owner’s carts impounded in accordance with this chapter in a one-day period. (Ord. 2051 § 1, 2020)

 

9.66.090 Option for immediate impoundment.
(a)     Notwithstanding Section 9.66.080(a), the city may impound an abandoned cart that otherwise meets the criteria set forth in Section 9.66.080(a) without complying with the three business day advance-notice requirement provided that each of the following is met:

(1)     The cart owner of the abandoned cart is provided actual notice within twenty-four hours following the impound and that notice informs the cart owner as to the location where the cart may be claimed.

(2)     Any cart so impounded shall be held at a location in compliance with Section 9.66.080(b).

(3)     Any cart reclaimed by the cart owner within three business days following the date of actual notice as provided pursuant to this section, shall be released and surrendered to the owner at no charge whatsoever, including the waiver of any redemption fees that would otherwise be applicable pursuant to Section 9.66.080(c).

(4)     Any cart not reclaimed by the cart owner within three business days following the date of actual notice as provided pursuant to this section, shall be subject to any applicable fee imposed pursuant to Section 9.66.080(c) commencing on the fourth business day following the date of notice but accruing from the date of retrieval and storage, and any applicable fine imposed pursuant to Section 9.66.080(d). Any cart reclaimed by the owner within three business days following the date of actual notice as provided pursuant to this section, shall not be deemed an “occurrence” under Section 9.66.080(d).

(b)     Any shopping cart involved in a violation of Section 9.66.050(a) is subject to immediate impoundment, and such impoundment shall follow the procedures provided in Section 9.66.090(a).

(c)     Sale; Final Disposition. Any cart not reclaimed by the cart owner within thirty days of receipt following the date of actual notice as provided pursuant to this section, may be sold or disposed of in accordance with Section 9.66.110. (Ord. 2051 § 1, 2020)

 

9.66.100 Notice of violation on unidentified carts.
Within ten days of the removal of an abandoned cart pursuant to this chapter, the director shall provide notice to any known owner of the cart by first-class mail at the address indicated on the cart or the cart owner’s last known address. The notice shall include the following information: (i) date and location of removal of the cart from public or private property; (ii) procedure for recovering such cart; and (iii) last possible date such cart may be recovered. If the cart owner is unknown and not clearly identified on the cart, the cart shall be designated “unidentified.” The director, for each unidentified cart, shall maintain a record containing the information above and a brief description of the cart. (Ord. 2051 § 1, 2020)

 

9.66.110 Final disposition of unclaimed carts.
Thirty days after notice is given to the owner, or after the cart is designated “unidentified” pursuant to Section 9.66.100, any abandoned cart not claimed may be sold at public auction or otherwise disposed of. Any proceeds derived from such auction or disposal shall be used to pay the costs of removal, storage, and related administrative procedures. Surplus proceeds derived from such auction or disposal shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. (Ord. 2051 § 1, 2020)

 

9.66.120 Enforcement.
Every cart owner who violates any provision of such owner’s effective cart nuisance abatement program, and every person who violates any provision of this chapter, shall be subject to enforcement procedures for each violation by any lawful means available to the city, including, but not limited to, those set forth in California Business and Professions Code Sections 22435.3 and 22435.5, Section 1.01.110 of this code, and chapters 1.18, and 9.36 of this code. (Ord. 2051 § 1, 2020)

Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Note
Chapter 10.04 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 10.05 SPEED LIMITS
Chapter 10.08 TRAFFIC SAFETY COMMITTEE
Chapter 10.12 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Chapter 10.13 PARKING PROHIBITIONS ON YELLOW, ORANGE AND RED LEVEL EMERGENCY ALERT DAYS
Chapter 10.14 PREFERENTIAL PARKING DISTRICTS
Chapter 10.16 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING AND SAFETY RULES
Chapter 10.17 SKATEBOARDING, ROLLER-SKATING, BICYCLING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN DESIGNATED AREAS
Chapter 10.20 PEDESTRIANS
Chapter 10.24 BICYCLES
Chapter 10.28 TAXICABS
Chapter 10.32 TRUCK ROUTES
Chapter 10.36 USE OF RESTRICTED STREETS
Chapter 10.56 PARADES
Chapter 10.76 STREET VENDING
Chapter 10.77 SIDEWALK VENDING

Note
*       For mapped highway area, see Ch. 19.18 of this code.

Chapter 10.04 DEFINITIONS
10.04.010 State law definitions adopted.
Whenever any of the words or phrases used in this title are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state, the definition therein expressed shall be the meaning of such words or phrases as used in this title and such parts of such code are referred to and made a part of this title. (Prior code § 12.1)

Chapter 10.05 SPEED LIMITS
10.05.010 Prima facie speed limits.
Pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of Section 22357 of the California Vehicle Code, the city council of the city of Glendora does determine, upon the basis of an Engineering and Traffic Survey that the following prima facie speed limits would facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic and would be reasonable and safe and are most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and are reasonable:

 

 

 

Roadway Segment

2017 Prima Facie Speed Limits (miles-per-hour)

1.

ADA AVENUE:

 

 

Between Grand Avenue and Vermont Avenue

30

 

Between Glendora Avenue and Glenwood Avenue

25

2.

AMELIA AVENUE:

 

 

Between Auto Centre Drive and Duell Street

40

 

Between Duell Street and Route 66

40

 

Between Route 66 & Country Club Drive

35

 

Between Country Club Drive and Foothill Boulevard

25

3.

AUTO CENTRE DRIVE:

 

 

Between Lone Hill Avenue and SR-57 Freeway

35

 

Between SR-57 Freeway and Amelia Avenue

35

4.

BARRANCA AVENUE:

 

 

Between Route 66 and Foothill Boulevard

40

 

Between Foothill Boulevard and Leadora Avenue

40

 

Between Leadora Avenue and Sierra Madre Avenue

35

5.

BASE LINE ROAD:

 

 

Between Barranca Avenue and Grand Avenue

45

 

Between Grand Avenue and Dodsworth Avenue

35

 

Between Dodsworth Avenue and Glendora Avenue

35

6.

BENNETT AVENUE:

 

 

Between Barranca Avenue and Grand Avenue

30

 

Between Grand Avenue and Glendora Avenue

35

 

Between Glendora Avenue and Cullen Avenue

35

 

Between Cullen Avenue and Live Oak Avenue

30

 

Between Live Oak Avenue and Loraine Avenue

30

 

Between Loraine Avenue and Underhill Drive

25

7.

BONNIE COVE AVENUE:

 

 

Between Arrow Highway and Juanita Avenue

25

 

Between Juanita Avenue and Gladstone Street

25

 

Between Gladstone Street and I-210 Freeway

25

8.

COMPROMISE LINE ROAD:

 

 

Between Valley Center Avenue and Route 66

40

9.

CULLEN AVENUE:

 

 

Between Ada Avenue and Foothill Boulevard

30

 

Between Foothill Boulevard and Bennett Avenue

30

 

Between Bennett Avenue and Leadora Avenue

30

 

Between Leadora Avenue and Sierra Madre Avenue

30

10.

ELWOOD AVENUE:

 

 

Between Route 66 and Foothill Boulevard

35

11.

FOOTHILL BOULEVARD:

 

 

Between Citrus Avenue and Barranca Avenue

35

 

Between Barranca Avenue and Grand Avenue

40

 

Between Grand Avenue and Glendora Avenue

40

 

Between Glendora Avenue and Cullen Avenue

40

 

Between Cullen Avenue and Loraine Avenue

35

 

Between Loraine Avenue and Valley Center Avenue

35

 

Between Valley Center Avenue and Lone Hill Avenue

35

 

Between Lone Hill Avenue and Amelia Avenue

40

 

Between Amelia Avenue and Cataract Avenue

45

12.

GLADSTONE STREET:

 

 

Between Barranca Avenue and Grand Avenue

45

 

Between Grand Avenue and Glendora Avenue

45

 

Between Glendora Avenue and Bonnie Cove Avenue

45

 

Between Bonnie Cove Avenue and Sunflower Avenue

45

 

Between Sunflower Avenue and Valley Center Avenue

45

 

Between Valley Center Avenue and Lone Hill Avenue

45

13.

GLENDORA AVENUE:

 

 

Between Arrow Highway and Juanita Avenue

40

 

Between Juanita Avenue and Gladstone Street

40

 

Between Gladstone Street and Base Line Road

40

 

Between Base Line Road and Route 66

40

 

Between Route 66 & Ada Avenue

35

 

Between Ada Avenue and Foothill Boulevard

35

 

Between Bennett Avenue and Sierra Madre Avenue

35

14.

GLENDORA MOUNTAIN ROAD:

 

 

Between Sierra Madre Avenue and Boulder Springs Drive

40

 

Between Boulder Springs Drive and Big Dalton Canyon Road

40

15.

GLENWOOD AVENUE:

 

 

Between Route 66 and Foothill Boulevard

25

16.

GRAND AVENUE:

 

 

Between Arrow Highway and Gladstone Street

45

 

Between Gladstone Street and I-210 Freeway

40

 

Between Base Line Road and Mauna Loa Avenue

40

 

Between Mauna Loa Avenue and Route 66

40

 

Between Route 66 and Ada Avenue

40

 

Between Ada Avenue and Foothill Boulevard

40

 

Between Foothill Boulevard and Bennett Avenue

40

 

Between Bennett Avenue and Leadora Avenue

40

 

Between Leadora Avenue and Sierra Madre Avenue

40

17.

JUANITA AVENUE:

 

 

Between Grand Avenue and Glendora Avenue

30

 

Between Glendora Avenue and Bonnie Cove Avenue

30

 

Between Bonnie Cove Avenue and Sunflower Avenue

30

 

Between Sunflower Avenue and Valley Center Avenue

30

18.

LEADORA AVENUE:

 

 

Between Yucca Ridge Road and Barranca Avenue

30

 

Between Barranca Avenue and Grand Avenue

30

 

Between Grand Avenue and Glendora Avenue

30

 

Between Glendora Avenue and Cullen Avenue

30

 

Between Cullen Avenue and Live Oak Avenue

30

 

Between Live Oak Avenue and Loraine Avenue

30

19.

LIVE OAK AVENUE:

 

 

Between Foothill Boulevard and Bennett Avenue

25

 

Between Bennett Avenue and Leadora Avenue

25

 

Between Leadora Avenue and Sierra Madre Avenue

25

 

Between Sierra Madre Avenue and Palm Drive

25

20.

LONE HILL AVENUE:

 

 

Between Gladstone Street and Auto Centre Drive

40

 

Between Auto Centre Drive and I-210 Freeway

40

 

Between Petunia Street and Route 66

40

 

Between Route 66 and Foothill Boulevard

40

21.

LORAINE AVENUE:

 

 

Between Route 66 and Steffen Street

40

 

Between Steffen Street and Foothill Boulevard

40

 

Between Foothill Boulevard and Bennett Avenue

40

 

Between Bennett Avenue and Leadora Avenue

40

 

Between Leadora Avenue and Sierra Madre Avenue

40

 

Between Sierra Madre Avenue and Palm Drive

35

22.

MAUNA LOA AVENUE:

 

 

Between Barranca Avenue and Grand Avenue

25

 

Between Grand Avenue and Glendora Avenue

30

23.

PALM DRIVE:

 

 

Between Live Oak Avenue and Loraine Avenue

35

24.

PASADENA AVENUE:

 

 

Between Route 66 and Lemon Avenue

25

 

Between Lemon Avenue and Ada Avenue

25

25.

ROUTE 66:

 

 

Between Barranca Avenue and Vecino Drive

40

 

Between Vecino Drive and Grand Avenue

40

 

Between Grand Avenue and Vermont Avenue

40

 

Between Vermont Avenue and Glendora Avenue

40

 

Between Glendora Avenue and Pasadena Avenue

40

 

Between Pasadena Avenue and Elwood Avenue

40

 

Between Elwood Avenue and Loraine Avenue

40

 

Between Loraine Avenue and Hunters Trail

45

 

Between Hunters Trail and Compromise Line Road

45

 

Between Compromise Line Road and Lone Hill Avenue

45

 

Between Lone Hill Avenue and Amelia Avenue

45

26.

SIERRA MADRE AVENUE:

 

 

Between 660 feet west of Yucca Ridge Road and Barranca Avenue

45

 

Between Barranca Avenue and Grand Avenue

45

 

Between Grand Avenue and Glendora Avenue

40

 

Between Glendora Avenue and Live Oak Avenue

40

 

Between Live Oak Avenue and Loraine Avenue

40

 

Between Loraine Avenue and Valley Center Avenue

40

27.

SUNFLOWER AVENUE:

 

 

Between Arrow Highway and Juanita Avenue

40

 

Between Juanita Avenue and Gladstone Street

40

 

Between Gladstone Street and I-210 Freeway

40

28.

VALLEY CENTER AVENUE:

 

 

Between Arrow Highway and Juanita Avenue

40

 

Between Juanita Avenue and Gladstone Street

40

 

Between Gladstone Street and Allen Avenue

25

 

Between Compromise Line Road and Foothill Boulevard

35

 

Between Foothill Boulevard and Sierra Madre Avenue

45

29.

VERMONT AVENUE:

 

 

Between Route 66 and Ada Avenue

30

 

Between Ada Avenue and Foothill Boulevard

30

(Ord. 2016 § 2, 2017)

 

10.05.020 Prima facie speed limits adjacent to children’s playground in a public park.
Pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of Section 22357.1 of the Vehicle Code, the city council of the city of Glendora does determine and declare, that a prima facie speed limit of twenty-five miles per hour is established upon Amelia Avenue between five hundred feet north of the north property line of South Hills Baseball Park and five hundred feet south of the south property line of South Hills Baseball Park from Monday to Friday three p.m. to nine p.m. and Saturday eight a.m. to nine p.m. (Ord. 1797 § 1, 2004)

Chapter 10.08 TRAFFIC SAFETY COMMITTEE
10.08.010 Established—Members.
There is created a traffic safety committee. The members of such committee shall be the city manager, chief of police and city engineer, or such members of their respective staffs as they may designate in their place. The traffic safety committee shall hold at least one meeting quarterly. (Ord. 1346 § 1, 1980; prior code § 12.13)

 

10.08.020 Duties.
The traffic safety committee is authorized and directed to advise and recommend to the city council on all matters for which the city is authorized pursuant to the Vehicle Code to enact local ordinances except as follows: The city engineer, independent of the traffic safety committee, shall review, deny or approve all requests for the implementation of no parking zones in the city of Glendora. The city engineer is further authorized to order the red painting or posting of signs as they relate to the determination of a no parking request. (Ord. 1946 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1346 § 1, 1980)

 

10.08.030 Procedures.
All advice and each recommendation of the traffic safety committee shall be subject to the review and approval of the city council. (Ord. 1346 § 1, 1980)

Chapter 10.12 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
10.12.010 Parking vehicle for sale on public property—Impounding of vehicle.
(a)     Violation. It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle upon any public street, public parking lot or other public lands within the city, when, as evidenced by the placement of a sign or placard on the vehicle, the primary purpose of parking the vehicle at that location is to advertise to the public the private sale of that vehicle.

(b)     Impounding of Vehicle, Warning, Continuous Violation. Any vehicle which has been issued a citation and warning of impoundment for violation of Section 10.12.010(a) of the Glendora Municipal Code, is subject to impoundment after expiration of twenty-four hours from the time of issuance of the citation and warning. Impoundment authority following issuance of a citation and warning continues in effect even if the cited vehicle is moved to another street, other public parking lot or public lands in the city, so long as the sign or placard offering the vehicle for sale remains on the vehicle. Impoundment authority remains in effect for thirty days from the time and date that the citation was issued pursuant to California Vehicle Code 22651.9.

(c)     Exemptions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no violation shall occur under the following limited exceptions:

(1)     Parking of a single vehicle with a “For Sale” sign on the public street, in front of one’s own residential property;

(2)     Parking of a vehicle on public property in a commercial zone solely for the time necessary to conduct a transaction at a local business; provided that, the business is not the work place nor owned by the owner/driver of the vehicle.

(d)     Civil Penalty. Any person who violates Section 10.12.010(a) shall be subject to a civil penalty as established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1678 § 1, 1998; Ord. 1617 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1616 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1416 § 1, 1983; Ord. 1408 § 1, 1983; Ord. 1400 § 1, 1983; prior code § 12.35)

 

10.12.020 Early morning parking.
(a)     It is unlawful for the operator or owner of any vehicle to park or knowingly permit to be parked any vehicle on any city street between the hours of two a.m. and four a.m., Monday through Friday.

          Every person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty as established by resolution of the city council.

(b)     The provisions of subsection (a) of this section are not applicable to:

(1)     Any emergency vehicle, government entity vehicle or public utility vehicle which is actively engaged in providing service.

(2)     Any delivery vehicle actively engaged in delivering or picking up product.

(3)     Any vehicle which has been issued a valid early morning parking permit pursuant to Section 10.12.021 or Section 10.12.022 of this chapter. (Ord. 1660 § 1, 1997; Ord. 1617 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1616 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1416 § 1, 1983; prior code § 12.36)

 

10.12.021 Early morning parking—Temporary permits.
For the dates celebrated by the city honoring Martin Luther King Junior’s Birthday, President’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Veteran’s, and any other holiday that may be subsequently recognized by the city, Thanksgiving week, two weeks surrounding Easter, and for the approximate two week period surrounding Christmas and New Year, Section 10.12.020 will not be enforced. For all other times a temporary parking permit may be purchased.

Temporary permits will be issued by the planning department to allow the temporary parking on the street for the period of time that there is no room on the property to legally park during a construction or remodeling project.

The fees for such permits shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1786 § 1, 2003; Ord. 1742 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1660 § 2, 1997)

 

10.12.022 Early morning parking permit—Annual permits.
(a) Any resident who has fully utilized all available legal parking spaces on the premises, yet has a hardship due to the limitations of the property and needs to park a nonprohibited passenger vehicle on city streets between the hours of two a.m. and four a.m. for an extended period of time, may request an annual permit by filing an application with the planning department, paying a nonrefundable fee established by council resolution, and agreeing to an inspection of the parking areas on the sited property.

(b)     The following conditions apply to the issuance and display of an annual early morning parking permit:

(1)     All vehicles parked at the location must be registered to the resident or be a company-sponsored passenger vehicle for the resident’s use.

(2)     All legal on-site parking spaces shall be utilized by registered, operable vehicles which are legally permitted on property by the Glendora Zoning Code.

(3)     The permitted vehicle shall be a passenger vehicle that is used on a regular basis, requiring that it is normally moved and driven daily.

(4)     No permit will be issued for the following: inoperable vehicle; recreation vehicle; motorcycle; house trailer; motorhome; pickup truck with camper higher than the cab; any trailer, commercial vehicle over seven thousand pounds gross vehicle weight; commercial vehicle with commercial markings; foreign registered vehicle; any vehicle with expired or invalid registration.

(5)     The permit sticker must be displayed and attached to the permitted vehicle in the lower left-hand corner of the front windshield.

(c)     The city council shall adopt early morning parking permit implementation guidelines by resolution, subject to future amendment, which establish procedures and additional conditions for the issuance of early morning parking permits. The implementation guidelines shall be distributed with the permit application. (Ord. 1660 § 2, 1997)

 

10.12.030 Curbside stopping and parking.
It is unlawful for the owner or operator of a vehicle to stop, leave standing or park the vehicle in violation of the following curb markings:

(1)     No vehicle, whether attended or unattended, shall be stopped, left standing or parked against a curb painted red, except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signposted as a bus loading zone.

(2)     Between the hours of eight a.m. and six p.m. of any day, except Sundays, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked against a curb painted yellow, except for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or freight. When loading or unloading passengers, the vehicle shall not remain stopped, left standing or parked for more than three minutes. When loading or unloading freight, the vehicle shall not remain stopped, left standing or parked for more than twenty minutes.

(3)     Between the hours of eight a.m. and six p.m. on any day, except Sunday, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked against a curb painted white, except for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or depositing mail in an adjacent mail box. When loading or unloading passengers or depositing mail, the vehicle shall not remain stopped, left standing or parked for more than three minutes.

(4)     Between the hours of eight a.m. and six p.m. of any day, except Sundays, no vehicle shall remain stopped, left standing or parked against a curb painted green for more than the time limit that is either marked on the curb or posted over the curb.

(5)     At no time shall any vehicle, except a vehicle displaying the distinguishing license plate or placard of a physically handicapped person, be stopped, left standing or parked against a curb painted blue. (Ord. 1558 § 1, 1989; Ord. 1508 § 1, 1987; Ord. 1416 § 4, 1983; Ord. 1079 § 1, 1968)

 

10.12.040 Prohibiting parking for more than seventy-two consecutive hours.
(a)     It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing on any highway or publicly owned property any vehicle for seventy-two or more consecutive hours.

          Every person who violates any provision of subsection (a) of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty as established by resolution of the city council.

(b)     Any vehicle parked in violation of subsection (a) of this section is a public nuisance and the police department is authorized to abate the same by removing or causing the vehicle to be removed to a public garage or other place of safety. (Ord. 1617 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1616 § 1,, 1993; Ord. 1416 § 1, 1983; Ord. 1196 § 1, 1973)

 

10.12.050 Parking on public property.
It is unlawful to park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking area on public property, and such use shall be in accordance with posted directions. It is also unlawful for any person to fail to observe all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping, or parking on public property posted for proper control and to safeguard life and property. The city council, by resolution, may adopt traffic and parking regulations and restrictions on any public property. Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b) of this code. (Ord. 1890 § 2, 2008)

 

10.12.060 Prohibited parking of commercial vehicles in residential zones.
(a)     It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any commercial vehicle exceeding a gross weight of seven thousand pounds in any residential zone or on any street contiguous thereto, for more than two hours except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. Every person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty as established by resolution of the city council.

(b)     This section shall not apply to vehicles making pickups or deliveries of goods to, or from, any property in a residential zone, or delivering materials for alterations, repairs, or construction or removing debris within the residential zone for which a valid building permit has previously been obtained. (Ord. 1652 § 2, 1996; Ord. 1617 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1616 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1416 § 4, 1983; Ord. 1281 § 3, 1977)

 

10.12.070 Prohibited parking of commercial vehicles in commercial zones.
(a)     It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any commercial vehicle or truck tractor with an unladen weight of more than ten thousand pounds or any detached trailer, semi-trailer or pipe or pole dolly designed to be operated in combination with a truck tractor on any commercially zoned property in excess of sixty minutes unless:

(1)     Actual loading or unloading of the vehicle, truck tractor, trailer, semi-trailer or pipe or pole dolly is in progress on the property; or

(2)     The owner or legal operator of the vehicle, truck tractor, trailer, semi-trailer or pipe or pole dolly is the owner or lessee of the property on which the vehicle, truck tractor, trailer, semi-trailer or pipe or pole dolly is parked or left standing.

(b)     For the purposes of this section, the definitions of “commercial vehicle,” “truck tractor,” “trailer,” “semi-trailer” and “pipe or pole dolly” of the California Vehicle Code shall apply.

(c)     Every person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty as established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1617 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1616 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1416 §§ 4, 5, 1983; Ord. 1358 § 1, 1981)

 

10.12.080 Obeying official traffic-control devices.
(a)     It is unlawful for the owner or operator of a vehicle to stop, leave standing or park the vehicle in violation of the instruction of any official traffic-control sign, signal, marking or device placed or erected upon any street, curb or sidewalk for the purpose of restricting or prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles.

(b)     It is unlawful for any person to fail to obey the instruction of any official traffic-control sign, signal, marking or device placed or erected upon any street, curb or sidewalk for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. (Ord. 1558 § 2, 1989)

 

10.12.090 Parking vehicle on public property advertising an event or function—Impounding of vehicle.
(a)     Violation. It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle upon any public street, public parking lot or other public lands within the city, when, as evidenced by the placement of a sign, message board or placard on the vehicle, the primary purpose of parking the vehicle at that location is to advertise to the public a business, service, event or function on private property or on public property hired for a private event or function.

(b)     Impounding of Vehicle, Warning, Mailed Warning. Any vehicle which has been issued a citation and warning of impoundment for violation of Section 10.12.090(a) of the Glendora Municipal Code, is subject to impoundment after the issuance of the citation and warning; provided that, the registered owner of the vehicle has also been mailed a written notice advising of the existence of the parking violation and that an additional violation may result in the impoundment of the vehicle (authority: CVC22651.2).

(c)     Exemptions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, this section does not apply to a vehicle bearing any sign or placard advertising any business or enterprise carried on by or through the use of that vehicle, or to signs that are permanently affixed to the vehicle.

(d)     Civil Penalty. Any person who violates Glendora Municipal Code Section 10.12.090(a) shall be subject to a civil penalty as established and amended from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1914 §§ 1—4, 2009; Ord. 1680 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 10.13 PARKING PROHIBITIONS ON YELLOW, ORANGE AND RED LEVEL EMERGENCY ALERT DAYS
10.13.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Glendora and property within the city of Glendora through the regulation of on-street parking on designated city streets during days of precipitation which pose a risk of water, mud and/or debris slides and flows. (Ord. 1980 § 1, 2014; Ord. 1979 § 1, 2014)

 

10.13.020 Definitions.
The words, terms, phrases, and their derivations set forth in this chapter have the meanings set forth below:

“On-street parking” is defined as the stopping, standing or parking of any vehicle on any of the city streets designated in Section 10.13.030.

“Yellow level emergency alert” is defined as any period of time that the police department determines weather conditions are such that small, isolated water, mud and/or debris slides and flows are possible at specific locations in the city. Streets may be flooded or blocked by mud or debris. Reports of mud and debris on private property may be received.

“Orange level emergency alert” is defined as any period of time that the police department determines weather conditions are such that moderate water, mud and/or debris slides and flows are possible at more widespread specific locations in the city. Streets may be flooded or blocked by mud or debris. Reports of mud and debris on private property may be received. Depending on location and terrain, some structures may be endangered by water, mud and/or debris slides and flows.

“Red level emergency alert” is defined as any period of time that the police department determines weather conditions are such that the potential exists for significant water, debris and mudflows to be widespread over specific locations in the city. Streets may be flooded or blocked by mud or debris and considered unsafe for travel. Many structures could be endangered by water, mud and/or debris slides and flows. (Ord. 1980 § 1, 2014; Ord. 1979 § 1, 2014)

 

10.13.030 Parking prohibitions.
(a)     Whenever a yellow, orange or red level emergency alert is implemented by the police department in which on-street parking on any city street designated in subsection (b) of this section would create a hazard to life or property by interfering with emergency vehicle access and resident evacuation during any event of water, mud and/or debris slides and flows, the police department is hereby authorized to give notice and prohibit on-street parking. Vehicles parked in violation of the parking prohibition established pursuant to the chapter shall be removed and impounded at the owner’s expense.

(b)     During a yellow, orange or red level emergency alert, it is unlawful to park any vehicle on any city streets or portions thereof in violation of this chapter that are located within the Colby Fire Impact Area as follows:

All city streets located on and within the Colby Fire Impact Area which are situated within the following boundaries: Sierra Madre Avenue as the south boundary, the Glendora city limits as the north boundary, Glendora Mountain Road as the east boundary, and Yucca Ridge Road as the west boundary. (Ord. 1980 § 1, 2014; Ord. 1979 § 1, 2014)

 

10.13.040 Violations—Penalties.
(a)     A vehicle which is parked in violation of this chapter may be removed and impounded by the city. Any person or entity who parks a vehicle in violation of this chapter is liable for the expense of removing and impounding the vehicle. The expense for removing and impounding the vehicles shall be charged against that person or entity, including the registered owner of the vehicle, which parks the vehicle in violation of this chapter. This charge shall constitute a debt and shall be collectable by the city.

(b)     Any person or entity that violates this chapter is guilty of an infraction which shall be punishable pursuant to Section 1.01.110 of this code. (Ord. 1980 § 1, 2014; Ord. 1979 § 1, 2014)

Chapter 10.14 PREFERENTIAL PARKING DISTRICTS
10.14.010 Authority to establish preferential parking districts.
(a)     Pursuant to applicable provisions of the California Vehicle Code, the city council may designate, by resolution, certain residential streets or any portion thereof as preferential parking districts for the benefit of residents within the district, in which district vehicles displaying a permit may be exempt from parking prohibitions or restrictions otherwise posted, marked or noticed.

(b)     Each preferential parking district shall be designated only upon findings that designation as a preferential parking district is required to enhance or protect the quality of life in the area of the proposed district which is threatened by noise, traffic hazards, environmental pollution, or devaluation of real property resulting from nonresident vehicular parking or traffic, and that designation as a preferential parking district is necessary to provide reasonably available and convenient parking for the benefit of the residents within the proposed district. No resolution creating a preferential parking district shall be enforceable until signs or markings giving adequate notice thereof have been placed. (Ord. 1776 § 1, 2003)

 

10.14.020 Criteria for findings.
(a)     The findings set forth in Section 10.14.010 of this chapter shall be based upon the existence of one or more of the following conditions established to the satisfaction of the city council:

(1)     Nonresident vehicles regularly and substantially interfere with the use of available public street parking spaces by the residents in the area of the proposed preferential parking district;

(2)     A shortage of reasonably available and convenient residential-related parking spaces exists in the area of the proposed preferential parking district;

(3)     Extended parking during the day or night by a substantial number of nonresident vehicles in the area of the proposed preferential parking district. (Ord. 1776 § 1, 2003)

 

10.14.030 Establishment of preferential parking districts.
(a)     Upon receipt and verification of a petition on a form supplied by the city and signed by residents of two-thirds of the dwelling units of the area proposed for designation as a preferential parking district, along with a filing fee as established by resolution of the city council, the city manager shall review the petition and submit a report to the city council concerning the validity thereof.

(b)     After receipt of the report, the city council shall conduct a public hearing thereon, for the purpose of determining whether a preferential parking district should be established by resolution.

          Notice of such public hearing shall be given by the public works director at least ten days prior to the hearing, by publication in a newspaper of general circulation and by mailing to the property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and to the occupants, of each parcel in the area proposed for designation as a preferential parking district.

 

(c)     As an alternative to the petition described in subsection (a) of this section, the city council may, on its own motion, initiate the public hearing process described in subsection (b) of this section if the city council finds that a petition by two-thirds of the residents is unnecessary.

Prior to the public hearing, the public works director shall notify the neighborhood residents of the city council’s interest in establishing a preferential parking district and shall conduct neighborhood outreach through a neighborhood meeting or other means, to ascertain the neighborhood residents’ interest in the establishment of a preferential parking district. After the neighborhood outreach effort, the public works director shall prepare the report as described in subsection (a) of this section. (Ord. 1776 § 1, 2003)

 

10.14.040 Issuance of permits.
(a)     Permits. The chief of police shall issue permits for preferential parking to qualified applicants who have completed an application form supplied by the chief of police. Applicants for such permits shall present such proof as may be required by the chief of police of residence within the area designated as a preferential parking district. Not more than two permits shall be issued for each qualified dwelling unit to any qualified applicant. The finance department shall collect a fee established by resolution of the city council for each permit issued.

(b)     Duration of Permit. Permits issued pursuant to this section shall be effective for a period of one or two fiscal years, beginning July 1st and ending June 30th, so long as the applicant continues to reside at the address set forth on the application and so long as the preferential parking district for which the permit was issued remains in effect.

(c)     Placement. Permits shall be suspended from the interior rear view mirror of each vehicle to be accorded preferential parking privileges.

(d)     Conditions of Permit. Each permit shall be subject to all conditions and restrictions set forth in this section and of the preferential parking district for which it is issued. The issuance of such a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of any provision of this code or any other laws or regulations.

(e)     Fees. Such fees as may be required in this chapter shall be set from time to time by resolution of the city council. The city council may waive fees for residents living within a preferential parking district should it elect to do so. (Ord. 1800 § 1, 2004)

 

10.14.050 Prohibitions.
(a)     No vehicle shall be parked or stopped adjacent to any curb in a preferential parking district in violation of any posted or noticed prohibition or restriction unless:

(1)     Such vehicle shall have prominently displayed upon the interior rearview mirror thereof a permit indicating the exemption from such restriction or prohibition;

(2)     A motor vehicle identified, in a manner prescribed by the director of public works, as being owned by or operated under contract to a utility, whether privately, municipally or publicly-owned, when used in the construction, operation, removal, or repair of utility property or facilities or engaged in authorized work in the designated preferential parking district;

(3)     A motor vehicle identified in a manner prescribed by the director of public works, as being owned by or operated under contract to a governmental agency, when used in the course of official government business; or

(4)     A commercial vehicle or trailer engaged in loading or unloading property, or parked in connection with or in aid of the performance of a service to or on a property located in the block in which such vehicle is parked.

(b)     It is unlawful for any person to sell, rent or lease, or cause to be sold, rented or leased, for any value or consideration, any preferential parking permit. Upon conviction of a violation of this subsection, all preferential parking permits issued to, or for the benefit of, the dwelling unit to which the sold, rented or leased permit is authorized shall be void.

(c)     It is unlawful for any person to buy or otherwise acquire for value or use any preferential parking permit, except as provided for in this section. (Ord. 1776 § 1, 2003)

 

10.14.060 Termination of preferential parking zones.
(a)     Upon receipt and verification of a petition supplied by the city signed by residents living in two-thirds of the dwelling units of an area established as a preferential parking district, the city manager may recommend to the city council that any preferential parking zone be terminated.

(b)     Upon such a recommendation by the city manager, the city council shall conduct a public hearing thereon, for the purpose of determining whether a proper basis exists for terminating an established preferential parking district. Notice of such public hearing shall be given in the same manner as required for establishment of the district.

(c)     Termination of an existing preferential parking district shall be based upon a finding that the conditions set forth in Section 10.14.010 of this chapter no longer exist or have diminished in degree to such an extent as to make unnecessary the continuation of the preferential parking district.

(d)     As an alternative to the petition described in subsection (a) of this section, the city council may, on its own motion, initiate the public hearing process described in subsection (b) of this section if the city council finds that a petition by two-thirds of the residents is unnecessary.

          Prior to the public hearing, the public works director shall notify the neighborhood residents of the city council’s interest in establishing a preferential parking district and shall conduct neighborhood outreach through a neighborhood meeting or other means, to ascertain the neighborhood residents’ interest in the establishment of a preferential parking district. After the neighborhood outreach effort, the public works director shall prepare the report as described in subsection (a) of this section. (Ord. 1776 § 1, 2003)

Chapter 10.16 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING AND SAFETY RULES
10.16.010 Funeral processions.
Funeral processions shall have the right-of-way over all other traffic. (Prior code § 12.2)

 

10.16.015 Prohibited turns between intersections.
It is unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to disobey the directions of any official traffic-control device placed or erected in the public right-of-way to regulate or prohibit turning movements on the following streets between the following intersections:

(1)     Alosta Avenue between Barranca Avenue and Cataract Avenue;

(2)     Base Line Road between Barranca Avenue and Glendora Avenue;

(3)     Foothill Boulevard between Citrus Avenue and Amelia Avenue;

(4)     Gladstone Street between Barranca Avenue and Lone Hill Avenue;

(5)     Glendora Avenue between Arrow Highway and Sierra Madre Avenue;

(6)     Grand Avenue between Arrow Highway and Sierra Madre Avenue;

(7)     Lone Hill Avenue between Gladstone Street and Foothill Boulevard. (Ord. 1531 § 1, 1988)

 

10.16.020 Parking of vehicles for sale on private property of another.
(a)     It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing upon the property of another any vehicle for the purpose of selling or offering for sale the vehicle or any goods or services therefrom, whereby any activity in connection with such sale or offer takes place or will take place on the private property including, but not limited to, negotiations, displays and inspections of the vehicle, goods or services.

          Every person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty as established by resolution of the city council.

(b)     This section shall not prohibit any person from parking or leaving upon the property of another any vehicle upon which is displayed a sign or writing advertising the vehicle or any goods or services therefrom for sale, provided the person remains on the property at the invitation of the owner or lessee and the vehicle does not remain parked or left standing for a period of more than six hours. (Ord. 1617 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1616 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1416 § 1, 1983; Ord. 1408 § 2, 1983; prior code § 12.6)

 

10.16.040 Operation on private property.
It is unlawful to operate any type of motorized vehicle (as defined in Section 415 of the Vehicle Code of the state) except upon public streets and highways. The operation of such motor vehicles on private property including private roadways or easements is expressly forbidden unless the operator thereof has the prior written consent of the owner of the property or easement or his or her authorized agent.

This section shall not prohibit the operation of motor vehicles upon the property of another when the motor vehicles are:

(1)     Authorized emergency vehicles as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 165; or

(2)     Operated upon public or private parking lots; or

(3)     Operated upon property primarily used for retail or wholesale sales, service or repair, manufacture or distribution of motor vehicles, but, operated in a manner not to be offensive and which shall not disturb peace and quiet of the general neighborhood; or

(4)     Operated upon property generally used in conjunction with commercial, industrial or office uses and used solely in conjunction with said uses and in a manner not to be offensive and which shall not disturb the peace and quiet of the general neighborhood; or

(5)     Operated upon private roadways or easements necessary for ingress to and egress from property used for those purposes designated in subsections (2), (3), and (4) of this section, and for no other purposes. (Ord. 1121 § 1, 1970; Ord. 991 § 1, 1966)

 

10.16.050 Permission.
Persons who obtain permission from private property owners to operate motorized vehicles thereon shall maintain in their possession such written permission at all times when operating motorized vehicles on such private property. (Ord. 991 § 2, 1966)

 

10.16.060 Application of provisions.
Sections 10.16.040 and 10.16.050 of this chapter in no way prohibit the use of such private property by:

(1)     Emergency vehicles;

(2)     Vehicles of commerce in the course of the conduct of normal business;

(3)     Vehicles being operated on property devoted to commercial purposes where the general public is expressly or impliedly invited to such property; unless such property is not open for business;

(4)     Vehicles operated on property actually used for residential purposes and where such vehicle is there at the express or implied invitation of the owner or occupant. (Ord. 991 § 3, 1966)

 

10.16.070 Removal of abandoned vehicles from private property.
Any employee appointed by the city to perform duties associated with municipal code enforcement is designated to remove abandoned vehicles from private property within the territorial limits of the city in accordance with California Vehicle Code Section 22669 et seq. (Ord. 1528 § 1, 1988)

Chapter 10.17 SKATEBOARDING, ROLLER-SKATING, BICYCLING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN DESIGNATED AREAS
10.17.010 Skateboarding, roller-skating, roller blades, bicycling and similar activities prohibited in certain areas.
(a)     It is unlawful and subject to punishment in accordance with Section 10.17.060 of this chapter, for any person utilizing or riding upon any skateboard, roller skates, bicycle, roller blades, or any similar device to ride or move about in or on any public or private property when the same property has been designated and posted as a no skateboard, roller-skating, roller blading, bicycling, or similar activity area, provided, however, nothing in this chapter shall be construed or deemed to negate or abrogate any right granted to bicycle riders by the California Vehicle Code.

(b)     No person shall use a skateboard, roller blades, roller skates, bicycle or similar device outside of a designated no skateboarding, roller-skating, bicycling or similar activity area in a manner which creates a nuisance as defined in Section 10.17.020 of this chapter.

(c)     No person shall place a ramp or foreign matter including but not limited to wax, grease or other lubricant, friction reducing agent or other physical aid which enhances or enables skateboarding, bicycling or roller-skating performance, on any sidewalk, step, hand rail, bench, wall or other improvement on public property or on other than their own property without consent of the owner. (Ord. 1641 § 2, 1995)

 

10.17.015 Skate facility.
(a)     Definition of Skate Facility. An area designated by ordinance which is designed to be used exclusively for skating, rollerblading and skateboarding and which requires that specific safety equipment is to be used and properly worn for protection of the users. The skate facility will be posted with rules governing hours of use, the personal conduct by users or other persons in and around the facility and warnings of the consequences for failure to abide by the rules.

          The skate facility located in the Finkbiner Park is hereby designated as a “skate facility.” The skate facility shall be posted with signs stating that all persons using such areas are required to wear a helmet, elbow pads, and kneepads, pursuant to the California Health and Safety Code Section 115800 and failure to do so is a violation of this section and is punishable pursuant to Section 10.17.060 of this chapter.

(b)     Skate Facility Rules.

(1)     The hours of operation shall be daylight, unless amend by council resolution and properly posted.

(2)     While using a skate facility, an individual shall comply with the posted rules governing the hours of use of the facility and safety requirements.

(3)     No person shall use a skate facility for uses other than for skateboarding and rollerskating.

(4)     No person shall use a designated skate facility unless they wear proper safety equipment as designed to be worn for roller sports use, including a helmet, elbow pads, and kneepads. Wrist guards are highly recommended. All wheels for the skating equipment shall be of a composite type. Metal wheels or any other equipment, which could damage the skating surface, are prohibited.

(5)     No person shall ride or cause a bicycle to be on the skating surface.

(6)     No person shall use alcohol, drugs, or tobacco products in a designated skate facility.

(7)     All persons using a skate facility must place trash in trash receptacles provided by the city.

(8)     Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or who uses profanity, threatens other persons, or who acts in disregard for the safety of others using a skate facility, may be ordered to leave the skate facility and/or park by any authorized city employee. Failure to leave the skate facility or park after being ordered to do so, or returning to the skate facility or to the adjoining park the same day is a violation of this section.

(9)     No person shall cause graffiti or tagging of a skate facility.

(10)   No person shall skate on curbs, sidewalks, bleachers or parking or any other area of the city property surrounding a skate facility.

(11)   The posted rules shall state that any person failing to abide the required safety regulations and/or code of conduct as listed in the posted rules shall be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1698 § 4, 1999)

 

10.17.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed:

“Bicycle” is defined in California Vehicle Code Section 231 as a device upon which any person may ride, propelled exclusively by human power through a belt, chain, or gears, and having one or more wheels.

“Business district” is defined as designated in Section 235 of the California State Vehicle Code.

“Nuisance” means any activity which is injurious to health, or is indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any public park, square, street, or highway.

“Private property” means any property held by private interests which is used primarily for business, commercial, office space, business park, religious, multifamily, or recreational purposes. This shall also include the parking facilities for these “private property” areas.

“Public property” means any property owned or maintained by the city of Glendora, any public agency or public school district, and any public utility within the geographical boundaries of the city of Glendora.

“Roller skates” or “roller blades” means any footwear, or device which may be attached to the foot or footwear, to which wheels are attached, including wheels that are “in line” and where such wheels may be used to aid the wearer in moving or propulsion.

“Skate facility” as used in this chapter, the term “skate facility” means a facility owned and operated by the city of Glendora that is identified by a sign as a Glendora skate facility.

“Skateboard” means a board of any material, which has wheels attached to it and which, if propelled or moved by human, gravitational, or mechanical power, and to which there is not fixed any device or mechanism to turn or control the wheels. (Ord. 1698 § 6, 1999; Ord. 1641 § 2, 1995)

 

10.17.030 Designation of private property as no skateboarding, roller-skating or bicycling area.
Owners of private property may designate their property as a no skateboarding, roller-skating or bicycling area by posting same in conformance with Section 10.17.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 1641 § 2, 1995)

 

10.17.040 Designation of public property as no skateboarding, roller-skating or bicycling area.
Public agencies may designate any public roadway, sidewalk, parking lot, or other public property as a no skateboarding, roller-skating, bicycling or similar activity area by the posting of appropriate signage in accordance with Section 10.17.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 1641 § 2, 1995)

 

10.17.050 Posting of signs required—Content.
Prior to the enforcement of the prohibition on skateboarding, roller-skating, bicycling or similar activity, as listed in Section 10.17.010 (a) the area so designated shall be posted with signs which provide substantially as follows:

 

Skateboarding, roller-skating, bicycling or similar activity is prohibited by Glendora Municipal Code Section 10.17. Any violation is punishable by a fine of $25 for the first offense. Glendora Police Department 914-8250.”

 

The sign may contain only those items which the agency or property owner wishes to prohibit. For example, if there is no desire to limit bicycling, the posting would not contain the word “bicycling.”

Such prohibition shall apply to the property or area so designated once the property or area has been posted with signs in plain view at all entrances to the property or area. Signs so posted at the entrances to the property or area, shall comply with the California Vehicle Code Section 22658a(1). These signs will be a minimum of seventeen inches by twenty-two inches with lettering not less than one inch in height. Public sidewalks or other surfaced areas may be painted with this warning in lieu of the foregoing signage requirement. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner or tenant(s) to post and maintain all signs prohibiting skateboarding, roller-skating or bicycling. (Ord. 1641 § 2, 1995)

 

10.17.060 Penalties.
A violation of any section or subsection in this chapter is deemed to be an infraction and is punishable as such according to the provisions of this code and state law. (Ord. 1698 § 5, 1999; Ord. 1641 § 2, 1995)

 

10.17.070 Exemption from the provisions of this chapter.
Any device designated, intended, and used solely for the transportation of infants, the handicapped, or incapacitated persons, devices designed, intended, and used for the transportation of merchandise to and from the place of purchase and other wheeled devices, when being used for either of these purposes shall be exempted from this chapter. Police officers who are performing duties in their official capacity are exempt from provisions of this chapter. Furthermore, the city council may, by resolution, suspend the enforcement provisions of this chapter to accommodate special events when so requested by the event organizer. (Ord. 1641 § 2, 1995)

Chapter 10.20 PEDESTRIANS
10.20.010 Standing or walking on roadway.
It is unlawful for any person to stand or walk in the highway, other than in a crosswalk, if such action interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. Every person who violates any provision of this Section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to subsection 1.01.110(b) of this code. (Ord. 1416 § 4, 1983; prior code § 12.24)

Chapter 10.24 BICYCLES
10.24.010 License required.
It is unlawful for any person residing in the city to operate or use a bicycle upon the streets and rights-of-way of the city unless a bicycle is licensed to the owner in accordance with this chapter. As used herein, the term “bicycle” also includes “motorized bicycle” as defined by the California Vehicle Code. Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to subsection 1.01.110(b) of this code. (Ord. 1416 § 4, 1983; Ord. 1307 § 1, 1978; Ord. 1012 § 1, 1966; prior code § 5.1)

 

10.24.020 Issuance—Duration.
The police department or its designated agent shall issue bicycle licenses upon written application therefor. Such licenses shall be valid for a period of three calendar years, including the year of registration, and shall expire on December 31st of the third year of the registration period. (Ord. 1307 § 1, 1978; Ord. 1100 § 1, 1969; Ord. 1012 § 1, 1966; prior code § 5.2)

 

10.24.030 Scope.
Bicycle licenses when issued shall entitle the licensee to operate the bicycle for which the license has been issued upon all streets, alleys and public highways, exclusive of the sidewalks thereof, in the city. (Ord. 1307 § 1, 1978; prior code § 5.3)

 

10.24.040 Fee.
The license fee to be paid for each new bicycle license shall be six dollars, and such fee shall be paid in advance. All license fees collected under this title shall be paid into the general fund of the city. Such fees shall be used by the city to support the carrying out of the provisions of this chapter, to improve bicycle safety programs within the city, and to establish, as the same shall be deemed necessary and desirable by the city council, bicycle facilities, including bicycle paths and lanes, within the city. There shall be no proration of fees regardless of when the license is purchased during the registration year. (Ord. 1307 § 1, 1978; Ord. 1012 § 1, 1966; prior code § 5.4)

 

10.24.050 Records to be kept by police.
The police department shall keep a record of the date of issue of each bicycle license, the license number of each such license, the serial number of the bicycle to which each such license applies, the make and type of each such bicycle, and the name and address of each licensee. Such records as are herein described shall be maintained by the police department during the period of validity of the license, or until notification is made to the police department that the bicycle is no longer to be operated. (Ord. 1307 § 1, 1978; prior code § 5.5)

 

10.24.060 Purchaser to apply for new license.
It shall be the duty of the purchaser of a bicycle which has not been previously registered to apply for a new license therefor within ten days of the sale or transfer of ownership. (Ord. 1307 § 1, 1978; prior code § 5.6)

 

10.24.070 License plate—Registration card.
In registering bicycles, the police department shall utilize the license indicia and registration card provided by the California Department of Motor Vehicles for such purpose. The license indicia shall be attached to the bicycle in such manner as is required by the California Department of Motor Vehicles.

If any license plate or registration card is lost, it shall be the duty of the registered owner of the bicycle to procure a replacement for such license or card, the cost of which replacement shall be one dollar. The replacement of a lost license or registration charge shall not serve to extend or otherwise modify the registration period then in existence with respect to such registration. (Ord. 1307 § 1, 1978; Ord. 1012 § 1, 1966; prior code § 5.7)

 

10.24.080 Reports of secondhand sales.
All persons engaged in the business of dealing in secondhand bicycles, as such business is contemplated by Section 39006(b) of the California Vehicle Code, are required to keep daily records and make monthly reports to the police department. Such reports shall give the name and address of the person from whom each bicycle is purchased, the description of each such bicycle purchased, the frame number thereof and the number of the license plate found thereon, if any. (Ord. 1307 § 1, 1978; Ord. 1012 § 1, 1966; prior code § 5.8)

 

10.24.090 Dealers selling bicycles—Reports.
Each bicycle retailer and each bicycle dealer shall supply each purchaser of a bicycle with a preregistration form and with such other information as is required by Section 39006 of the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1307 § 1, 1978; Ord. 1012 § 1, 1966; prior code § 5.9)

 

10.24.100 Recordation of transfer.
It shall be the duty of every person who sells or otherwise transfers ownership of any previously registered bicycle to endorse upon the registration certificate of such bicycle a written transfer of same, setting forth the name, address and telephone number of the transferee, date of transfer, and signature of the transferor. It shall be the further duty of each such transferor to return the registration certificate, so endorsed, to the police department within ten days of the date of such sale or transfer.

Any person who purchases or otherwise acquires possession of a previously registered bicycle shall, within ten days of taking possession thereof, apply to the police department for the transfer of the license and registration to the transferee’s own name. The fee for such transfer shall be one dollar. Such transfer of registration shall in no way extend or otherwise modify the registration period then in existence with respect to such registration. (Ord. 1307 § 1, 1978; prior code § 5.10)

 

10.24.110 Impounding of bicycles.
In addition to such penalties as are established by Section 1.01.110 of this code, the police department or any of the members thereof may impound and retain possession of any bicycle operated within the city in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, and may retain possession of the same until the license required by this chapter is obtained by the owner of such bicycle. (Ord. 1307 § 1, 1978; prior code § 5.12)

 

10.24.120 When license due—Renewal.
Bicycle licenses are due and payable in advance on the first day of January of the first year of each three-year registration period beginning January 1, 1979. Each registration renewal shall be for an additional three-year period, and the fee for such renewal shall be three dollars. (Ord. 1307 § 1, 1978; Ord. 1100 § 2, 1969; Ord. 1012 § 1, 1966; prior code § 5.13)

Chapter 10.28 TAXICABS
10.28.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter have the meanings as set out herein:

“Certificate” means a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the chief of police or his or her agent, authorizing the holder thereof to conduct a taxicab business in the city of Glendora;

“Driver’s certificate” means a certificate issued to a taxicab driver by the chief of police or his or her agent;

“Holder” means a person to whom a certificate of public convenience and necessity has been issued;

“Manifest” means a daily record prepared by a taxicab driver of all trips made by said driver showing time and place of origin, destination, number of passengers, and the amount of fare of each trip;

“Open stand” means a public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere, in the city, which has been designated by the city council as reserved exclusively for the use of taxicabs;

“Person” includes an individual, a corporation or other legal entity, a partnership, and any unincorporated association;

“Rate card” means a card for display in each taxicab which contains the rates of fare then in force;

“Taxicab” means a motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire;

“Taximeter” means a meter instrument or device attached to a taxicab which measures mechanically the distance driven and the waiting time upon which the fare is based. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1973)

 

10.28.020 Certificate of public convenience and necessity required.
No person shall operate or permit a taxicab owned or controlled by him or her to be operated as a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the city without having first obtained a certificate of public convenience and necessity from the chief of police or his or her agent. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1973)

 

10.28.030 Application for certificate.
An application for a certificate shall be filed with the chief of police or his or her agent upon forms provided by the city, and the application shall be verified under oath and shall furnish the following information:

(1)     The name and address of the applicant;

(2)     The financial status of the applicant, including the amounts of all unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature of the transaction or acts giving rise to said judgments;

(3)     The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers;

(4)     Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that public convenience and necessity require the granting of a certificate;

(5)     The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the applicant and the location of proposed depots and terminals;

(6)     The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the vehicle or vehicles of the applicant;

(7)     Such further information as the chief of police of the city, or his or her agent, may require. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1973)

 

10.28.040 Public hearing.
Upon the filing of an application, the chief of police or his or her agent shall fix a time and place for a public hearing thereon. Notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant and to all persons to whom certificates of public convenience and necessity have been theretofore issued. Any interested person may file with the chief of police or his or her agent a memorandum in support of or opposition to the issuance of a certificate. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1973)

 

10.28.050 Issuance of certificate.
If the chief of police or his or her agent finds that further taxicab service in the city is required by the public convenience and necessity and that the applicant is fit, willing, and able to perform such public transportation and to conform to the provisions of this chapter and the rules promulgated by the chief of police or his or her agent, then the chief of police or his or her agent shall issue a certificate stating the name and address of the applicant, the number of vehicles authorized under the certificate and the date of issuance; otherwise, the application shall be denied.

In making the above findings, the chief of police or his or her agent shall take into consideration the number of taxicabs already in operation, whether existing transportation is adequate to meet the public need, the probable effect of increased service on local traffic conditions, and the character, experience, and responsibility of the applicant. Any person may appeal the decision of the chief of police or his or her agent to the city council by filing with the city clerk a written notice of appeal within ten days of the decision of the chief of police or his or her agent. The action of the city council in granting or denying the application shall be final. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1973)

 

10.28.060 Liability insurance required.
No certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be issued or continued in operation unless there is in full force and effect liability insurance for each vehicle authorized in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars for bodily injury to any one person; in the amount of three hundred thousand dollars for injuries to more than one person which are sustained in the same accident; and twenty-five thousand dollars for property damages resulting from any one accident. Copies of such policies of insurance shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1973)

 

10.28.070 License fees.
No certificate shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder thereof has paid an annual license fee of fifty dollars each year for each vehicle operated under a certificate of public convenience and necessity. The license fees shall be for the calendar year and shall be in addition to any other license fees or charges established by proper authority and applicable to the holder or the vehicle or vehicles under his or her operation and control. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1973)

 

10.28.080 Transfer of certificates.
No certificate of public convenience and necessity may be sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred without the consent of the chief of police or his or her agent. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1973)

 

10.28.090 Suspension and revocation of certificates.
A certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the chief of police or his or her agent if the holder thereof has:

(1)     Violated any of the provisions of this chapter;

(2)     Discontinued operations for more than seven days; or

(3)     Violated any ordinance of the city or the laws of the United States or the state of California, the violation of which reflects unfavorably on the fitness of the holder to offer public transportation.

Prior to suspension or revocation, the holder shall be given notice of the proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to be heard. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1973)

 

10.28.100 Examination of applicant—Current state motor vehicle operator’s permit required.
Before any application is finally passed upon by the chief of police or his or her agent, the applicant shall be required to pass a satisfactory examination as to his or her knowledge of the city and to show that he or she has a current motor vehicle operator’s permit issued by the state of California. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1973)

 

10.28.110 Police investigation of applicant.
The police department shall conduct an investigation of each applicant for a taxicab driver’s certificate, and a report of such investigation and a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application for the consideration of the chief of police or his or her agent. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1973)

 

10.28.120 Consideration of application.
The chief of police or his or her agent shall, upon consideration of the application and the reports and certificate required to be attached thereto, approve or reject the application. If the application is rejected, the applicant may request a personal appearance before the chief of police or his or her agent, to offer evidence why his or her application should be reconsidered. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1973)

 

10.28.130 Issuance of certificate.
Upon approval of an application for a taxicab driver’s certificate, the chief of police or his or her agent shall issue a certificate to the applicant which shall bear the name, address, color, age, signature and photograph of the taxicab driver. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1973)

 

10.28.140 Display of certificate and rate card.
Every driver shall post his or her driver’s certificate in such a place as to be in full view of all passengers while such driver is operating a taxicab, and every taxicab operated under this chapter shall have a rate card setting forth the authorized rates of fare displayed in such a place as to be in view of all passengers. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1973)

 

10.28.150 Revocation of certificate.
The chief of police or his or her agent is given the authority to revoke any driver’s certificate for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter; however, a certificate may not be revoked unless the driver has received notice and has had an opportunity to present evidence in his or her behalf. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1973)

 

10.28.160 Failure to comply with city, state and federal laws.
Every driver granted a certificate under this chapter shall comply with all city, state and federal laws. Failure to do so will justify the chief of police or his or her agent in revoking a certificate. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1973)

 

10.28.170 Vehicles—Equipment and maintenance.
(a)     Vehicles Must Be Licensed. Prior to the use and operation of any vehicle under the provisions of this chapter, the vehicle shall be thoroughly examined and inspected by the police department and found to comply with such reasonable rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the chief of police or his or her agent. These rules and regulations shall be promulgated to provide safe transportation and shall specify such safety equipment and regulatory devices as the chief of police or his or her agent shall deem necessary therefor.

(b)     Periodic Inspections. Every vehicle operating under this chapter shall be periodically inspected by the police department at such intervals as shall be established by the chief of police to insure the continued maintenance of safe operating conditions.

(c)     Vehicles Must Be Kept in a Clean and Sanitary Condition. Every vehicle operating under this chapter shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition according to rules and regulations promulgated by the chief of police or his or her agent. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1973)

 

10.28.180 Designation of taxicabs.
Each taxicab shall bear on the outside, in painted letters, the name of the owner, and in addition may bear an identifying design approved by the chief of police or his or her agent. No vehicle covered by the terms of this chapter shall be licensed whose color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia to be used thereon shall, in the opinion of the chief of police or his or her agent, conflict with or imitate any color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia used on a vehicle or vehicles already operating under this chapter, in such a manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public; and provided further, that if, after a certificate has been issued for a taxicab hereunder, the color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia thereof is changed so as to be, in the opinion of the chief of police or his or her agent, in conflict with or imitate any color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia used by any other person, owner or operator, in such a manner as to be misleading or tending to deceive the public, the certificate covering each such taxicab shall be suspended or revoked. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1973)

 

10.28.190 Taximeter required.
All taxicabs operated under the authority of this chapter shall be equipped with taximeters fastened in front of the passengers, visible to them at all times of day and night; and after sundown the face of the taximeter shall be illuminated. The taximeter shall be operated mechanically by mechanism of standard design and construction, driven either from the transmission or from one of the front wheels by a flexible and permanently attached driving mechanism. They shall be sealed at all points and connections which, if manipulated, would affect their correct reading and recording. Each taximeter shall have thereon a flag to denote when the vehicle is employed and when it is not employed; and it shall be the duty of the driver to throw the flag of such taximeter into a nonrecording position at the termination of each trip. The taximeters shall be subject to inspection from time to time by the department of police. Any inspector or other officer of the department is hereby authorized, either on complaint of any person or without such complaint, to inspect any meter and, upon discovery of any inaccuracy therein, to notify the person operating said taxicab to cease operation. Thereupon said taxicab shall be kept off the highways until the taximeter is repaired and in the required working condition. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1973)

 

10.28.200 Open stands—Establishment—Use.
The city is authorized and empowered to establish open stands in such place or places upon the streets of the city as it deems necessary for the use of taxicabs operated in the city. Open stands shall be used by the different drivers on a first-come, first-served basis. The driver shall pull on to the open stand from the rear and shall advance forward as the cabs ahead pull off. Drivers shall stay within five feet of their cabs; they shall not solicit passengers or engage in loud or boisterous talk while at an open stand. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent a passenger from boarding the cab of his or her choice that is parked at an open stand.

Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1416 § 4, 1983; Ord. 1181 § 1, 1973)

 

10.28.210 Prohibition of other vehicles.
Private or other vehicles for hire shall not at any time occupy the space upon the streets that has been established as open stands.

Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1416 § 4, 1983; Ord. 1181 § 1, 1973)

 

10.28.220 Taxicab service.
All persons engaged in the taxicab business in the city operating under the provisions of this chapter shall render an overall service to the public desiring to use taxicabs. Holders of certificates of public convenience and necessity shall maintain a central place of business and keep the same open twenty-four hours a day for the purpose of receiving calls and dispatching cabs. They shall answer all calls received by them for services inside the corporate limits of Glendora as soon as they can do so, and if said services cannot be rendered within a reasonable time they shall then notify the prospective passengers how long it will be before the said call can be answered and give the reason therefor. Any holder who shall refuse to accept a call anywhere in the corporate limits of Glendora at any time when such holder has available cabs, or who shall fail or refuse to give overall service, shall be deemed a violator of this chapter and the certificate granted to such holder shall be revoked at the discretion of the chief of police or his or her agent. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1973)

 

10.28.230 Manifests.
Every driver shall maintain a daily manifest upon which are recorded all trips made each day, showing time and place of origin and destination of each trip and amount of fare, and all such completed manifests shall be returned to the owner by the driver at the conclusion of his or her tour of duty. The forms for each manifest shall be furnished to the driver by the owner and shall be of a character approved by the chief of police or his or her agent.

Every holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall retain and preserve all drivers’ manifests in a safe place for at least the calendar year next preceding the current calendar year, and said manifests shall be available to the chief of police or his or her agent.

Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1416 § 4, 1983; Ord. 1181 § 1, 1973)

 

10.28.250 Severability.
Each of the provisions of this chapter is severable, and if any provision shall be declared to be invalid, the remaining provisions shall not be affected but shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 1181 § 1, 1973)

Chapter 10.32 TRUCK ROUTES
10.32.010 Designation.
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, the following streets or portions of streets are declared to be truck traffic routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons:

(1)     Allen Avenue, between Lone Hill Avenue on the west and Interstate Route 210 on the east;

(2)     Alosta Avenue, from city limits to city limits;

(3)     Arrow Highway, from city limits to city limits;

(4)     Baseline Road, between the city limits on the west and Glendora Avenue on the east;

(5)     Foothill Boulevard, between the city limits on the west and Glendora Avenue on the east;

(6)     Foothill Boulevard, between Amelia Avenue on the west and the city limits on the east;

(7)     Glendora Avenue, between Foothill Boulevard on the north and Baseline Road on the south;

(8)     Grand Avenue, between Foothill Boulevard on the north and the city limits on the south;

(9)     Lone Hill Avenue, between Alosta Avenue on the north and the city limits on the south;

(10)   Sunflower Avenue, between Interstate Route 210 on the north and the city limits on the south. (Ord. 1491 § 1, 1986; Ord. 1209 § 1, 1974)

 

10.32.020 Signing.
Whenever this title or any ordinance of the city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street, the use of which is permitted by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons, the city engineer is authorized to designate such street or streets by appropriate signs as “Truck Traffic Routes” for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons. (Ord. 1209 § 1, 1974)

 

10.32.030 Vehicles over three tons—Use required—Exceptions.
(a)     When truck traffic routes are established and designated by appropriate signs as provided in Sections 10.32.010 and 10.32.020, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons shall drive on such route and none other; except that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons coming from a truck traffic route having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor.

(b)     The provisions of this section shall not apply to:

(1)     Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission; or

(2)     Any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation, maintenance or repair of public utilities; or

(3)     Any vehicle owned and operated by a public agency.

(c)     Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1416 § 5, 1983; Ord. 1209 § 1, 1974)

 

10.32.040 Commercial vehicles—Use of certain streets prohibited.
(a)     Whenever this code or any other ordinance of the city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street, the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle, the city engineer shall erect and maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected by such ordinance.

(b)     When signs are erected as provided in this chapter, no driver of a commercial vehicle shall disobey the direction of such sign; except that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle coming from a truck traffic route having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor. (Ord. 1209 § 1, 1974)

Chapter 10.36 USE OF RESTRICTED STREETS
10.36.010 Permit to use restricted street.
(a)     Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 10.32, vehicles exceeding the maximum gross weight limit set forth in Chapter 10.32 may be operated upon restricted streets from which they are excluded by said chapter upon obtaining a permit therefor pursuant to this chapter. It is unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle for which a permit has been issued without complying with any and all applicable provisions of this chapter.

(b)     Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1416 § 1, 1983; Ord. 1210 § 1, 1974)

 

10.36.020 Application for permit.
Any person desiring to operate a nonexempt vehicle or vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons each along or upon any restricted street shall file an application, in triplicate, for a permit to do so with the city engineer, the original of which shall be verified. The application shall set forth the following information:

(1)     A full identification and the residence and business addresses of the applicant, including all members of any firm or partnership, and the president and secretary of any corporation applying. If the applicant is the agent or employee of any person for whose benefit the permit is requested, this fact, with the full identification of such person and his or her business and residence addresses, shall be given;

(2)     The facts constituting the necessity of the use;

(3)     The amount of materials expected to be hauled in tons;

(4)     The dates on which the use is intended to be commenced and completed, and the times of day during which use is intended to be commenced and completed and the times of day during which the use is intended to be conducted;

(5)     The particular streets or highways over which a permit to operate is requested;

(6)     The time interval between vehicles, and the number of vehicles per hour, which will travel over the route for which the permit is applied;

(7)     The locations of the place or places of delivery of the materials; provided that if delivery is to be made in small quantities to numerous places, a general description, satisfactory to the city engineer, of the locations of the contemplated deliveries will be sufficient;

(8)     A specific description of the vehicle or vehicles and load to be operated or moved;

(9)     Whether such permit is requested for a single trip or for continuous operation;

(10)   Such further information as the city engineer may require. (Ord. 1210 § 1, 1974)

 

10.36.030 Investigation of application.
Immediately upon the filing of an application for a permit pursuant to this chapter, the city engineer shall make or cause to be made an investigation of the facts stated in the application. (Ord. 1210 § 1, 1974)

 

10.36.040 Application filing fee.
At the time of filing an application for a permit pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall pay to the city, at the office of the city treasurer, a filing fee of fifty dollars to cover the cost of the city’s investigation of such application. (Ord. 1210 § 1, 1974)

 

10.36.050 Issuance of permit—Terms and conditions.
If the city engineer, after considering the application and the results of the investigation required by Section 10.36.030, finds that the vehicle or vehicles described in the application may be operated upon the restricted streets set forth in the application without undue damage to the roadway, foundations, surfaces and structures of such restricted street or streets and that such proposed use is not inconsistent with the public health, safety, welfare and convenience, or that there is no reasonable alternative route available to the applicant, he or she may, if good cause appears therefor, issue a permit upon the terms and conditions that he or she believes are necessary to assure against such damage and to protect the public health, safety, welfare and convenience, authorizing the applicant to operate a nonexempt vehicle or vehicles over and upon restricted streets within the city for a period not to exceed six months. The city engineer shall render his or her decision in writing on the application within ten days of the filing thereof. (Ord. 1210 § 1, 1974)

 

10.36.060 Remit fees.
Any permittee authorized by permit issued pursuant to this chapter to operate a nonexempt vehicle over three tons gross weight over or upon a restricted street within the city shall pay to the city, as a liquidated sum, in payment for and in full satisfaction of all damages and injury to such restricted street which will be caused by such vehicle operating on the street, a sum to be established by resolution of the city council. Payment of such sum is necessary to protect such restricted streets from the actual damage and injury which will result from the operation of such vehicles and by reason of the difficulty in computing such damages. The city engineer is authorized to accept such sums in full satisfaction for all damages and injury to such restricted streets to be caused by such vehicles and is authorized to enter into an agreement, stipulating to the acceptance of such sums as full satisfaction for all damages and injury to occur from the use of such streets by the vehicles. Payment of such fees shall be made in monthly installments and shall be paid to the city treasurer on or before the tenth day of the month succeeding the use of the restricted street or streets with the deposit required by this chapter to be applied on the payment due for the last calendar month of operation or part thereof. (Ord. 1210 § 1, 1974)

 

10.36.070 Deposit required for permit.
The city engineer shall require, as a condition to the issuance of any permit pursuant to this chapter, that the applicant, prior to the issuance of the permit, deposit with the city treasurer, as security for the payment of fees specified in Section 10.36.060, a sum of money to be fixed by the city engineer. Such deposit shall be based upon the estimated fees which will become due during the first month of the permittee’s use of restricted streets pursuant to the permit. Upon completion or termination of the use permitted by the permit, the deposit shall be applied to the sum due from the permittee for the previous month’s operation or use and any excess shall be returned to the permittee by the city treasurer. In the event the amount of the deposit is less than the amount due from the permittee for the last month of his or her operation or use of restricted streets as computed pursuant to Section 10.36.060, the permittee shall pay such deficiency on or before the tenth day of the first month after the permittee ceases to use the restricted streets as authorized by the permit. The amount of the deposit under this section shall be returned to the applicant if, prior to the commencement of any use pursuant to such application, the applicant notifies the city engineer in writing of his or her intention to engage in the permitted use and demands the return of deposit. In such event, the city engineer shall cause the deposit to be returned to the applicant and the permit shall thereupon become null and void. (Ord. 1210 § 1, 1974)

 

10.36.080 Surety bond.
The city engineer may, if he or she deems it desirable and necessary to protect the interest of the city and its citizens, require in addition to the deposit set forth in Section 10.36.070, as a condition of the issuance of any permit pursuant to this chapter, a cash bond or, in lieu thereof, a corporate surety bond, in an amount to be fixed by the city engineer, in a form to be approved by the city attorney, inuring to the benefit of the city and guaranteeing that the applicant will faithfully perform all of the conditions and requirements specified in the permit. (Ord. 1210 § 1, 1974)

 

10.36.090 Display of permit.
A copy of every permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be carried in the vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers and the copy of the permit shall be open to inspection by any peace officer or any other officer or governmental employee charged with the care or protection of such streets. (Ord. 1210 § 1, 1974)

 

10.36.100 Right of appeal for nonissuance of permit.
(a)     In the event the city engineer denies an application for permit made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or imposes conditions or terms which the applicant feels are inappropriate or unwarranted, the applicant may, within five days after the date the city engineer notifies the applicant in writing of his or her decision on the application, file with the city clerk a written notice of appeal to the city council from such decision. Before accepting for filing any such notice of appeal, the city clerk shall charge and collect a fee of twenty-five dollars. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal and the payment of the fee, the city clerk shall set a hearing on such appeal before the city council for the next succeeding regular meeting after the date of filing of such notice.

(b)     At the time set for hearing, the city council may summon witnesses and hear evidence relating to the application. The council may, if it deems it necessary, continue the hearing from time to time. At the conclusion thereof, the council shall make its findings thereon and may grant or deny the application, or make such modifications with reference thereto, as it may deem appropriate. The findings and order of the city council shall be final and conclusive on the application. (Ord. 1210 § 1, 1974)

 

10.36.110 Suspension and revocation of permit.
(a)     The council may revoke any permit issued by the city engineer or the council under the provisions of this chapter upon any ground upon which such permit could or should have been denied in the first instance or whenever the council is satisfied that the conduct of the permittee’s use of such restricted streets does or will in any manner endanger, threaten or jeopardize the public health, safety, peace or welfare or that such permit was obtained upon false or misleading statements or representations of or on behalf of the applicant.

(b)     The council may revoke or suspend any permit issued by it or the city engineer under the provisions of this chapter where the permittee or his or her employees violate or permit any infraction of any law of the state, or any provisions of this code, or any condition of the permit in connection with the permittee’s use of such restricted streets under the terms of the permit.

(c)     For any of the reasons specified in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the council may suspend or revoke any permit under the provisions of this chapter after a public hearing afforded the permittee upon at least five days’ written notice mailed to the permittee at the address shown in his or her application for such permit.

(d)     For any reasons specified in subsections (a) and (b), the city engineer may by written order temporarily suspend any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter by mailing a copy of the written order to the permittee at the address shown on his or her application for such permit or by personally serving a copy on the permittee. Such suspension shall remain in full force and effect until the next regular meeting of the council, at which time the council shall consider the matter of the temporary suspension and may thereupon rescind, modify or continue the suspension or may revoke the permit or affix new or different terms to the continuation of the permit. (Ord. 1210 § 1, 1974)

Chapter 10.56 PARADES
10.56.010 Definition.
“Parade” means any march, ceremony, pageant, review, or procession of any kind, in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, which does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations and controls. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 1976)

 

10.56.020 Permit required.
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, solicit from, or start any parade unless a permit so to do has been obtained from the city manager and unless such permit is carried by the person heading or leading the parade. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 1976)

 

10.56.030 Exemptions from provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to funeral processions. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 1976)

 

10.56.040 Application for permit—Time of filing.
Applications for a parade permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than thirty days nor more than ninety days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. Such applications shall be sworn to and shall state:

(1)     The name of the person or organization wishing to conduct such parade;

(2)     If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible head of such organization;

(3)     The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chair and who will be responsible for its conduct;

(4)     The name, address and telephone number of the person or organization to whom the permit is desired to be issued;

(5)     The date when such parade is to be conducted;

(6)     The route to be traveled, the starting point, and the termination point;

(7)     The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade, the type of animals, and a description of the vehicles;

(8)     The hour when such parade will start and terminate;

(9)     Whether such parade will occupy all or only one-half of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed;

(10)   The location by streets of any assembly or assembly areas for such parade;

(11)   The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas;

(12)   The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade;

(13)   If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his or her behalf;

(14)   Any other information the police chief deems necessary for his or her investigation. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 1976)

 

10.56.050 Investigation.
The police chief shall investigate and make recommendation to the city manager to approve, with or without conditions, or deny the application based upon a consideration of the following questions and other pertinent information:

(1)     Will the conduct of such parade substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route?

(2)     Will the conduct of such parade require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto, as to prevent normal police protection to the city or impose too great an expense to the city?

(3)     Will the concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas?

(4)     Will the conduct of such parade interfere with the movement of fire-fighting equipment en route to a fire?

(5)     Will the conduct of such parade be reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property?

(6)     Will such parade move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without stopping en route?

(7)     Is such parade to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or event, and is it designed to be held purely for private profit?

(8)     Has the permittee provided for the services of monitors to control the orderly conduct of the parade in conformity with such permit?

(9)     Has the permittee provided reasonable means for informing all the persons participating therein of the terms and conditions of such permit?

(10)   Does the applicant agree to abide by or comply with all conditions of such permit?

(11)   Are the facts contained in the application true and not false or nonexistent in any material detail? (Ord. 1253 § 1, 1976)

 

10.56.060 Bond required.
An applicant for a parade permit may be required by the city manager, before the issuance of a permit, to deposit with the finance department a sum of money or an approved surety bond in such amount as determined by the city manager, as a guarantee that the applicant will pay any and all damages which may result in the conduct of the parade. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 1976)

 

10.56.070 Contents of the permit.
Each parade permit shall state the following:

(1)     The assembly area and time of assembly;

(2)     The starting time;

(3)     The route of the parade;

(4)     What portions of the street to be traversed may be occupied by such parade;

(5)     The disbanding area and time of disbanding;

(6)     The number of persons required to monitor the parade;

(7)     The maximum length of parade in miles or fractions hereof, or in units, or in number of participants;

(8)     Such other requirements as are found by the city manager to be reasonably necessary for the protection of persons or property. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 1976)

 

10.56.080 Parade prohibited.
No permit shall be issued authorizing the conduct of a parade which the city manager finds is proposed to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods, wares, merchandise, or that is designed to be held purely for private profit. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 1976)

 

10.56.090 Appeal of denial.
Any appeal to the city council from the city manager’s denial of a parade permit must be filed with the city clerk within five days after notice of such denial. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 1976)

 

10.56.100 Revocation of permit.
Any permit for a parade issued under this chapter may be summarily revoked by the city manager at any time when, by reason of disaster, public calamity or other emergency, the city manager determines that the safety of persons or property demands such revocation. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 1976)

 

10.56.110 Violation.
Wilful violation of any of the terms or conditions of the parade permit by the permittee or any participant in the parade is a misdemeanor. Wilful violation of any section of this chapter is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 1976)

 

10.56.120 Notification.
Upon the granting of a parade permit, the city manager will cause a copy of the permit to be sent to all agencies and businesses in the Glendora area providing emergency services. (Ord. 1253 § 1, 1976)

Chapter 10.76 STREET VENDING
10.76.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

“Commercial vehicle” means a vehicle maintained for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation or profit, or designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. Passenger vehicles which are not used for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation or profit are not commercial vehicles.

“Driver” means and includes every person who drives or; is in actual charge and control of any vehicle or commercial vehicle from which street vending takes place.

“Goods or merchandise” includes items and products of every kind and description, including all food, produce and beverage items.

“Highway” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.

“Nonmotorized device” means any device moved exclusively by human power, including but not limited to, any pushcart, stand, display, showcase, rack, pedal-driven cart, wagon, bicycle, tricycle or other wheeled container or conveyance.

“Owner” means and includes every person having legal title to any vehicle or commercial vehicle from which street vending takes place.

“Person” means any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or other entity of any kind or nature.

“Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

“Street vend” or “street vending” means the sale or offering for sale of any goods or merchandise to the public from a vehicle or commercial vehicle.

“Street vendor” means any person who engages in the act of street vending from a vehicle or commercial vehicle or who drives or otherwise operates any such vehicle or commercial vehicle for the purpose of street vending therefrom. (Ord. 2046 § 3, 2020; Ord. 1643 § 4, 1995)

 

10.76.020 Permit process.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the act of street vending within the city unless that person first obtains a street vendor permit from the city and complies with all other provisions of this chapter. Any person desiring to street vend within the city shall first submit an application for a street vendor permit. A nonrefundable processing fee and annual street vendor permit fee to be set by city council resolution shall be submitted with the application. Such application shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:

(1)     Name.

(2)     Applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes and hair.

(3)     Written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age.

(4)     Current home address of applicant.

(5)     The previous home addresses of applicant, if any, for the period of five years immediately prior to date of application.

(6)     Business, occupation and/or employment history of applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application.

(7)     Two sets of fingerprints taken by the Los Angeles County sheriff’s department or the Glendora police department.

(8)     Two prints of a recent passport-size photograph of applicant.

(9)     The name and address of the owner of the vehicle or commercial vehicle to be used for street vending.

(10)   Any criminal convictions or offenses within the past ten years.

(11)   On applications made on, or after, the later of the date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or the year immediately prior to the application, any violations of this chapter.

(12)   The make, model and license plate number of all vehicles or commercial vehicles which will be used by the street vendor.

(13)   A photograph of all vehicles or commercial vehicles which will be used by the street vendor.

(14)   Such other information as may be reasonably required by the city.

(15)   A statement in writing by the applicant that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct, said statement being duly dated.

(16)   Authorization for the city and its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application.

Upon receipt of a fully completed application for a street vendor permit and the applicable fees, the city shall review the information and conduct a criminal background check for each street vendor listed in the application. (Ord. 2046 § 3, 2020; Ord. 1643 § 4, 1995)

 

10.76.030 Permit approval.
The street vendor permit shall be approved, conditionally approved or denied by the director of community development or designee based on whether the following criteria have been met:

(1)     Payment of all applicable fees.

(2)     Receipt and approval by the city attorney of certificates of insurance and endorsements for at least five hundred thousand dollars combined single limit, certifying as to adequate liability insurance for the specific street vending business which the street vendor will work for or owns, including coverage for all individuals, property and vehicles to be used in the street vending. If a street vendor will not be using a vehicle or commercial vehicle to street vend, then the certificate of insurance will not be required.

(3)     A finding that the street vendor has not been found guilty or pled no contest to any of the following within the past five years: a crime of moral turpitude; a drug-related misdemeanor or felony, including but not limited to, the sale of a controlled substance; the sale, distribution or display of obscene matter; indecent exposure; selling or disposing of lottery tickets; gambling; or bookmaking.

(4)     A finding that, on, or after, the later of the date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter or the year immediately prior to the application, the street vendor has not had a street vendor permit revoked or been found guilty of a violation of this chapter.

(5)     Accurate completion of the application.

The decision of the director of community development or designee is final.

If the street vendor permit application is approved, the city shall issue a street vendor permit and street vendor identification card to each street vendor. The street vendor identification card shall include a photograph of the street vendor. The street vendor permit and street vendor identification card will be valid for a period of one year and must be renewed on or before the one year anniversary of the issuance of the permit if the street vendor wishes to continue street vending in the city. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to exempt or grant a waiver of any requirement set forth in Chapter 5.08 of this code.

Any person found to have misrepresented any information on the application will not be eligible to apply for a street vendor permit for a period of one year. (Ord. 2046 § 3, 2020; Ord. 1643 § 4, 1995)

 

10.76.040 Street vendor regulations.
(a)     All street vendors vending fruits, vegetables, ice cream or other foodstuffs shall be in possession of a valid Los Angeles County health inspection sticker. If such foodstuffs are being vended from a vehicle or commercial vehicle, the sticker shall be affixed to the lower right side of the windshield of the vehicle or commercial vehicle.

(b)     While street vending, each street vendor who operates or vends from a vehicle or commercial vehicle shall have on his or her person a current valid state driver’s license which he or she shall make available for inspection by law enforcement officials upon request.

(c)     Each street vendor shall wear or carry his or her street vendor identification card issued by the city in a visible position upon his or her person at all times while street vending.

(d)     Street vendors may only street vend between the hours of eight a.m. and six p.m. on weekdays (Monday through Friday), excepting holidays, and between the hours of ten a.m. and six p.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.

(e)     Street vendors and all vehicles and commercial vehicles shall comply with the noise regulations set forth in Chapter 9.44 of this code.

(f)      Street vendors shall comply with all of the provisions of Chapter 10.12 (Stopping, Standing and Parking) of this code. (Ord. 2046 § 3, 2020; Ord. 1643 § 4, 1995)

 

10.76.050 Prohibited conduct.
(a)     It is unlawful for any person to vend from any nonmotorized device or operate any nonmotorized device for street vending purposes while parked, stopped or standing upon any public street, highway or alley in the city.

(b)     It is unlawful for any person to street vend from any vehicle or commercial vehicle unless the driver of such vehicle or commercial vehicle has brought such vehicle to a complete stop and is lawfully parked adjacent to a curb. Such vehicle or commercial vehicle shall be deemed to not be lawfully parked for purposes of this chapter if it is parked in any of the following locations:

(1)     Within an intersection;

(2)     On a crosswalk;

(3)     Within an area designated as “No Parking” by either signage or a curb painted red;

(4)     Within fifteen feet of the driveway entrance to a fire station;

(5)     In front of a public or private driveway;

(6)     On a sidewalk;

(7)     Alongside or opposite any street or highway excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;

(8)     On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped, parked or standing at the curb or edge of a highway;

(9)     Alongside curb space designated for the loading and unloading of bus passengers;

(10)   Upon a bridge;

(11)   In front of that portion of a curb which has been cut down, lowered or constructed to provide wheelchair access and which has been designated as such by either signage or red paint on the curb;

(12)   The posted speed limit on the public street or highway exceeds thirty-five mph.

(c)     It is unlawful for any person to street vend:

(1)     Before the hour of eight a.m. or after the hour of six p.m. on weekdays (Monday through Friday), excepting holidays, and before the hour of ten a.m. and after six p.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays;

(2)     Within one thousand feet of any school property;

(3)     In any manner that impedes the flow of traffic;

(4)     In any manner that impedes the flow of pedestrians on any sidewalk. Street vendors shall allow at least five feet clear of pedestrian access exclusive of any customer transaction area.

(d)     It is unlawful for any street vendor or owner to drive or cause to be driven any vehicle or commercial vehicle used for street vending which is in a defective, unsafe or unsanitary condition. Every vehicle or commercial vehicle used for street vending shall be subject to inspection by any officer of the city at all times during its operation. (Ord. 2046 § 3, 2020; Ord. 1643 § 4, 1995)

 

10.76.060 Vending on private property not prohibited.
Subject to the provisions of Sections 10.16.040, 10.16.050, 10.16.060 and 10.16.070 of this code, this chapter shall not be construed to prohibit any person from vending from any vehicle or commercial vehicle when such vehicle or commercial vehicle is located entirely upon private property and is otherwise being operated in compliance with this chapter and any other applicable state or local laws; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to permit trespass upon private property, nor shall it be construed to eliminate the need of a vendor to obtain the permission of a private property owner on whose property such vendor may operate. (Ord. 2046 § 3, 2020; Ord. 1643 § 4, 1995)

 

10.76.070 Remedies for violation.
In addition to any other penalties of law, any vendor found to be in violation of this chapter or who has been convicted or pled no contest to any of the violations outlined in Section 1.01.110 and Section 10.76.050 shall be subject to the following:

(1)     Revocation of the current street vendor permit and street vendor identification card.

(2)     Requirement that the street vendor discontinue street vending and vacate the area.

(3)     Should any street vendor fail to discontinue street vending at the direction of any officer of the city, all property associated with the street vendor’s operation shall be impounded at the street vendor’s cost.

          In the event that property has been seized, said property will be held until all financial obligations related to impound costs and any other legally imposed fees, fines or costs have been met. (Ord. 1643 § 4, 1995)

 

10.76.080 Revocation of permit.
In the event of revocation of a street vendor permit, the permittee shall not be eligible to apply for a new street vendor permit for a period of one year from the date of revocation. (Ord. 2046 § 3, 2020; Ord. 1643 § 4, 1995)

 

10.76.090 Exempted activities.
The following activities are exempt from the operation of this chapter:

Any person(s) engaged in the act of street vending, whether licensed as a street vendor(s) or not, who are an integral part of and sponsored by:

(1)     Any parade permitted pursuant to Chapter 10.56 of this code; or

(2)     Any special outdoor event permitted by Chapter 5.32 of this code. (Ord. 1643 § 4, 1995)

 

10.76.100 Violation—Penalty.
Any person or persons who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of the Glendora Municipal Code up to and including a misdemeanor and subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.01.110 of this code. Each and every day during any portion of which the provisions of this chapter are violated shall constitute a separate offense and may be punished accordingly. (Ord. 2046 § 3, 2020; Ord. 1643 § 4, 1995)

Chapter 10.77 SIDEWALK VENDING
10.77.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:

“Certified farmers’ market” means a location operated in accordance with Chapter 10.5 (commencing with Section 47000) of Division 17 of the Food and Agricultural Code and any regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter.

“City” means the city of Glendora.

“Director” means director of community development or designee.

“Emergency vehicle access” means the roadway path or other surface that provides police or fire safety vehicular access from the dispatched point of origin to a facility, building, parcel, park or portion thereof. Emergency vehicle access includes, but is not limited to, fire lanes, public and private streets, parking lot lanes, access roadways, and walkways.

“Food” means any item provided Health and Safety Code Section 113781, or any successor section.

“Merchandise” means any item(s) that can be sold and immediately obtained from a sidewalk vendor that is not considered food. Items for rent shall not be considered merchandise.

“Park” means any area dedicated or established as a public park owned or operated by the city.

“Pathway” means a paved path or walkway for pedestrian travel, other than a sidewalk.

“Person” means any natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership, joint venture, business trust, corporation, or company.

“Public property” means all property owned or controlled by the city, including, but not limited to, alleys, parks, pathways, streets, parking lots, sidewalks, and walking trails.

“Roaming sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who operates by traveling from place to place and stops only to complete a transaction.

“Sidewalk” means a public sidewalk or paved pedestrian path specifically designed for public pedestrian travel.

“Sidewalk vending device” means a pushcart, stand, pedal-driven cart, display, wagon, showcase, rack or non-motorized conveyance.

“Sidewalk vendor” or “vendor” means a person who sells food or merchandise from a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other nonmotorized conveyance, or from one’s person, upon a sidewalk within the city.

“Sidewalk vending” refers to commercial activity conducted by a sidewalk vendor.

“Special event permit” means a permit issued for the temporary use of, or encroachment on, a sidewalk or other public area, including a “special outdoor display event.”

“Special outdoor display event” refers to that meaning in Section 5.32.010.

“Stationary sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who operates from a fixed location.

“Swap meet” means a location operated in accordance with Article 6 (commencing with Section 21660) of Chapter 9 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code, and any regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter, or any successor chapter. (Ord. 2046 § 4, 2020)

 

10.77.020 Permit required—Applicability.
A.      No person shall engage in any sidewalk vending activities without first obtaining a sidewalk vendor permit from the director, or designee. Permit decisions by the director or designee shall be final.

B.      The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the following persons:

1.       Persons delivering goods, wares, merchandise, or food upon order of, or by agreement with, a customer from a store or other fixed place of business or distribution.

2.       Solicitors, as described in Section 5.14.010.

3.       Persons selling goods, wares, merchandise, or food from a motorized vehicle, including food trucks or street vendors. (Ord. 2046 § 4, 2020)

 

10.77.030 Permit application process and application fee.
A.      An application for a sidewalk vending permit shall include the following information:

1.       The applicant’s name, current mailing address, and telephone number;

2.       A copy of a valid California’s driver’s license or identification number, an individual taxpayer identification number, or a social security number. An applicant for a business license or permit to operate as a sidewalk vendor shall not be required to submit a social security number for the issuance of such license or permit. In lieu of an otherwise required social security number, the city shall accept a California driver’s license or identification number, an individual taxpayer identification number, or a municipal identification number. Identification numbers submitted under this section shall not be made available to the public for inspection, shall be treated as confidential, and shall not be disclosed except as required to administer the license or permit program or to comply with a state law or state or federal court order;

3.       Each individual sidewalk vendor must have his or her own permit. In addition, if the vendor is an agent of an individual, company, partnership, or corporation, the name and business address of the principal and the name, address, and telephone number of the person in charge of any roaming sidewalk vendors, and sidewalk vending activity;

4.       Two prints of a recent passport size photo of the applicant;

5.       Whether the vendor(s) intends to operate as a stationary sidewalk vendor or a roaming sidewalk vendor;

6.       A description of the merchandise and/or food to be offered for sale;

7.       The number of sidewalk vending devices the sidewalk vendor will operate under the permit and a description and a photograph of each and every vending device and trash receptacle to be used (including the dimensions of carts or other conveyances);

8.       A copy of a valid California Department of Tax and Fee Administration seller’s permit, as required, which shall be maintained during the pendency of the sidewalk vendor’s permit;

9.       If a vendor of food, proof of all required approvals from the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health;

10.     Evidence of insurance as required of street vendors as stated in Glendora Municipal Code Section 10.76.030(2).

11.     The applicant’s acknowledgment that the sidewalk vendor’s use of public property is at their own risk, the city does not take any steps to ensure public property is safe or conducive to the sidewalk vending activities, and the sidewalk vendor uses public property at his or her own risk.

12.     The applicant’s certification that, to his or her knowledge and belief, the information contained in the application is true and acknowledgment that the sidewalk vendor will comply with all other generally applicable local, state, and federal laws.

B.      Application and Permit Fees. Applications shall not be accepted unless accompanied by payment of an application fee that the city council may establish by separate resolution in an amount not to exceed the city’s reasonable cost of providing the services required by this chapter. The application and permit are only applicable to the individual(s) named on the application. (Ord. 2046 § 4, 2020)

 

10.77.040 Operating requirements.
All sidewalk vendors are subject to the following operating conditions when conducting sidewalk vending activities:

A.      All food and merchandise shall be stored either inside or affixed to the sidewalk vendor device or carried by the sidewalk vendor. Food and merchandise shall not be stored, placed, or kept on any public property.

B.      All sidewalk vendors that prepare or sell food must be in compliance with all Los Angeles County and state of California permitting and licensing requirements for the preparation or sale of food.

C.      The overall space taken up by the sidewalk vendor device shall not exceed the size requirements provided for in this section. Sidewalk vendors shall not set up, maintain, or permit the use of any additional table, crate, carton, rack, or any other device to increase the selling or display capacity of their stand where such terms have not been described by their application and approved in their sidewalk vendor permit.

D.      The sidewalk vendor permit shall always be displayed conspicuously on the sidewalk vending device or the sidewalk vendor’s person. If multiple sidewalk vendors are staffing a sidewalk vendor device or working as roaming sidewalk vendors, each person shall wear their permit on their person in a conspicuous manner.

E.       Sidewalk vendors shall not leave their sidewalk vending device unattended to solicit business for their sidewalk vending activities. Sidewalk vending devices shall not be stored on public property and shall be removed when not in active use by a vendor.

F.       All sidewalk vendors shall allow any city official at any time, to inspect their sidewalk vending device for compliance with the size requirements of this chapter and to ensure the safe operation of any heating elements used to prepare food.

G.      Sidewalk vending devices shall not exceed a total height of three feet, a total width of three feet, and a total length of three feet.

H.      If a sidewalk vending device requires more than one person to conduct the sidewalk vending activity, all sidewalk vendors associated with the vending device shall be within five feet of the device when conducting sidewalk vending activities.

I.        Sidewalk vendors that sell food shall maintain a trash container in or on their sidewalk vending device and shall not empty their trash into public trash cans. The size of the food vendor’s trash container shall be considered when assessing the total size limit of a sidewalk vending device. All sidewalk vendors shall not leave any location without first picking up, removing, and disposing of all trash, refuse or spillage from their operation. All sidewalk vendors shall immediately clean up any food, refuse, grease or other fluid or items related to sidewalk vending activities that fall on public property.

J.       Stationary sidewalk vending activities may only occur on sidewalks with an eight-foot minimum width. All vending activities must maintain a four-foot minimum accessible and unobstructed clearance for pedestrians, including sidewalk vending devices and customer queuing area.

K.      Sidewalk vendors shall comply with the following noise standards:

1.       It is unlawful for any sidewalk vendor to shout, make any outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device, including any loud speaking radio or sound-amplifying system while vending where such sound exceeds the city’s noise standards as set forth Chapter 9.44.

2.       No sidewalk vendor shall operate or permit the operation of any sound amplification system to advertise, to draw attention to the presence of the sidewalk vendor or to communicate commercial information to the general public, except to request emergency assistance or warn of a hazardous situation.

L.       Sidewalk vendors shall not vend to or otherwise conduct transactions with persons in moving vehicles or vehicles illegally parked or stopped. Sidewalk vending activities may only sell to pedestrians and may not sell to, or attempt to sell to, any customers located in any vehicles.

M.     In residential areas, roaming sidewalk vendors may only operate between the hours of eight a.m. and six p.m., Monday through Friday, inclusive and between ten a.m. and six p.m. on weekends and holidays. Stationary vendors may not operate in areas that are zoned exclusively residential.

N.      In commercial or mixed-use areas, both sidewalk and stationary sidewalk vendors may only operate between eight a.m. and nine p.m., or as consistent with the hours of operation of the businesses on that same street, seven days a week. (Ord. 2046 § 4, 2020)

 

10.77.050 Prohibited activities and locations.
A.      Sidewalk vendors shall comply with all operating conditions, including those conditions set forth in Section 10.77.040.

B.      Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in any of the following activities:

1.       Renting merchandise to customers;

2.       Displaying merchandise or food that is not available for immediate sale;

3.       Selling of adult-oriented material, marijuana, or alcohol.

4.       Using an open flame that is not covered by a top.

C.      Sidewalk vendors shall not engage in sidewalk vending activities at the following locations:

1.       Within fifteen feet of a:

a.       Fire hydrant;

b.       Curb which has been designated as yellow or red zone or a transit stop;

c.       Driveway, alley or street corner; and

d.       Bike racks, benches, bus stops or similar public use.

2.       On any designated emergency vehicle access way.

3.       On any public property that does not meet the definition of a sidewalk, except as otherwise stated in subsection D below.

4.       Within one hundred feet of a sidewalk or other public area designated for a special outdoor display event, parade permit, swap meet, certified farmers’ market, filming, or encroachment issued by the city, during the limited duration of the permit.

5.       On any private property without the express written consent of the owner or lessee of the property.

6.       Any location that would impede entering or exiting a parked vehicle.

7.       Stationary sidewalk vendors shall not sell food or merchandise or engage in any sidewalk vending activities at any park where the city has signed an agreement for concessions that exclusively permits the sale of food or merchandise by a concessionaire.

8.       Within one hundred feet of any public safety facility, including without limitation police stations, first responder locations, and fire stations.

9.       On any sidewalk where vending equipment and queuing patrons would restrict access requirements under the Americans with Disabilities Act.

10.     Sidewalk vending devices shall not touch, lean against or be affixed at any time to any building or structure including, but not limited to, lampposts, parking meters, mailboxes, traffic signals, fire hydrants, benches, bus shelters, newsstands, trashcans, or traffic barriers.

D.      Sidewalk vendors may be permitted to operate upon sidewalks in parks owned or operated by the city. However, no stationary sidewalk vendor may operate in a city-owned or city-operated park if the operator of the park has signed an agreement for concessions that exclusively permits the sale of food or merchandise by the concessionaire. (Ord. 2046 § 4, 2020)

 

10.77.060 Permit nontransferable.
A sidewalk vending license shall not be transferable to any person or be valid for vending operations in any location(s) other than that location designated on the license for the term stated. (Ord. 2046 § 4, 2020)

 

10.77.070 Violations and penalties.
A.      Any violation of this chapter or any term of a sidewalk vendor’s permit, except a violation for operating without a required sidewalk vendor’s permit, is punishable only as follows:

1.       An administrative fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation.

2.       An administrative fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation within one year of the first violation.

3.       An administrative fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation within one year of the first violation.

4.       Rescission of the sidewalk vendor’s permit for the remaining term of that permit upon the fourth violation or subsequent violations within one year of the first violation.

B.      A violation for operating without a required sidewalk vendor’s permit is punishable only as follows:

1.       An administrative fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for a first violation.

2.       An administrative fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for a second violation within one year of the first violation.

3.       An administrative fine not exceeding one thousand dollars for each additional violation within one year of the first violation.

C.      Upon proof that a sidewalk vendor possesses the required sidewalk vendor’s permit, any administrative fine imposed pursuant to subsection B of this section for operating without a required sidewalk vendor’s permit shall be reduced to the applicable fine amount set forth in subsection A of this section.

D.      Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, all fines imposed pursuant to this section shall be subject to an ability-to-pay determination as described in Government Code Section 51039(f), and as amended. Concurrent with issuance of any citation for administrative fines pursuant to this section, the citing officer shall provide the sidewalk vendor with notice of his or her right to request an ability-to-pay determination, and shall make available to the sidewalk vendor instructions or other materials for requesting the ability-to-pay determination.

E.       Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, no violation of this chapter shall be punished as a criminal offense. (Ord. 2046 § 4, 2020)

 

10.77.080 Ability-to-pay determinations.
A.      When assessing an administrative fine under this chapter, the city will take into consideration a person’s ability to pay the fine. Furthermore:

1.       Any fine issued under this chapter will be accompanied by notice of and instruction regarding a person’s right to request an ability-to-pay determination.

2.       A person may request an ability-to-pay determination at adjudication or while the judgment remains unpaid, including when a case is delinquent or has been referred to a comprehensive collection program.

B.      If a person is receiving public benefits under Government Code Section 68632, subdivision (a), or has a monthly income which is one hundred twenty-five percent or less than the current poverty guidelines updated periodically in the Federal Register by the United States Department of Health and Human Services, the person’s administrative fine will be limited to twenty percent of the amount assessed according to the fee schedules in Section 5.122.110(8). The city may also take the following actions:

1.       Allow the person to complete community service in lieu of paying the total administrative fine; or

2.       Waive the administrative fine; or

3.       Offer an alternative disposition. (Ord. 2046 § 4, 2020)

Title 11 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Chapter 11.04 PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
Chapter 11.08 DISASTER COUNCIL
Chapter 11.12 EMERGENCY SERVICES
Chapter 11.16 EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION
Chapter 11.20 EXPENDITURES
Chapter 11.24 PROHIBITED ACTS
Chapter 11.26 APPOINTMENT OF STANDBY OFFICERS
Chapter 11.28 STANDARDIZED EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS (SEMS)
Chapter 11.30 SEVERABILITY

Chapter 11.04 PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
11.04.010 Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:

“Local emergency” means the duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the territorial limits of a county, city and county or city, caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, drought, sudden and severe energy shortage, plant or animal infestation or disease, the governor’s warning of an earthquake or volcanic prediction, or an earthquake, or other conditions other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of that political subdivision and require the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat, or with respect to regulated energy utilities, a sudden and severe energy shortage requires extraordinary measures beyond the authority vested in the state public utilities commission.

“State of emergency” means the duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the state caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, drought, sudden and severe energy shortage, plant or animal infestation or disease, the governor’s warning of an earthquake or volcanic prediction, or an earthquake, or other conditions, other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy or conditions causing a state of war emergency, which conditions, by reason of their magnitude, are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of any single county, city and county, or city and require the combined forces of a mutual aid region or regions to combat, or with respect to regulated energy utilities, a sudden and severe energy shortage requires extraordinary measures beyond the authority vested in the state public utilities commission.

“State of war emergency” means the condition, which exists immediately with or without a proclamation thereof by the governor, whenever the state or nation is attacked by an enemy of the United States, or upon receipt by the state of a warning from the federal government indicating that such an enemy attack is probable or imminent. (Ord. 1749 § 2, 2002)

 

11.04.020 Purpose.
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the city in the event of an emergency, the direction of the emergency organization, and the coordination of the emergency functions of the city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected private persons. (Ord. 1749 § 2, 2002)

Chapter 11.08 DISASTER COUNCIL
11.08.010 Disaster council—Created—Members.
The city disaster council is hereby created, and shall consist of the following:

(1)     The mayor, who shall be chair.

(2)     The director of emergency services, who shall be vice-chair.

(3)     The assistant director of emergency services.

(4)     The deputy director of emergency services.

(5)     Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of the city adopted pursuant to this chapter.

(6)     Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 1749 § 2, 2002)

 

11.08.020 Powers and duties—Meetings.
It shall be the duty of the city disaster council, and the council is hereby empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chair or, in his or her absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice-chair or, in their absence from the city or inability to call such a meeting, upon the call of the assistant director of emergency services. (Ord. 1749 § 2, 2002)

Chapter 11.12 EMERGENCY SERVICES
11.12.010 Director, assistant director, and deputy director of emergency services—Offices created.
(a)     There is hereby created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services.

(b)     There is hereby created the office of assistant director of emergency services, who shall be the chief of police.

(c)     There is hereby created the office of deputy director of emergency services, who shall be the emergency manager. (Ord. 1749 § 2, 2002)

 

11.12.020 Powers and duties.
(a)     The director is hereby empowered to:

(1)     Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect.

(2)     Request the governor to proclaim a state of emergency when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency.

(3)     Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of the city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter.

(4)     Direct cooperation between the coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of the city; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them.

(5)     Represent the city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies.

(b)     In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as provided in this chapter, the proclamation of a state of emergency by the governor or the director of the state office of emergency services, or the existence of war emergency, the director is hereby empowered to:

(1)     Make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, that such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council;

(2)     Obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the properties for public use;

(3)     Require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a state of emergency in the county in which the city is located or the existence of a state of war emergency, to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he or she deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties. Such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers;

(4)     Requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency;

(5)     Execute all of his or her ordinary power as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him or her by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan adopted by the city council pursuant to the chapter, and all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority; and

(6)     Impose rationing of vital commodities and equipment, and to make rules and regulations in regard to the distribution and pricing of rationed commodities and equipment;

(7)     Promulgate orders and regulations necessary to provide for the protection of life and property, including orders or regulations imposing curfew within designated boundaries where necessary to preserve the public order and safety. Such orders and regulations will be given widespread publicity and notice. Whenever a curfew is imposed by the director, the curfew shall not remain in effect for a period of more than seven days, unless otherwise approved by the city council. The director shall proclaim the termination of a curfew at the earliest possible date that conditions warrant;

(8)     Order the dispersion of all persons present at the place of any riot, rout or unlawful assembly in order to protect the public health, safety or welfare threatened by the local emergency and to prohibit the gathering of two or more persons who may, acting together, threaten to use force or violence, use force or violence, or disturb the public peace. The orders to disperse persons or prohibit gatherings of person shall not remain in effect for a period of more than seven days, unless otherwise approved by the city council;

(c)     The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of the emergency manager and emergency service officials develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of the city; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. In the event that the director and the assistant director are not available, the deputy director shall assume the powers and duties assigned to the director and assistant director. (Ord. 1749 § 2, 2002)

Chapter 11.16 EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION
11.16.010 Emergency organization—Composition.
All officers and employees of the city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Section 11.12.020(b)(3), who may by agreement or operation of law be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in the city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city. (Ord. 1749 § 2, 2002)

 

11.16.020 Structure, duties and functions.
The structure, duties and functions of the city emergency organization and order emergency succession to the position of director of emergency services shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1749 § 2, 2002)

Chapter 11.20 EXPENDITURES
11.20.010 Expenditures.
Any expenditure made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. (Ord. 1749 § 2, 2002)

Chapter 11.24 PROHIBITED ACTS
11.24.010 Prohibited acts.
(a)     It is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for not to exceed six months, or both, for any person, during an emergency, to:

(1)     Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of this chapter.

(2)     Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued to pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of the city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof.

(3)     Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state.

(b)     The police chief and his or her representatives are empowered to inspect the credentials and identification of all persons claiming affiliation with civil defense and disaster organizations. (Ord. 1749 § 2, 2002)

Chapter 11.26 APPOINTMENT OF STANDBY OFFICERS
11.26.010 Appointment of standby officers.
(a)     To provide for the continuance of legislative and executive functions in the city during a state of war emergency or a state of emergency or a local emergency, the city council shall appoint three standby officers for each of its members. In case a standby office becomes vacant because of removal, death, resignation or other cause, the city council shall appoint another person to fill the office. Standby officers shall be designated numbers 1, 2 and 3, as the case may be.

(b)     The qualifications of each standby officer should be carefully investigated, and the city council may request the chief of police to aid in the investigation of any prospective appointee. No examination or investigation shall be made without the consent of the prospective appointee.

(c)     Each standby officer shall take an oath of office required of the person occupying the office for which he or she stands by. Persons appointed as standby officers shall serve in their posts as standby officers at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed and replaced at any time with or without cause.

(d)     Each standby officer shall have the following duties:

(1)     To inform himself or herself of the duties of the office for which he or she stands by. Employees of the city will assist him or her and shall provide each standby officer with a copy of this chapter.

(2)     To keep informed of the business and affairs of the city to the extent necessary to enable him or her to fill his or her post competently. For this purpose the city may arrange information meetings and require attendance.

(3)     To immediately report himself or herself ready for duty in the event of a state of war emergency or in the event of a state of emergency or a local emergency at the place and in the method previously designated in the city emergency plan.

(4)     To fill the post for which he or she has been appointed when the regular council member is unavailable during a state of war emergency. Standby officers numbers 2 and 3 shall substitute in succession for standby officer number 1 in the same way that the standby officer is substituted in place of the regular council member. He or she shall serve until the regular council member becomes available or until the election or appointment of a new regular council member.

(e)     Should all members of the city council, including all standby members, be unavailable, temporary officers shall be appointed to serve until a regular member or a standby member becomes available or until the election or appointment of a new regular or standby member. Temporary officers shall be appointed as follows:

(1)     By the chairperson of the board of supervisors of the county, and if he or she is unavailable,

(2)     By the chairperson of the board of supervisors of any other county within one hundred fifty miles of the city, beginning with the nearest and most populated county and going to the farthest and least populated, and if he or she is unavailable,

(3)     By the mayor of any city within one hundred fifty miles of the city, beginning with the nearest and most populated city and going to the farthest and least populated.

(f)      As used in this chapter, the word “unavailable” means that a council member is either killed, missing or so seriously injured as to be unable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his or her duties. The city council or any remaining available members of such body, including standby officers who are serving on the city council, shall settle any question as to whether a particular member is unavailable. (Ord. 1749 § 2, 2002)

Chapter 11.26 APPOINTMENT OF STANDBY OFFICERS
11.26.010 Appointment of standby officers.
(a)     To provide for the continuance of legislative and executive functions in the city during a state of war emergency or a state of emergency or a local emergency, the city council shall appoint three standby officers for each of its members. In case a standby office becomes vacant because of removal, death, resignation or other cause, the city council shall appoint another person to fill the office. Standby officers shall be designated numbers 1, 2 and 3, as the case may be.

(b)     The qualifications of each standby officer should be carefully investigated, and the city council may request the chief of police to aid in the investigation of any prospective appointee. No examination or investigation shall be made without the consent of the prospective appointee.

(c)     Each standby officer shall take an oath of office required of the person occupying the office for which he or she stands by. Persons appointed as standby officers shall serve in their posts as standby officers at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed and replaced at any time with or without cause.

(d)     Each standby officer shall have the following duties:

(1)     To inform himself or herself of the duties of the office for which he or she stands by. Employees of the city will assist him or her and shall provide each standby officer with a copy of this chapter.

(2)     To keep informed of the business and affairs of the city to the extent necessary to enable him or her to fill his or her post competently. For this purpose the city may arrange information meetings and require attendance.

(3)     To immediately report himself or herself ready for duty in the event of a state of war emergency or in the event of a state of emergency or a local emergency at the place and in the method previously designated in the city emergency plan.

(4)     To fill the post for which he or she has been appointed when the regular council member is unavailable during a state of war emergency. Standby officers numbers 2 and 3 shall substitute in succession for standby officer number 1 in the same way that the standby officer is substituted in place of the regular council member. He or she shall serve until the regular council member becomes available or until the election or appointment of a new regular council member.

(e)     Should all members of the city council, including all standby members, be unavailable, temporary officers shall be appointed to serve until a regular member or a standby member becomes available or until the election or appointment of a new regular or standby member. Temporary officers shall be appointed as follows:

(1)     By the chairperson of the board of supervisors of the county, and if he or she is unavailable,

(2)     By the chairperson of the board of supervisors of any other county within one hundred fifty miles of the city, beginning with the nearest and most populated county and going to the farthest and least populated, and if he or she is unavailable,

(3)     By the mayor of any city within one hundred fifty miles of the city, beginning with the nearest and most populated city and going to the farthest and least populated.

(f)      As used in this chapter, the word “unavailable” means that a council member is either killed, missing or so seriously injured as to be unable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his or her duties. The city council or any remaining available members of such body, including standby officers who are serving on the city council, shall settle any question as to whether a particular member is unavailable. (Ord. 1749 § 2, 2002)

Chapter 11.28 STANDARDIZED EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS (SEMS)
11.28.010 Standardized Emergency Management Systems (SEMS).
The city adopted the state of California’s Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS) to manage emergency response and recovery activities. (Ord. 1749 § 2, 2002)

Chapter 11.30 SEVERABILITY
11.30.010 Severability.
Invalidity of any provision not to affect other provisions. If any provision of this title nor application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications, and to this end the provisions of this title are declared to be severable. (Ord. 1749 § 2, 2002)

Title 12 (RESERVED)

Title 13 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Note
Chapter 13.04 PROHIBITED CONDUCT
Chapter 13.08 ENCROACHMENTS—PERMITS
Chapter 13.12 EXCAVATION, CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIRS—PERMITS ,
Chapter 13.16 NEWSRACKS
Chapter 13.17 STREET CLOSURES DURING SPECIAL EVENTS
Chapter 13.20 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY

Note
*       For regulations governing weed and rubbish on streets and sidewalks, see Ch. 9.28 of this code.

Chapter 13.04 PROHIBITED CONDUCT
13.04.010 Excavating streets.
It is unlawful for any person to dig in, excavate, tear up or injure any street of the city without express authority therefor, and without complying with all the provisions of this code and other ordinances of the city relating thereto. (Prior code § 17.1)

 

13.04.020 Hauling cesspool contents over streets.
It is unlawful for any person to move the contents of any cesspool on or along any public highway, unless such contents are placed in a vehicle or receptacle sufficiently strong and tight to prevent any leakage. Such vehicle or receptacle shall be tightly covered so as to prevent any offensive odor coming therefrom. (Prior code § 17.2)

 

13.04.030 Dirt and fertilizer hauling.
It is unlawful for any person to haul any dirt, sand, gravel, manure, fertilizer or similar material upon or along any paved, oiled or macadamized street in the city, unless contained in a box or receptacle sufficiently tight to prevent the same from sifting or dropping upon such street. (Prior code § 17.3)

 

13.04.040 Draining water on streets.
(a)     No person shall:

(1)     Drain or permit water to run onto any public highway, from premises owned, occupied or in possession of any person, which water as aforesaid shall or may endanger the life, limb, health or property of any person, or which shall cause injury to such public highway;

(2)     Drain, or permit water to drain from any premises owned, occupied or in his or her possession, which causes injury to any public highway;

(3)     Drain, or permit water to be drained from any swimming pool without having first obtained a permit therefor from the department of public works and which permit shall be issued when the applicant has paid the appropriate permit fee per the master schedule of fees to the city and when the department of public works determines that such drainage will not conflict with any downstream construction.

(b)     Every person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1967 § 1, 2012; Ord. 1416 § 1, 1983; Ord. 1163 § 1, 1972; Ord. 1044 § 1, 1967; prior code § 17.5)

 

13.04.050 Notice to cease drainage and make repairs.
When notice of the conditions enumerated in Section 13.04.040 is given by the director of public works to any person permitting or suffering such damage to any highway or permitting or suffering any such condition to exist, such person shall immediately cease and discontinue such drainage or diversion of waters, or shall discontinue and prevent such drainage, seepage or overflow, and shall repair the highway at his or her own expense. (Ord. 1163 § 2, 1972; prior code § 17.6)

 

13.04.060 Repairs by city.
If any person is notified as provided by Section 13.04.050 and fails, neglects or refuses to cease and discontinue such diversion, or to discontinue and prevent the drainage, seepage or overflow of such waters, or to make the repairs required, the city may make such repairs and may also perform such work as is necessary to prevent the further drainage, diversion, overflow or seepage of such waters. (Prior code § 17.7)

 

13.04.070 Recovery of city costs.
The city may recover in an action at law, in any court of competent jurisdiction, the amount expended for repairs and work as authorized by Section 13.04.060 and in addition thereto, the sum of ten dollars for each day such drainage, diversion, overflow or seepage of such waters is permitted to continue after the service of the notice as required by Section 13.04.050, together with the costs and expenses incurred in such action. (Prior code § 17.8)

 

13.04.080 Private stenciling of curbs.
It is unlawful for any person to stencil or restencil house numbers on curbs in the public right-of-way. This section shall not apply to any person who has a contract with the city to stencil or restencil house numbers on curbs in the public right-of-way. (Ord. 1527 § 1, 1988)

Chapter 13.08 ENCROACHMENTS—PERMITS
Note
*       Prior history; prior code §§ 17.21—17.30; Ords. 1369 and 1536.

 

13.08.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

(1)     “Encroachment” includes any tower, post, pole, pole line, pipe, pipe line, conduit, wire, cable, fence, bench, kiosk, stand, steps, porch, building, or any other structure or object of any kind or character not particularly mentioned in this section which is placed on, over, or along any portion of a public highway. “Encroachment” does not include:

(A)    Newsracks installed and maintained in accordance with the laws of the city with reference thereto;

(B)    Signs installed and maintained in accordance with the laws of the city with reference thereto;

(C)    Trees and shrubs planted and maintained in accordance with the laws of the city with reference thereto;

(D)    Portable and usual garbage and rubbish receptacles when conforming to and placed in accordance with the laws of the city with reference thereto;

(E)     United States mail boxes: or

(F)     Any of the structures or objects listed or referred to above, if placed, made, changed or removed by any city or her public official or employee while acting within the scope of his or her office or employment.

(2)     “Public highway” includes all or any part of the entire width of a public street, alley or other way, including the sidewalk and parkway and any other public property immediately adjacent to the highway, whether or not such entire area is actually used for highway purposes. (Ord. 1537 § 1, 1989)

 

13.08.020 Compliance.
It is unlawful for any person to place, make, change or remove an encroachment without complying with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1537 § 1, 1989)

 

13.08.030 Permit required.
(a)     A permit, issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be required in order to place, make, change or remove an encroachment. Any work done under the authority of a permit so issued shall be done in accordance with the terms and conditions of such permit.

(b)     Each permittee shall present for inspection a copy of the permit to any public official upon his or her request therefor, made at any reasonable time and place. (Ord. 1537 § 1, 1989)

 

13.08.040 Permit application.
Application for a permit pursuant to this chapter shall be made to the director of public works on a form provided by the director and shall be accompanied by an application fee, in an amount established by resolution of the city council. The application shall specify the following:

(1)     The nature, location and duration of the encroachment;

(2)     The name, address, and legal status of the applicant;

(3)     The name and address of the person who will be responsible for the encroachment; and

(4)     Such other information as the director deems necessary, including, but not limited to, plans and specifications for the work contemplated. (Ord. 1537 § 1, 1989)

 

13.08.050 Hold harmless agreement.
On each application, the applicant or his or her agent shall sign a statement that he or she agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city and its officers, employees, servants and agents from any liability or responsibility for any accident, loss or damage to persons or property happening or occurring as a proximate result of the encroachment and all work related thereto. (Ord. 1537 § 1, 1989)

 

13.08.060 Issuance of permit.
Prior to deciding whether to approve or deny a permit, the director of public works shall give the owner of the property immediately abutting the location of the proposed encroachment written notice of the application. The notice shall describe the encroachment and shall provide that within ten days from the date of the notice, the abutting property owner may respond, orally or in writing, to the director regarding the application. The director shall approve the permit upon finding that:

(1)     The application is complete and all of the information provided by the applicant is true and correct:

(2)     The encroachment is reasonably necessary and is consistent with the public interest;

(3)     The encroachment will not cause any unreasonable interference with the public’s use of the highway;

(4)     The encroachment will not cause any unreasonable interference with the abutting property owner’s use of his or her property; and

(5)     The application fee and all charges, deposits and insurance certificates required hereunder have been paid to, or filed with, the city. (Ord. 1537 § 1, 1989)

 

13.08.070 Conditions imposed.
The director of public works is empowered to conditionally issue a permit where such conditions are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this code and to carry out the purposes of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to:

(1)     The duration of the term of the permit;

(2)     The public highway be restored to its previous condition, or the entire expense therefor be paid by the permittee;

(3)     The location and manner in which the work be done, including compliance with all applicable laws and any necessary safety measures;

(4)     The encroachment be maintained in good repair;

(5)     The amount of charges and security deposits to be paid, if any. The amount and form of such charges and deposits shall be set by the director, based upon the estimated cost to the city of administration, engineering, field inspection, and other services required; and

(6)     The type and amount of insurance to be carried by the applicant to cover the encroachment and all work related thereto. The city shall be named as an additional insured.

(7)     The recordation with the Los Angeles County recorders office of a notice of encroachment and encroachment permit against the permittee’s adjacent private property, giving notice of the existence of the encroachment and the encroachment permit. (Ord. 1930 § 1, 2009; Ord. 37 § 1, 1989)

 

13.08.080 Relocation and removal.
All permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall contain a provision stating that if the director of public works determines that the future improvement of the public highway necessitates the relocation or removal of the encroachment, then the permittee will relocate or move the same at his or her own expense. In such event, the director shall serve on the permittee a written demand that the encroachment be relocated or removed. This demand may specify the place of relocation and shall provide a reasonable time, under the circumstances, within which the work of relocation or the removal must be completed. (Ord. 1537 § 1, 1989)

 

13.08.090 Permits nontransferable.
Permits issued under the authority of this chapter are nontransferable. (Ord. 1537 § 1, 1989)

 

13.08.100 Revocation of permit.
The director of public works shall revoke a permit if the director finds that:

(1)     The work thereunder is not being conducted in compliance with the provisions of this chapter;

(2)     The permittee has failed to comply with an order to remove or relocate the encroachment;

(3)     The work, as conducted, constitutes a public nuisance or is detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare; or

(4)     The applicant falsified information on the permit application. (Ord. 1537 § 1, 1989)

 

13.08.110 Appeals.
Within ten days following the approval or denial of a permit by the director of public works, the applicant or the abutting property owner may appeal to the city council by written notice filed with the city clerk. Within ten days following the revocation of a permit by the director of public works, the permittee may appeal to the city council by written notice filed with the city clerk. The council shall hear and decide the appeal within thirty days of filing, but may continue the matter for good cause. The applicant or permittee and, when the appeal is from the approval or denial of a permit, the abutting property owner shall be given ten days prior written notice of the time and place of the hearing. The council may, by resolution, impose a fee to cover the cost of appeals. (Ord. 1537 § 1, 1989)

 

13.08.120 Removal of encroachment by order.
(a)     The director of public works may order the immediate removal of any encroachment which:

(1)     Has been placed or is being maintained without a permit;

(2)     Obstructs or prevents the use of the highway by the public:

(3)     Causes water to be impounded within any public highway to the damage of the highway; or

(4)     Consists of refuse.

(b)     Where a permit has been obtained, the permittee shall be served with written notice of the order for removal. Where no permit has been obtained, written notice shall be given to the owner, occupant or person in apparent possession of the encroachment, or to any other person causing or suffering the encroachment to exist. The notice shall describe the encroachment complained of with reasonable certainty as to its character and location. In lieu of personal service, service of notice may made by registered mail and by posting for a period of three days a copy of the notice on the encroachment described in the notice. (Ord. 1537 § 1, 1989)

 

13.08.130 Summary removal by city.
If a permittee or other responsible party fails to comply with an order or demand of the director of public works made pursuant to this chapter or if the director determines that the encroachment creates an immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare, the director may summarily remove the encroachment and, if reasonably practicable, store any materials obtained therefrom. The city shall have an action to recover the expense of such removal, storage, costs and expenses of suit, and in addition thereto the sum of ten dollars for each day such encroachment remains after the expiration of the time for removal. After sixty days, the director may sell, destroy, or otherwise dispose of any materials stored at his or her discretion. (Ord. 1537 § 1, 1989)

 

13.08.140 State law to prevail over chapter.
This chapter shall not limit the powers and duties vested by law in the public utilities commission of the state, and in the event of any conflict with regard to the powers and duties given by law to the public utilities commission, those of the public utilities commission shall prevail. (Ord. 1537 § 1, 1989)

Chapter 13.12 EXCAVATION, CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIRS—PERMITS ,
Note
*       For provisions of Uniform Building Code and Los Angeles County building code governing excavation, construction and repair, see Chs. 1901 and 1904 respectively.

**    Prior history; prior code Chapters 17.40—17.59 and Ord. 1042.

 

13.12.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

(1)     “Agent” means every employee or servant of any other person and every contractor doing any of the work described in this chapter for any other person;

(2)     “Highway” means all streets, avenues, alleys and other public places in the city. (Ord. 1163 § 3, 1972)

 

13.12.020 Permit required.
It is unlawful for any person to construct any sidewalk, curb, gutter or driveway of cement, concrete materials or any other material upon any of the highways of the city, or to construct any pipe or other kind of structure along the gutter lines or along, upon, or beneath any portion of a highway at approaches to driveways, or to make any excavations in any of the highways, without first securing a permit to do so from the city. (Ord. 1163 § 3, 1972)

 

13.12.030 Permit for subdivisions not required.
No permits shall be required for the performance of any work provided for under the provisions of Title 20, relating to subdivisions, and the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to such work.

The securing of permits and payment of fees under the provisions of this chapter shall not be required for the construction of cement concrete sidewalks, curbs, gutters or driveways, or for the construction of any such work with other material, of those who are doing work in connection with subdivisions approved by the city; provided, that the work in such subdivisions is done either before the approval of the final maps thereof or under an agreement in lieu of improvements as set forth in Section 11612 of the Subdivision Map Act of the State and in Title 20 of this code. (Ord. 1163 § 3, 1972)

 

13.12.040 Exhibiting permit.
A copy of the permit for work regulated by this chapter shall at all times, during the construction thereof, be in the possession of the person in charge of such work, and shall be exhibited to the director of public works or his or her authorized agents or inspectors thereof on demand. (Ord. 1163 § 3, 1972)

 

13.12.050 Fees established—Collection.
The fees enumerated in Section 13.12.060 are established for the issuance of any of the permits required by this chapter and all such fees shall be collected in advance or at the time the permit issued. (Ord. 1163 § 3, 1972)

 

13.12.060 Enumeration of fees.
An applicant for a permit required by this chapter shall submit a description and drawing of the particular kind and amount of work to be performed pursuant to the permit to the director of public works or his or her authorized agent. The applicant shall post a reconstruction deposit with the city clerk in accordance with the schedule established pursuant to resolution of the city council. In addition, the applicant shall pay to the city permit fees, established pursuant to resolution of the city council, for the purpose set forth in Section 13.12.070. (Ord. 1536 § 11, 1989; Ord. 1163 § 3, 1972)

 

13.12.070 Purpose of fees.
The permit fees are charged to pay the cost and expense of setting line and grade stakes, inspection of the work and final inspection by the city engineer. (Ord. 1163 § 3, 1972)

 

13.12.080 Expenditures by city—Refund of reconstruction deposits.
The moneys thus collected shall be retained by the city to defray the expense of replacing the surface of the highways or of a gutter or sidewalk excavated or removed under such permits, if the work shall be performed by the city. If the quantities of such improvements replaced by the city are less in square feet or lineal feet than the quantities given on the permits, then such difference in quantities multiplied by the applicable unit rates above specified shall be the amount to be returned to the permittee. In the event the permittee performs the necessary work to resurface or replace the surface of the highways or of gutter or sidewalk excavated, and such resurface or replacement is in accordance with the city standards and specifications, inspected and approved by the director of public works, the reconstruction deposit shall be refunded by the city to the permittee upon his or her written request and approval by the director of public works. (Ord. 1163 § 3, 1972)

 

13.12.090 Deficiency—Payment of balance.
If the area in square feet or lineal feet of any such highway improvements constructed by the city are more than the quantities shown on the permit, then the permittee shall be required to pay the city for the excess or difference at the applicable unit rates above specified. (Ord. 1163 § 3, 1972)

 

13.12.100 Failure to obtain permit.
In addition to any other penalties provided by law for failure to obtain a permit for the installation of driveways as provided in this chapter, any person who installs a driveway before first obtaining a permit shall thereafter obtain a permit upon request being made by the director of public works and the price to be charged therefor shall be double that provided in this chapter for a permit obtained before doing the work. In addition to obtaining such permit for work done prior to the issuance of the permit, the work shall be made to conform to the terms of the permit. (Ord. 1163 § 3, 1972)

 

13.12.110 Grade and line stakes to be set—Exception.
No person shall commence the construction of any cement concrete sidewalk, curb, gutter or driveway until the grade and line stakes for such work have been set or approved by the director of public works, unless permission to do so has been endorsed upon the permit therefor by the director of public works. (Ord. 1163 § 3, 1972)

 

13.12.120 Standard specifications for public works construction—Adopted.
The construction of any improvements within any highway shall conform to the “Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction,” copyright 2002 by BNI Publications, Inc., together with the “2004 Supplement,” copyright 2003 by Public Works Standards, Inc., and all related supplements hereinafter published, and the “Standard Plans for Public Works Construction,” copyright 1997 by BNI Publications, Inc., together with the “1999 Supplement,” and all related supplements hereinafter published, and shall be in accordance with plans approved by the director of public works or the city engineer. The construction of any improvements within any highway shall conform to the city of Glendora’s standard designs and specifications, approved by the director of public works or city engineer. In the event of any conflicts between any of the foregoing documents, the director of public works or the city engineer shall have discretion to determine which requirements shall apply and control the design and construction of the improvements. (Ord. 1803 §§ 1, 2, 2004; Ord. 1163 § 3, 1972)

 

13.12.130 Temporary driveways.
Driveways which are to be constructed on streets where there is no curb or wall in place, or where no such curb is to be constructed under the same permit, or where the existing pavement of the roadway of such street does not conform to the official established grade of such street or where no such official grade has been established and none proposed to be established prior to the construction of a driveway, may be constructed of asphaltic or other materials conforming to the physical conditions existing at the location where such driveway is to be constructed, but such driveway shall be so constructed that it will not impede or interfere with the free flow of drainage along existing gutters or to cause any hazard or interference with vehicular or pedestrian traffic along the street. (Ord. 1163 § 3, 1972)

 

13.12.140 Permit for temporary driveway.
When a permit is issued for the construction of a temporary driveway, the owner of the property served by the driveway will be required at his or her own cost and expense to remove the driveway and construct a new driveway in accordance with the standards mentioned in this chapter, whenever curbs or pavements are constructed in accordance with the official established grade along the street upon which such driveway is located and when a permit is issued for the construction of such a driveway, the words: “Temporary Permit” shall be written on top of the permit. (Ord. 1163 § 3, 1972)

 

13.12.150 Construction over improved sidewalk.
Whenever a person desires a driveway constructed over and across a sidewalk upon any street or highway in the city which is now improved with curb and sidewalk, or with either of them, or which may hereafter be so improved, he or she shall construct or have constructed a driveway from the outer edge of the sidewalk line to the gutter line of such street or highway, and shall also protect such sidewalk along the property line in such a manner as may be required by the director of public works. If he or she neglects, fails or refuses to construct or have such driveway constructed, he or she shall not be allowed to use such space as a driveway. (Ord. 1163 § 3, 1972)

 

13.12.160 Leaving driveway openings in curbs.
It is unlawful for any person or for the agent of any person having a contract for the improvement of any public street or highway of the city with curbs to leave any driveway opening in the curb at the request of any person, unless such person shall authorize such contractor to construct a driveway from the outer line of such sidewalk now in place or to the property line if no such sidewalk is now in place or is to be constructed to the gutter line of such street or highway, or such person shall have either constructed such work him or herself or have such work constructed by some other person, and if such work is not completed before such contractor shall set the forms for the curb along such portion of the street or highway, then the contractor shall not leave any space for a driveway in the curb. (Ord. 1163 § 3, 1972)

 

13.12.170 Excavations—Filling with earth.
It shall be the duty of every person making any excavation in any of the highways of the city to replace the earth excavated to the original surface of such highway with well-flooded and tamped earth so that the same, when it has become settled, will remain at the same level as the surface adjacent thereto. (Ord. 1163 § 3, 1972)

 

13.12.180 Failure to comply with chapter.
Whenever the director of public works has rejected any of the work specified in this chapter, and the person to whom the permit therefor was issued refuses to do such work over again and bring such work within the provisions of this chapter or other ordinances governing the same within thirty days after notice to do so from the director of public works, the director of public works shall report such fact in writing to the city council, whose duty shall be to order the city engineer to employ the necessary labor and purchase the necessary materials to perform such work in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the city, and the cost thereof together with a reasonable attorney fee to be fixed by the court shall be recoverable by the city in any action brought therefor by the city in any court having jurisdiction of such action. (Ord. 1163 § 3, 1972)

Chapter 13.16 NEWSRACKS
13.16.010 Purpose.
The purpose of the provisions of this chapter is to establish a comprehensive set of regulations applicable to newsracks within the public right-of-way. (Ord. 1400 § 2, 1982)

 

13.16.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as set forth in this section, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:

“Director of public works” means the director or the designee of the director.

“Newsrack” means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used, or maintained for the display and sale of newspapers, or periodicals or other printed matter.

“Parkway” means that area between the sidewalk and the curb of any street, and where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto. Parkway also includes any area within a roadway which is not open to vehicular travel.

“Roadway” means that portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.

“Sidewalk” means any surface within a street provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians.

“Street” means all the public right-of-way dedicated to public use for public street purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, and sidewalks. (Ord. 1400 § 2, 1982)

 

13.16.030 Registration required.
(a)     No person shall install or maintain any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any street without first registering the newsrack with the city and without otherwise complying with the provisions of this chapter. Such registration shall be in writing by the owner of the newsrack or his or her authorized agent, shall be filed with the director of public works and shall contain the following:

(1)     The name, address and telephone number .of the owner of the newsrack and the name and address of the person to whom any notice pursuant to this chapter should be given;

(2)     The location at which the newsrack is to be installed and maintained;

(3)     An executed document, approved as to form by the city attorney, by which the registrant agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, employees and agents from any claim, demand or judgment in favor of any person, arising out of the location, installation, maintenance or removal of the newsrack;

(4)     A certificate of insurance evidencing that a liability insurance policy in minimum amounts set by the director of public works has been issued, naming the city as a co-insured, and containing a provision that the policy cannot be cancelled except upon ten days’ written notice to the city of the fact of such cancellation. If such insurance is cancelled at any time during the time the newsrack is installed or maintained on public property, said newsrack shall be removed forthwith by the registrant;

(5)     A filing fee, as established by resolution of the city council, to cover the cost of inspection.

(b)     No encroachment permit shall be required pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 13.04, if the newsrack is registered in accordance with this section. (Ord. 1400 § 2, 1982)

 

13.16.040 Standard for installation, maintenance and removal.
(a)     Any newsrack which is installed or maintained in any street, shall comply with the following standards:

(1)     The newsrack shall rest entirely outside the roadway and shall in whole or in part rest upon, in or over the sidewalk or parkway.

(2)     The newsrack shall not exceed sixty inches in height, thirty inches in width, or twenty-four inches in thickness.

(3)     The newsrack shall only be placed parallel to a curb or the wall of a building. Newsracks placed parallel to the curb shall be placed with the back not less than eighteen inches nor more than twenty-four inches from the edge of the curb. Newsracks placed parallel to the wall of a building shall be placed with the back not more than six inches from the wall. No newsrack shall be placed or maintained opposite a newsstand or another newsrack.

(4)     The newsrack shall not be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any property not owned by the owner of the newsrack or to any permanently fixed object; provided, however, the newsrack may be securely anchored to the ground or sidewalk.

(5)     The newsrack shall be installed on a single or multiple pedestal-type or modular-type base; provided, however, not more than four newsracks shall be installed on any one base.

(6)     Newsracks may be placed next to each other; provided, however, no group of newsracks shall extend more than fifteen feet along a curb or wall, and no such group of newsracks shall be located within five feet of any other group of newsracks.

(7)     The newsrack shall not be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the printed matter sold therein.

(8)     The newsrack shall be maintained in a clean, neat, safe and secure condition and in good repair at all times.

(9)     The newsrack shall not be installed or maintained to:

(A)    Within five feet of any marked crosswalk;

(B)    Within fifteen feet of any curb return;

(C)    Within five feet of any utility meter or service box;

(D)    Within five feet of any driveway;

(E)     Within six feet of any bus bench;

(F)     Within five feet ahead of, and twenty-five feet to the rear of, any sign marking a designated bus stop;

(G)    Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility;

(H)    Within three feet of any area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs or trees; provided, however, that if the planting area and the adjacent sidewalk or parkway area are separated by a wall or fence in excess of three feet in height and the planting area and the parkway are on substantially the same grade, the restriction shall not apply; or

(I)      Within three feet of any display window of any building abutting the sidewalk or parkway or in such manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window for display purposes.

(10)   The newsrack shall not be installed or maintained so as to:

(A)    Cause, create or constitute a hazard to, or unreasonably interfere with, or obstruct the flow of, vehicular traffic or pedestrians;

(B)    Endanger persons or property; or

(C)    Unreasonably obstruct or interfere with access to, or the use and enjoyment of, abutting property.

(b)     Upon the removal of any newsrack which has been anchored to the ground or sidewalk, the director of public works shall be so notified and any resulting condition shall be repaired, including the filling in of any holes left in the sidewalk, to the satisfaction of the director. (Ord. 1400 § 2, 1982)

 

13.16.050 Display of harmful matter prohibited.
The provisions of Chapter 9.51 of this code shall apply to the display of harmful material, as that term is defined in Section 9.51.010 of this code, in newsracks installed or maintained on any public sidewalk or parkway. (Ord. 1725 § 2, 2000; Ord. 1400 § 1, 1982)

 

13.16.060 Newsrack violation.
(a)     Whenever the director of public works is advised that a newsrack has been installed or is being maintained in violation of this chapter, he or she shall so notify the person in whose name the newsrack is registered pursuant to Section 13.16.030. Such notice shall state the nature of the violation, the intention to impound the newsrack if the violation is not corrected or a hearing is not requested before the director of public works within ten days after the giving of such notice, and the procedure for requesting such a hearing.

A timely request for a hearing shall stay any impounding, provided that if the violation is not corrected within five days after the decision at such hearing becomes final, the director of public works may impound the newsrack in accordance with Section 13.16.070.

(b)     Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, in the case of any violation of this chapter which creates an immediate danger to public health, safety or welfare, which violation cannot be corrected by moving or otherwise repositioning an unanchored newsrack, said newsrack may be summarily impounded by the director of public works. (Ord. 1400 § 1, 1982)

 

13.16.070 Impounded newsracks.
(a)     Whenever a newsrack is impounded pursuant to Section 13.16.060, the director of public works shall forthwith notify the person in whose name the newsrack is registered pursuant to Section 13.16.030. Such notice shall state the date the newsrack was impounded, the reasons thereof, and the procedure for claiming the newsrack. If the newsrack was summarily impounded, such notice shall also state the procedure for requesting a hearing before the director of public works.

(b)     The registrant or other person who provides satisfactory proof of ownership of the impounded newsrack may, at any time within thirty days of the notice of impound, obtain the return of the newsrack and its contents upon payment of an impound fee in an amount equal to the reasonable cost to the city of removing and storing the newsrack.

(c)     If, after a hearing pursuant to Section 13.16.080, the impounded newsrack is found not to have been in violation of this chapter, the newsrack shall be returned to the registrant or other claimant without payment of any impound fee or, if an impound fee has previously been paid, the impound fee shall be refunded.

(d)     Upon failure of the registrant or other claimant to claim an impounded newsrack and pay the impound fees within the thirty day period, the newsrack shall be deemed to be unclaimed property in possession of the police department. The chief of police or the designee of the chief shall sell or otherwise dispose of such newsrack and its contents in accordance with law. (Ord. 1400 § 1, 1982)

 

13.16.080 Hearing procedure.
(a)     Within ten days of the notice of violation or notice of impound of a newsrack summarily impounded, the person in whose name the newsrack is registered pursuant to Section 13.16.030, or other person who provides satisfactory proof of ownership may request a hearing before the director of public works. The request shall be in writing, shall state the basis thereof, and shall be filed with the director.

The hearing shall be held within five working days of the filing of the request. At the hearing any person may present evidence or argument as to whether the newsrack has violated this chapter. Within two working days after the close of the hearing, the director of public works shall render a decision in writing. Notice of the decision shall forthwith be given to the person who requested the hearing.

(b)     Any person who requested a hearing before the director of public works may, within ten days after the decision was given, appeal such decision to the city council. The appeal shall be in writing, shall state the basis upon which the appeal is made, and shall be filed with the city clerk.

The city council shall hear the appeal within thirty days of the filing of the request. At the hearing, any person may present evidence or argument as to whether the newsrack has violated this chapter. At the next regular meeting of the city council after the close of the hearing, the council shall render a decision in writing. Notice of the decision shall forthwith be given to the person who made the appeal. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 1400 § 1, 1982)

 

13.16.090 Notices.
Notices required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be given in writing by personal service or United States postal service, certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the person to be notified at his or her last known address. The giving of notice under this chapter shall be deemed to have occurred as of the date of personal service or of the date of deposit in the course of transmission of the United States postal service. (Ord. 1400 § 2, 1982)

 

13.16.100 Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all newsracks, whether installed or maintained prior to, or after, the effective date of any of the provisions herein. Those newsracks installed prior to the effective date of any provision of this chapter shall be brought into compliance with said provisions within thirty days of the effective date thereof. Any newsrack not brought into compliance within the aforementioned time period shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1400 § 2, 1982)

 

13.16.110 Unmarked machines.
Where the director of public works finds that a newsrack does not have the name, address and telephone number of the owner thereof placed upon such newsrack, in compliance with Section 17570 et seq., of the Business and Professions Code of the state, he or she shall make every reasonable effort to ascertain the owner thereof. If he or she is unable to determine ownership, he or she shall summarily impound such newsrack and, notwithstanding Section 13.16.070, the newsrack shall immediately be deemed to be unclaimed property in possession of the police department. The chief of police or the designee of the chief shall sell or otherwise dispose of such newsrack and its contents in accordance with law. (Ord. 1400 § 2, 1982)

Chapter 13.17 STREET CLOSURES DURING SPECIAL EVENTS
13.17.010 Temporary street closures for special events.
Pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 21101, subsection (e), the city manager or his or her designee, after soliciting recommendations from the director of public works and the chief of police, may temporarily close all or a portion of any local street, except a state highway, for celebrations, parades, local special events and other purposes when, in the opinion of the city manager or his or her designee that such closure is necessary for the safety and protection of persons who are to use that portion of the street during the temporary closing. (Ord. 1767, 2002)

Chapter 13.20 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
13.20.010 Purpose.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide a uniform and comprehensive set of regulations and standards for the permitting, development, siting, installation, design, operation and maintenance of wireless telecommunications facilities in the city’s public right-of-way. These regulations are intended to prescribe clear and reasonable criteria to assess and process applications in a consistent and expeditious manner, while reducing the impacts associated with wireless telecommunications facilities. This chapter provides standards necessary: (1) for the preservation of the public right-of-way (“PROW”) in the city for the maximum benefit and use of the public; (2) to promote and protect public health and safety, community welfare, visual resources and the aesthetic quality of the city consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the general plan; and (3) to provide for the orderly, managed and efficient development of wireless telecommunications facilities in accordance with the state and federal laws, rules and regulations, including those regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (“FCC”) and California Public Utilities Commission (“CPUC”); and (4) to ensure that the use and enjoyment of the PROW is not inconvenienced by the use of the PROW for the placement of wireless facilities. The city recognizes the importance of wireless facilities to provide high-quality communications service to the residents and businesses within the city, and the city also recognizes its obligation to comply with applicable federal and state laws. This chapter shall be constructed and applied in consistency with the provisions of state and federal laws, and the rules and regulations of FCC and CPUC. In the event of any inconsistency between any such laws, rules and regulations and this chapter, the laws, rules and regulations shall control. (Ord. 2040 § 5, 2019; Ord. 2039 § 5, 2019)

 

13.20.020 Definitions.
“Accessory equipment” means any and all on-site equipment, including, without limitation, back-up generators and power supply units, cabinets, coaxial and fiber optic cables, connections, equipment buildings, shelters, radio transceivers, transmitters, pedestals, splice boxes, fencing and shielding, surface location markers, meters, regular power supply units, fans, air conditioning units, cables and wiring, to which an antenna is attached in order to facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunication services.

 

“Antenna” means that specific device for transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency or other signals for purposes of wireless telecommunications services. “Antenna” is specific to the antenna portion of a wireless telecommunications facility.

“Antenna array” shall mean two or more antennas having active elements extending in one or more directions, and directional antennas mounted upon and rotated through a vertical mast or tower interconnecting the beam and antenna support, all of which elements are deemed to be part of the antenna.

“Base station” shall have the meaning as set forth in Title 47 Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) Section 1.40001(b)(1), or any successor provision. This means a structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network (regardless of the technological configuration, and encompassing DAS and small cells). “Base station” does not encompass a tower or any equipment associated with a tower. Base station includes, without limitation:

(1)     Equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.

(2)     Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems and small cells).

(3)     Any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the city under this chapter, supports or houses equipment described in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this definition that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing that support.

(4)     “Base station” does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant application is filed under this chapter, does not support or house equipment described in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this definition. Other structures that do not host wireless telecommunications facilities are not “base stations.”

As an illustration and not a limitation, the FCC’s definition of “base station” refers to any structure that actually supports wireless equipment even though it was not originally intended for that purpose. Examples include, but are not limited to, wireless facilities mounted on buildings, utility poles, light standards or traffic signals. A structure without wireless equipment replaced with a new structure designed to bear the additional weight from wireless equipment constitutes a base station.

“Cellular” means an analog or digital wireless telecommunications technology that is based on a system of interconnected neighboring cell sites.

“City” means the city of Glendora.

“Code” means the Glendora Municipal Code.

“Collocation” bears the following meanings:

(1)     For the purposes of any eligible facilities request, the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(2), as may be amended, which defines that term as “[t]he mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes.” As an illustration and not a limitation, the FCC’s definition means to add transmission equipment to an existing facility and does not necessarily refer to two or more different facility operators in the same location; and

(2)     For all other purposes, the same as defined in 47 CFR 1.6002(g)(1) and (2), as may be amended, which defines that term as: (a) Mounting or installing an antenna facility on a pre-existing structure; and/or (b) Modifying a structure for the purpose of mounting or installing an antenna facility on that structure.

“Collocation facility” means the eligible support structure on, or immediately adjacent to, which a collocation is proposed, or a wireless telecommunications facility that includes collocation facilities. (See, Gov. Code, Section 65850.6(d).)

“COW” means a “cell on wheels,” which is a portable, self-contained wireless telecommunications facility that can be moved to a location and set up to provide wireless telecommunication services, which facility is temporarily rolled in, or temporarily installed, at a location. Under this chapter, the maximum time a facility can be installed to be considered a COW is five days. A COW is normally vehicle-mounted and contains a telescoping boom as the antenna support structure.

“Distributed antenna system” or “DAS” means a network of spatially separated antennas (nodes) connected to a common source (a hub) via a transport medium (often fiber optics) that provide wireless telecommunications service within a specific geographic area or building. DAS includes the transport medium, the hub, and any other equipment to which the DAS network or its antennas or nodes are connected to provide wireless telecommunication services.

“Eligible facilities request” means any request for modification to an existing eligible support structure that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such structure, involving:

(1)     Collocation of new transmission equipment;

(2)     Removal of transmission equipment;

(3)     Replacement of transmission equipment (replacement does not include completely replacing the underlying support structure); or

(4)     Hardening through structural enhancement where such hardening is necessary to accomplish the eligible facilities request, but does not include replacement of the underlying support structure.

“Eligible facilities request” does not include modifications or replacements when an eligible support structure was constructed or deployed without proper local review, was not required to undergo local review, or involves equipment that was not properly approved. “Eligible facilities request” does include collocation facilities satisfying all the requirements for a non-discretionary collocation facility pursuant to Government Code Section 65850.6.

“Eligible support structure” means any support structure located in the PROW that is existing at the time the relevant application is filed with the city under this chapter.

“Existing” means a support structure, wireless telecommunications facility, or accessory equipment that has been reviewed and approved under the city’s applicable zoning or siting process, or under another applicable state or local regulatory review process, and lawfully constructed prior to the time the relevant application is filed under this chapter. However, a support structure, wireless telecommunications facility, or accessory equipment that has not been reviewed and approved because it was not in a zoned area when it was built, but was lawfully constructed, is “existing” for purposes of this chapter. “Existing” does not apply to any structure that: (1) was illegally constructed without all proper local agency approvals; or (2) was constructed in noncompliance with such approvals. “Existing” does not apply where an existing support structure is proposed to be replaced in furtherance of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility.

“Facility(ies)” means wireless telecommunications facility(ies).

“FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission.

“FCC shot clock” means the presumptively reasonable time frame within which the city generally must act on a given wireless application, as defined by the FCC and as may be amended from time to time.

“Ground-mounted” means mounted to a pole, tower or other freestanding structure which is specifically constructed for the purpose of supporting an antenna or wireless telecommunications facility and placed directly on the ground at grade level.

“Lattice tower” means an open framework structure used to support one or more antennas, typically with three or four support legs.

“Located within (or in) the public right-of-way” includes any facility which in whole or in part, itself or as part of another structure, rests upon, in, over or under the PROW.

“Modification” means a change to an existing wireless telecommunications facility that involves any of the following: collocation, expansion, alteration, enlargement, intensification, reduction, or augmentation, including, but not limited to, changes in size, shape, color, visual design, or exterior material. “Modification” does not include repair, replacement or maintenance if those actions do not involve whatsoever any expansion, alteration, enlargement, intensification, reduction, or augmentation of an existing wireless telecommunications facility.

“Monopole” means a structure composed of a pole or tower used to support antennas or related equipment. A monopole also includes a monopine, monopalm and similar monopoles camouflaged to resemble faux trees or other faux objects attached on a monopole (e.g. water tower).

“Mounted” means attached or supported.

“OTARD antennas” means antennas covered by the “over-the-air reception devices” rule in 47 C.F.R. Sections 1.4000 et seq. as may be amended or replaced from time to time.

“Permittee” means any person or entity granted a WTFP pursuant to this chapter.

“Personal wireless services” shall have the same meaning as set forth in 47 United States Code Section 332(c)(7)(C)(i).

“Planning director” means the director of planning, or his or her designee.

“Pole” means a single shaft of wood, steel, concrete or other material capable of supporting the equipment mounted thereon in a safe and adequate manner and as required by provisions of this code.

 “Public right-of-way” or “PROW” means a strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription, condemnation, or easement that allows for the passage of people and goods. The PROW includes, but is not necessarily limited to, streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, roadway medians, and parking strips. The PROW does not include lands owned, controlled or operated by the city for uses unrelated to streets or the passage of people and goods, such as, without limitation, parks, city hall and community center lands, city yards, and lands supporting reservoirs, water towers, police or fire facilities and non-publicly accessible utilities.

“Public works director” means the director of public works, or his or her designee.

“Replacement” refers only to replacement of transmission equipment, wireless telecommunications facilities or eligible support structures where the replacement structure will be of like-for-like kind to resemble the appearance and dimensions of the structure or equipment replaced, including size, height, color, landscaping, materials and style.

(1)     In the context of determining whether an application qualifies as an eligible facilities request, the term “replacement” relates only to the replacement of transmission equipment and does not include replacing the support structure on which the equipment is located.

(2)     In the context of determining whether a SWF application qualifies as being placed upon a new eligible support structure or qualifies as a collocation, an application proposing the “replacement” of the underlying support structure qualifies as a new pole proposal.

“RF” means radio frequency.

“Small cell” means a low-powered antenna (node) that has a range of ten meters to two kilometers. The nodes of a “small cell” may or may not be connected by fiber. “Small,” for purposes of “small cell,” refers to the area covered, not the size of the facility. “Small cell” includes, but is not limited to, devices generally known as microcells, picocells and femtocells.

“Small cell network” means a network of small cells.

“Spectrum Act” means Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief Act and Job Creation Act of 2012, 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a).

“Substantial change” has the same meaning as “substantial change” as defined by the FCC at 47 C.F.R. 1.40001(b)(7). Notwithstanding the definition above, if an existing pole-mounted cabinet is proposed to be replaced with an underground cabinet at a facility where there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the structure, such modification may be deemed a non-substantial change, in the discretion of the public works director and based upon his or her reasonable consideration of the cabinet’s proximity to residential view sheds, interference to public views and/or degradation of concealment elements. If undergrounding the cabinet is technologically infeasible such that it is materially inhibitive to the project, the public works director may allow for a ground mounted cabinet. A modification or collocation results in a “substantial change” to the physical dimensions of an eligible support structure if it does any of the following:

(1)     It increases the height of the structure by more than ten percent or more than ten feet, whichever is greater;

(2)     It involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six feet;

(3)     It involves installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four cabinets. However, for towers and base stations located in the public rights-of-way, it involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than ten percent larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure;

(4)     It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site. For purposes of this subsection, excavation outside the current site occurs where excavation more than twelve feet from the eligible support structure is proposed;

(5)     It defeats the concealment or stealthing elements of the eligible support structure; or

(6)     It does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure; provided, however, that this limitation does not apply to any modification that is non-compliant only in a manner that would not exceed the thresholds identified in paragraphs (1) through (4) of this definition.

(7)     For all proposed collocations and modifications, a substantial change occurs when:

(A)    The proposed collocation or modification involves more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four equipment cabinets;

(B)    The proposed collocation or modification would defeat the concealment elements of the support structure; or

(C)    The proposed collocation or modification violates a prior condition of approval; provided, however, that the collocation need not comply with any prior condition of approval that is inconsistent with the thresholds for a substantial change described in this section.

The thresholds and conditions for a “substantial change” described in this section are disjunctive such that the violation of any individual threshold or condition results in a substantial change. The height and width thresholds for a substantial change described in this section are cumulative for each individual support structure. The cumulative limit is measured from the physical dimensions of the original structure for base stations, and for all other facilities sites in the PROW from the smallest physical dimensions that existed on or after February 22, 2012, inclusive of originally approved-appurtenances and any modifications that were approved prior to that date.

“Support structure” means a tower, pole, base station or other structure used to support a wireless telecommunications facility.

“SWF” means a “small wireless facility” as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. 1.6002(l) as may be amended, which are personal wireless services facilities that meet all the following conditions that, solely for convenience, have been set forth below:

(1)     The facility(ies):

(A)    Is mounted on an existing or proposed structure fifty feet or less in height, including antennas, as defined in Title 47 C.F.R. Section 1.1320(d); or

(B)    Is mounted on an existing or proposed structure no more than ten percent taller than other adjacent structures, or

(C)    Does not extend an existing structure on which it is located to a height of more than fifty feet or by more than ten percent, whichever is greater;

(2)     Each antenna associated with the deployment, excluding associated antenna equipment (as defined in the definition of antenna in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.1320(d)), is no more than three cubic feet in volume;

(3)     All other wireless equipment associated with the structure, including the wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any pre-existing associated equipment on the structure, is no more than twenty-eight cubic feet in volume;

(4)     The facility does not require antenna structure registration under 47 C.F.R. Part 17;

(5)     The facility is not located on Tribal lands, as defined under Title 36 C.F.R. Section 800.16(x); and

(6)     The facility does not result in human exposure to radiofrequency radiation in excess of the applicable safety standards specified in Title 47 C.F.R. Section 1.1307(b).

“SWF Regulations” means those regulations adopted by the city council as policy for implementing the provisions of this chapter applicable to SWFs and further regulations and standards applicable to SWFs.

“Telecommunications tower” or “tower” bears the meaning ascribed to wireless towers by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(9), including, without limitation, a freestanding mast, pole, monopole, guyed tower, lattice tower, free standing tower or other structure designed and built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site. This definition does not include utility poles.

“Transmission equipment” means equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply. The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.

“Utility pole” means any pole or tower owned by any utility company that is primarily used to support wires or cables necessary to the provision of electrical or other utility services regulated by the California Public Utilities Commission. A telecommunications tower is not a utility pole.

“Wireless telecommunications facility” means equipment and network components such as antennas, accessory equipment, support structures, and emergency power systems that are integral to providing wireless telecommunications services. Exceptions: The term “wireless telecommunications facility” does not apply to the following:

(1)     Government-owned and operated telecommunications facilities.

(2)     Emergency medical care provider-owned and operated telecommunications facilities.

(3)     Mobile services providing public information coverage of news events of a temporary nature.

(4)     Any wireless telecommunications facilities exempted from this code by federal law or state law.

“Wireless telecommunications services” means the provision of services using a wireless telecommunications facility or a collocation facility, and shall include, but is not limited to, the following services: personal wireless services as defined in the federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 at 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7)(C) or its successor statute, cellular service, personal communication service, and/or data radio telecommunications.

“WTFP” means a “wireless telecommunications facility permit” required by this chapter, which may be categorized as either a Major WTFP or an Administrative WTFP. (Ord. 2040 § 5, 2019; Ord. 2039 § 5, 2019)

 

13.20.030 Applicability.
(a)     This chapter applies to the siting, construction or modification of any and all wireless telecommunications facilities proposed to be located in the public right-of-way as follows. Wireless telecommunications facilities located in the PROW shall be governed by this Chapter 13.20 rather than the city’s zoning code.

(b)     Pre-Existing Facilities in the ROW. Nothing in this chapter shall validate any existing illegal or unpermitted wireless facilities. All existing wireless facilities shall comply with and receive a wireless encroachment permit, when applicable, to be considered legal and conforming.

(c)     This chapter does not apply to the following:

(1)     Amateur radio facilities;

(2)     OTARD antennas;

(3)     Facilities owned and operated by the city for its use or for public safety purposes;

(4)     Any entity legally entitled to an exemption pursuant to state or federal law or governing franchise agreement, excepting that to the extent such the terms of state or federal law, or franchise agreement, are preemptive of the terms of this chapter, then the terms of this chapter shall be severable to the extent of such preemption and all remaining regulations shall remain in full force and effect.

(5)     Installation of a COW or a similar structure for a temporary period in connection with an emergency or event at the discretion of the public works director, but no longer than required for the emergency or event; provided that installation does not involve excavation, movement, or removal of existing facilities.

(d)     Public Use. Except as otherwise provided by state or federal law, any use of the PROW authorized pursuant to this chapter will be subordinate to the city’s use and use by the public. (Ord. 2040 § 5, 2019; Ord. 2039 § 5, 2019)

 

13.20.040 Wireless telecommunications facility permit administration.
(a)     Administration. Unless a matter is referred to the planning director as provided below, the public works director is responsible for administering this chapter. As part of the administration of this chapter, the public works director may:

(1)     Interpret the provisions of this chapter;

(2)     Develop and implement standards governing the placement and modification of wireless telecommunications facilities consistent with the requirements of this chapter, including regulations governing collocation and resolution of conflicting applications for placement of wireless facilities;

(3)     Develop and implement acceptable design, location and development standards for wireless telecommunications facilities in the PROW, taking into account the zoning districts bounding the PROW;

(4)     Develop forms and procedures for submission of applications for placement or modification of wireless facilities, and proposed changes to any support structure consistent with this chapter;

(5)     Collect, as a condition of the completeness of any application, any fee established by this chapter;

(6)     Establish deadlines for submission of information related to an application, and extend or shorten deadlines where appropriate and consistent with federal laws and regulations;

(7)     Issue any notices of incompleteness, requests for information, or conduct or commission such studies as may be required to determine whether a permit should be issued;

(8)     Require, as part of, and as a condition of completeness of any application, that an applicant for a wireless encroachment permit send notice to members of the public that may be affected by the placement or modification of the wireless facility and proposed changes to any support structure;

(9)     Subject to appeal as provided herein, determine whether to approve, approve subject to conditions, or deny an application; and

(10)   Take such other steps as may be required to timely act upon applications for placement of wireless telecommunications facilities, including issuing written decisions and entering into agreements to mutually extend the time for action on an application.

(b)     Administrative Wireless Telecommunications Facilities Permits (“Administrative WTFP”).

(1)     An Administrative WTFP, subject to the public works director’s approval, may be issued for wireless telecommunications facilities, collocations, modifications or replacements to an eligible support structure that meet the following criteria:

(A)    The proposal is determined to be for an SWF; or

(B)    The proposal is determined to be an eligible facilities request; or

(C)    Both.

(2)     In the event that the public works director determines that any application submitted for an Administrative WTFP does not meet the administrative permit criteria of this chapter, the public works director shall convert the application to a Major WTFP and refer it to the planning director for planning commission hearing.

(3)     Except in the case of an eligible facilities request, the public works director may refer, in his or her discretion, any application for an Administrative WTFP to the planning director, who shall have discretion to further refer the application to planning commission for hearing. If the planning director determines not to present the Administrative WTFP application to the planning commission for hearing, the application shall be relegated back to the public works director for processing. This exercise of discretion shall not apply to an eligible facilities request.

(c)     Major Wireless Telecommunications Facilities Permit (“Major WTFP”). All other new wireless telecommunications facilities or replacements, collocations, or modifications to a wireless telecommunications facility that are not qualified for an Administrative WTFP shall require a Major WTFP subject to planning commission hearing and approval unless otherwise provided for in this chapter.

(d)     Special Provisions for SWFs; SWF Regulations. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter as provided herein, all SWFs are subject to a permit as specified in the SWF Regulations, which is adopted and may be amended by city council resolution. All SWFs, shall comply with the SWF Regulations, as they may be amended from time to time.

The SWF Regulations are intended to be constructed in consistency with, and addition to, the terms and provisions of this chapter. To the extent general provisions of this chapter are lawfully applicable to SWFs, such terms shall apply unless in contradiction to more specific terms set forth in the SWF Regulations, in which case the more specific terms of the SWF Regulations shall control.

(e)     Other Permits Required. In addition to any permit that may be required under this chapter, the applicant must obtain all other required prior permits or other approvals from other city departments, or state or federal agencies. Any permit granted under this chapter is subject to the conditions and/or requirements of other required prior permits or other approvals from other city departments, state or federal agencies. Building and encroachment permits, and all city standards and requirements therefor, are applicable.

(f)      Eligible Applicants. Only applicants who have been granted the right to enter the PROW pursuant to state or federal law, or who have entered into a franchise agreement with the city permitting them to use the PROW, shall be eligible for a WTFP pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2040 § 5, 2019; Ord. 2039 § 5, 2019)

 

13.20.050 Application requirements for wireless telecommunications facility permits.
(a)     Generally. Unless the SWF Regulations specifically provide otherwise, the applicant shall submit a paper copy and an electronic copy of any application, amendments, or supplements to a WTFP application, or responses to requests for information regarding a WTFP, in accordance with the provisions of this section. SWF applications shall be governed by any additional terms set forth in the SWF Regulations, and in the event of an inconsistency between the provisions of this section and the terms of the SWF Regulations, the SWF Regulations shall control.

(1)     All applications for WTFPs shall be initially submitted to the public works director. In addition to the information required of an applicant for an encroachment permit or any other permit required by this code, each applicant shall fully and completely submit to the city a written application on a form prepared by the public works director and published on the city’s website.

(2)     Application Pre-Submittal Appointment.

(A)    Administrative WTFP: The city does not require pre-submittal appointments for the submission of Administrative WTFPs. However, the city strongly encourages applicants to schedule and attend a pre-submittal conference with the approval authority for all proposed SWF projects, and particularly those that involve more than five SWFs.

(B)    Major WTFP: Applications must be submitted to the public works director at a pre-scheduled application submission appointment. A Major WTFP application will only be reviewed upon submission of a complete application therefor.

(C)    Pre-submittal conferences do not cause the FCC shot clock to begin and are intended to streamline the review process through informal discussion that includes, without limitation, any latent issues in connection with the proposed project, including compliance with generally applicable rules for public health and safety; potential concealment issues or concerns (if applicable); coordination with other city departments responsible for application review; and application completeness issues. To mitigate unnecessary delays due to application incompleteness, applicants are encouraged (but not required) to bring any draft applications or other materials so that city staff may provide informal feedback and guidance about whether such applications or other materials may be incomplete or unacceptable. Any request for a pre-submittal conference shall be in writing and shall confirm that any drafts to be provided the city at the pre-submittal conference will not be deemed as “submissions” triggering the start of any FCC shot clock.

(D)    The approval authority shall use reasonable efforts to provide the applicant with a pre-submittal appointment within five working days after receiving the written request therefor, and any applicable fee or deposit to reimburse the city for its reasonable costs to provide the services rendered in the pre-submittal conference.

(3)     If the wireless telecommunications facility will also require the installation of fiber, cable or coaxial cable, such cable installations shall be included within the application form and processed in conjunction with the proposal for vertical support structure(s). Applicants shall simultaneously request fiber installation or other cable installation when seeking to install antennas in the PROW. Standalone applications for the installation of fiber, cable or coaxial cable, or accessory equipment designed to serve an antenna must include all features of the wireless telecommunications facility proposed.

(b)     Application Contents—Administrative WTFPs. The content of the application form for facilities subject to an Administrative WTFP shall be determined by the public works director, but at a minimum shall include the following:

(1)     The name of the applicant, its telephone number and contact information, and if the applicant is a wireless infrastructure provider, the name and contact information for the wireless service provider that will be using the wireless facility.

(2)     The name of the owner of the structure, if different from the applicant, and a signed and notarized owner’s authorization for use of the structure.

(3)     A complete description of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility and any and all work that will be required to install or modify it, including, but not limited to, detail regarding proposed excavations, if any; detailed site plans showing the location of the wireless telecommunications facility, and dimensioned drawings with specifications for each element of the wireless facility, clearly describing the site and all structures and facilities at the site before and after installation or modification; and a dimensioned map identifying and describing the distance to the nearest residential dwelling unit and any historical structure within five hundred feet of the facility. Before and after three-hundred-sixty-degree photo simulations must be provided.

(4)     Documentation sufficient to show that the proposed facility will comply with generally-applicable health and safety provisions of the municipal code and the FCC’s radio frequency emissions standards.

(5)     A copy of the lease or other agreement, if any, between the applicant and the owner of the property to which the proposed facility will be attached.

(6)     If the application is for an SWF, the application shall state as such and shall explain why the proposed facility meets the definition of an SWF.

(7)     If the application is for an eligible facilities request, the application shall state as such and must contain information sufficient to show that the application qualifies as an eligible facilities request, which information must demonstrate that the eligible support structure was not constructed or deployed without proper local review, was not required to undergo local review, or involves equipment that was not properly approved. This shall include copies of all applicable local permits in-effect and as-built drawings of the current site. Before and after three-hundred-sixty-degree photo simulations must be provided, as well as documentation sufficient to show that the proposed facility will comply with generally-applicable health and safety provisions of the municipal code and the FCC’s radio frequency emissions standards.

(8)     For SWFs, the application must contain all additional application information, if any, required by the SWF Regulations.

(9)     If the applicant contends that denial of the application would prohibit or effectively prohibit the provision of service in violation of federal law, or otherwise violate applicable law, the application must provide all information on which the applicant relies on in support of that claim. Applicants are not permitted to supplement this showing if doing so would prevent the city from complying with any deadline for action on an application.

(c)     Application Contents—Major WTFPs. The public works director shall develop an application form and make it available to applicants upon request and post the application form on the city’s website. The application form for a Major WTFP shall require the following information, in addition to all other information determined necessary by the public works director:

(1)     The name, address and telephone number of the applicant, owner and the operator of the proposed wireless telecommunication facility.

(2)     If the applicant does not, or will not, own the support structure, the applicant shall provide a duly-executed letter of authorization from the owner of the structure. If the owner of the support structure is the applicant, but such owner/applicant will not directly provide wireless telecommunications services, the owner/applicant shall provide a duly-executed letter of authorization from the person(s) or entity(ies) that will provide those services.

(3)     A full written description of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility and its purpose.

(4)     Detailed engineering plans of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility and related report prepared by a professional engineer registered in the state documenting the following:

(A)    Height/elevation, diameter, layout and design of the facility, including technical engineering specifications, economic and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design, together with evidence that demonstrates that the proposed facility has been designed to be the least intrusive equipment within the particular technology available to the carrier for deployment.

(B)    A photograph and model name and number of each piece of the facility or proposed antenna array and accessory equipment included.

(C)    Power output and operating frequency for the proposed antenna array (including any antennas existing as of the date of the application serving the carrier identified in the application).

(D)    Total anticipated capacity of the wireless telecommunications facility for the subject carrier, indicating the number and types of antennas and power and frequency ranges, which can be accommodated.

(E)     Sufficient evidence of the structural integrity of the support structure as required by the city.

(5)     A written description identifying the geographic service area to be served by the proposed WTFP, plus geographic or propagation maps showing applicant’s service area objectives.

(6)     A justification study which includes the rationale for selecting the proposed wireless telecommunication facility design, support structure and location. A detailed explanation of the applicant’s coverage objectives that the proposal would serve, and how the proposed use is the least intrusive means for the applicant to cover such objectives. This shall include:

(A)    A meaningful comparative analysis that includes the factual reasons why the proposed location and design deviates is the least noncompliant or intrusive location and design necessary to reasonably achieve the applicant’s reasonable objectives of covering an established significant gap (as established under state and federal law).

(B)    Said study shall include all eligible support structures and/or alternative sites evaluated for the proposed WTFP, and why said alternatives are not reasonably available, technically feasible options that most closely conform to the local values. The alternative site analysis must include the consideration of at least two eligible support structures; or, if no eligible support facilities are analyzed as alternatives, why no eligible support facilities are reasonably available or technically feasible.

(C)    If a portion of the proposed facility lies within a jurisdiction other than the city’s jurisdiction, the applicant must demonstrate that alternative options for locating the project fully within one jurisdiction or the other is not a viable option. Applicant must demonstrate that it has obtained all approvals from the adjacent jurisdiction for the installation of the extra-jurisdictional portion of the project.

(7)     Site plan(s) to scale, specifying and depicting the exact proposed location of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility, location of accessory equipment in relation to the support structure, access or utility easements, existing utilities, adjacent land uses, and showing compliance with all design and safety requirements set forth in this chapter.

(8)     A completed environmental assessment application, or in the alternative any and all documentation identifying the proposed WTFP as exempt from environmental review (under the California Environmental Quality Act, Public Resources Code 21000–21189, the National Environmental Policy Act, 42 U.S.C. Section 4321 et seq., or related environmental laws). Notwithstanding any determination of environmental exemption issued by another governmental entity, the city reserves its right to exercise its rights as a responsible agency to review de novo the environmental impacts of any WTFP application.

(9)     An accurate visual impact analysis showing the maximum silhouette, view-shed analysis, color and finish palette and proposed screening for the wireless telecommunications facility, including scaled photo simulations from at least three different angles.

(10)   Completion of the radio frequency (RF) emissions exposure guidelines checklist contained in Appendix A to the FCC’s “Local Government Official’s Guide to Transmitting Antenna RF Emission Safety” to determine whether the facility will be “categorically excluded” as that term is used by the FCC.

(11)   For a facility that is not categorically excluded under the FCC regulations for RF emissions, the applicant shall submit an RF exposure compliance report prepared and certified by an RF engineer acceptable to the city that certifies that the proposed facility, as well as any facilities that contribute to the cumulative exposure in the subject area, will comply with applicable federal RF exposure standards and exposure limits. The RF report must include the actual frequency and power levels (in watts effective radio power “ERP”) for all existing and proposed antennas at the site and exhibits that show the location and orientation of all transmitting antennas and the boundaries of areas with RF exposures in excess of the uncontrolled/general population limit (as that term is defined by the FCC) and also the boundaries of areas with RF exposures in excess of the controlled/occupational limit (as that term is defined by the FCC). Each such boundary shall be clearly marked and identified for every transmitting antenna at the project site.

(12)   Copies of any documents that the applicant is required to file pursuant to Federal Aviation Administration regulations for the proposed wireless telecommunications facility.

(13)   A noise study prepared by a qualified acoustic engineer documenting that the level of noise to be emitted by the proposed wireless telecommunications facility will comply with this code, including Chapter 9.44 (Noise) of this code.

(14)   A traffic control plan when the proposed installation is on any street in a non-residential zone. The city shall have the discretion to require a traffic control plan when the applicant seeks to use large equipment (e.g. crane).

(15)   A scaled conceptual landscape plan showing existing trees and vegetation and all proposed landscaping, concealment, screening and proposed irrigation with a discussion of how the chosen material at maturity will screen the wireless telecommunication facility.

(16)   Certification that applicant is a telephone corporation or a statement providing the basis for its claimed right to enter the right-of-way. If the applicant has a certificate of public convenience and necessity (CPCN) issued by the California Public Utilities Commission, it shall provide a copy of its CPCN.

(17)   Evidence that the proposed wireless facility qualifies as a “personal wireless services facility” as defined in United States Code, Title 47, Section 332(c)(7)(C)(ii).

(18)   Address labels for use by the city in noticing all property owners within five hundred feet of the proposed wireless telecommunication facility and, if applicable, all public hearing information required by the municipal code for public noticing requirements.

(19)   Any other information and/or studies reasonably determined to be necessary by the public works or planning director(s) may be required.

(d)     Fees and Deposits Submitted with Application(s). For all WTFPs, application fee(s) shall be required to be submitted with any application, as established by city council resolution and in accordance with California Government Code Section 50030. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no application fee shall be refundable, in whole or in part, to an applicant for a WTFP unless paid as a refundable deposit.

(e)     Independent Expert. The public works and/or planning director, as applicable, is authorized to retain on behalf of the city one or more independent, qualified consultant(s) to review any WTFP application. The review is intended to be a review of technical aspects of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility and shall include, but not limited to, application completeness or accuracy, structural engineering analysis, or compliance with FCC radio frequency emissions standards.

(f)      Costs. Reasonable costs of city staff, consultant and attorney time (including that of the city attorney) pertaining to the review, processing, noticing and hearing procedures directly attributable to a WTFP shall be reimbursable to the city. To this end, the public works and/or planning director, as applicable, may require applicants to enter a trust/deposit reimbursement agreement, in a form approved by the city attorney, or other established trust/deposit accounting mechanism for purposes of obtaining an applicant deposit from which the direct costs of city processing of an application may be drawn-down.

(g)     Effect of State or Federal Law on Application Process. In the event a state or federal law prohibits the collection of any information or application conditions required by this section, the public works director is authorized to omit, modify or add to that request from the city’s application form in consultation with the city attorney. Requests for waivers from any application requirement of this section shall be made in writing to the public works director or his or her designee. The public works director may grant a request for waiver if it is demonstrated that, notwithstanding the issuance of a waiver, the city will be provided all information necessary to understand the nature of the construction or other activity to be conducted pursuant to the WTFP sought. All waivers approved pursuant to this section shall be: (1) granted only on a case-by-case basis; and (2) narrowly tailored to minimize deviation from the requirements of the municipal code.

(h)     Applications Deemed Withdrawn. To promote efficient review and timely decisions, any application governed under this chapter will be automatically deemed withdrawn by the applicant when the applicant fails to tender a substantive response to the city on any application within thirty calendar days after the application is deemed incomplete in a written notice to the applicant. The public works or planning director (as applicable) may, in his or her discretion, grant a written extension for up to an additional thirty calendar days when the applicant submits a written request prior to the ninetieth day that shows good cause to grant the extension.

(i)      Waiver of Applications Superseded by Submission of New Project. If an applicant submits a WTFP application, but substantially revises the proposed facility during the application process prior to any city hearing or decision on such application, the substantially revised application shall be deemed a new application for all processing purposes, including federal shot clocks, and the prior submittals deemed waived and superseded by the substantially revised application. For purposes of this subsection, “substantially revised” means that the project as initially proposed has been alternately proposed for a location three hundred feet or more from the original proposal or constitutes a substantial change in the dimensions or equipment that was proposed in the original WTFP application.

(j)      Rejection for Incompleteness. WTFPs will be processed, and notices of incompleteness provided, in conformity with state, local, and federal law. If such an application is incomplete, it may be rejected by the public works director by notifying the applicant in writing and specifying the material omitted from the application. (Ord. 2040 § 5, 2019; Ord. 2039 § 5, 2019)

 

13.20.060 Review procedure.
(a)     Generally. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be installed and modified in a manner that minimizes risks to public safety and utilizes installation of new support structures or equipment cabinets in the PROW only after all existing and replacement structure options have been exhausted, and where feasible, places equipment underground, and otherwise maintains the integrity and character of the neighborhoods and corridors in which the facilities are located; ensures that installations are subject to periodic review to minimize the intrusion on the PROW; and ensures that the city bears no risk or liability as a result of the installations, and that such use does not inconvenience the public, interfere with the primary uses of the ROW, or hinder the ability of the city or other government agencies to improve, modify, relocate, abandon, or vacate the PROW or any portion thereof, or to cause the improvement, modification, relocation, vacation, or abandonment of facilities in the PROW.

(b)     Collocation Encouraged. Where the facility site is capable of accommodating a collocated facility upon the same site in a manner consistent with the permit conditions for the existing facility, the owner and operator of the existing facility shall allow collocation of third-party facilities, provided the parties can mutually agree upon reasonable terms and conditions.

(c)     Findings Required for Approval.

(1)     Administrative WTFP Applications for SWFs. For WTFP applications proposing an SWF, the public works director or planning director, as the case may be, shall approve such application if, on the basis of the application and other materials or evidence provided in review thereof, all of the following findings can be made:

(A)    The facility qualifies as an SWF; and

(B)    The facility meets all standards, requirements and further findings as may be specified in the SWF Regulations; and

(C)    The facility is not detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare; and

(D)    The facility meets applicable requirements and standards of state and federal law.

(2)     Administrative WTFP Applications for Eligible Facility Requests. For WTFP applications proposing an eligible facilities request, the public works director shall approve such application if, on the basis of the application and other materials or evidence provided in review thereof, all of the following findings can be made:

(A)    That the application qualifies as an eligible facilities request; and

(B)    That the proposed facility will comply with all generally-applicable laws.

(3)     Major WTFP Applications. No Major WTFP shall be granted unless all of the following findings are made by the applicable decision-maker:

(A)    If applicable, all notices required for the proposed WTFP have been given, including the inclusion, or placement on-site, of photo simulations for the proposed facility.

(B)    The proposed wireless telecommunications facility has been designed and located in compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter.

(C)    If applicable, the applicant has demonstrated its inability to locate on an eligible support structure.

(D)    The applicant has provided sufficient evidence supporting the applicant’s claim that it has the right to enter the public right-of-way pursuant to state or federal law, or the applicant has entered into a franchise agreement with the city permitting them to use the public right-of-way.

(E)     The applicant has demonstrated the proposed installation is designed such that the proposed installation represents the least intrusive means possible, supported by factual evidence and a meaningful comparative analysis to show that all alternative locations and designs identified in the application review process were technically infeasible or not reasonably available.

(d)     Notice; Decisions. The provisions in this section describe the procedures for the approval process, any required notice and public hearings for a WTFP application.

(1)     Administrative WTFP Applications: A WTFP application for an SWF as well as qualifying applications for eligible facilities requests shall not require notice.

(2)     Major WTFP Applications: Any Major WTFP application shall require notice and a public hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be provided in accordance with Glendora Municipal Code Section 21.01.030, which includes mailed noticing to all property owners within five hundred feet of the proposed wireless telecommunication facility. Public notices shall include color photo simulations from three different angles depicting the wireless telecommunication facility as proposed to be considered by the planning commission. If the application proposes the use of an existing or replacement eligible support structure, such simulations shall be posted upon the proposed support structure for a period of at least thirty days prior to the date of approval; such posted simulations shall remain in-place until final decision on the application is reached.

(3)     Written Decision Required for All WTFP Determinations. Unless otherwise specified for SWF’s in the SWF Regulations, all final decisions made pursuant to this chapter, including those for administratively-processed permits and eligible facilities requests, shall be in writing and based on substantial evidence in the written administrative record. Within five days after any decision to grant, approve, deny or conditionally grant a WTFP application, the public works director or planning director, as applicable, shall provide written notice including the following:

(A)    A general explanation of the decision, including the findings required for the decision, if any, and how those findings were supported or not supported by substantial evidence;

(B)    A general description of the property involved;

(C)    Information about applicable rights to appeal, if any, the decision and explanation of how that right may be exercised; and

(D)    To be given by first class mail to:

(i)      The project applicant and property owner,

(ii)     Any person who submitted written comments concerning the WTFP,

(iii)   Any person who has filed a written request with the city to receive such notice, and

(iv)    Any homeowner association on file with the city that has jurisdiction over the WTFP site.

(4)     Once a WTFP is approved, no changes shall be made to the approved plans without review and approval in accordance with this chapter.

(e)     Appeals.

(1)     Administrative WTFPs do not have an appeal procedure and all administrative decisions thereon are final.

(2)     Appeals on Major WTFPs shall proceed as provided in accordance with the appeal provisions in Title 21 of the Glendora Municipal Code, Section 21.01.030(F) (Appeals). The appellate authority may hear the appeal de novo.

(f)      Notice of Shot Clock Expiration. The city acknowledges there are federal and state shot clocks which may be applicable to a proposed wireless telecommunications facility. That is, federal and state law provide time periods in which the city must approve or deny a proposed wireless telecommunications facility. As such, the applicant is required to provide the city written notice of the expiration of any shot clock, which the applicant shall ensure is received by the city (e.g. overnight mail) no later than twenty days prior to the expiration. (Ord. 2040 § 5, 2019; Ord. 2039 § 5, 2019)

 

13.20.070 Design and development standards.
(a)     SWF Design and Development Standards. SWFs are subject to those design and development standards and conditions of approval set forth in the SWF Regulations. The city’s grant of a WTFP for an SWF does not waive, and shall not be construed to waive, any standing by the city to challenge any FCC orders or rules related to small cell facilities, or any modification to those FCC orders or rules.

(b)     Eligible Facilities Request Design and Development Standards. Approved eligible facilities requests for which the findings set forth in Section 13.20.060 have been made are subject to the following conditions, unless modified by the approving authority:

(1)     WTFP subject to conditions of underlying permit. Any WTFP granted in response to an application qualifying as an eligible facilities request shall be subject to the terms and conditions of the underlying permit and all such conditions that were applicable to the facility prior to approval of the subject eligible facility request.

(2)     No permit term extension. The city’s grant or grant by operation of law of an eligible facilities request permit constitutes a federally-mandated modification to the underlying permit or approval for the subject tower or base station. Notwithstanding any permit duration established in another permit condition, the city’s grant or grant by operation of law of an eligible facilities request permit will not extend the permit term for the underlying permit or any other underlying regulatory approval, and its term shall have the same term as the underlying permit or other regulatory approval for the subject tower or base station.

(3)     No waiver of standing. The city’s grant or grant by operation of law of an eligible facilities request does not waive, and shall not be construed to waive, any standing by the city to challenge Section 6409(a) of the Spectrum Act, any FCC rules that interpret Section 6409(a) of the Spectrum Act, or any modification to Section 6409(a) of the Spectrum Act.

(c)     Major WTFP Design and Development Standards. All wireless telecommunications facilities subject to a Major WTFP that are located within the PROW shall be designed and maintained as to minimize visual, noise and other impacts on the surrounding community and shall be planned, designed, located, and erected in accordance with the following standards:

(1)     General Guidelines.

(A)    The applicant shall employ screening, undergrounding and camouflage design techniques in the design and placement of wireless telecommunications facilities in order to ensure that the facility is as visually screened as possible, to prevent the facility from dominating the surrounding area and to minimize significant view impacts from surrounding properties and public views, all in a manner that achieves compatibility with the community and in compliance with this code.

(B)    Screening shall be designed to be architecturally compatible with surrounding structures using appropriate techniques to camouflage, disguise, and/or blend into the environment, including landscaping, color, and other techniques to minimize the facility’s visual impact as well as be compatible with the architectural character of the surrounding buildings or structures in terms of color, size, proportion, style, and quality.

(C)    Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be located consistent with Section 13.20.080 (Location Restrictions) unless an exception is granted.

(2)     Traffic Safety. All facilities shall be designed and located in such a manner as to avoid adverse impacts on traffic safety.

(3)     Blending Methods. All facilities shall have subdued colors and non-reflective materials that blend with the materials and colors of the surrounding area, infrastructure and structures.

(4)     Equipment. The applicant shall use the least visible equipment for the provision of wireless telecommunications services that is technically feasible. Antenna elements shall be flush mounted, to the extent feasible, with all cables and wires clipped-up or otherwise out of public view. All antenna mounts shall be designed so as not to preclude possible future collocation by the same or other operators or carriers. Unless otherwise provided in this section, antennas shall be situated as close to the ground as technically feasible.

(5)     Support Structures.

(A)    Pole-Mounted Only. Only pole-mounted antennas (excepting wooden poles per subparagraph (5)(B) below) shall be permitted in the public right-of-way. Mountings to all other forms of support structure in the public right-of-way are prohibited unless an exception pursuant to Section 13.20.080 is granted.

(B)    Utility Poles. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall not be located on wooden poles unless an exception pursuant to Section 13.20.080 is granted. The maximum height of any antenna shall not exceed forty-eight inches above the height of an existing utility pole, nor shall any portion of the antenna or equipment mounted on a pole be less than twenty-four feet above any drivable road surface. All installations on utility poles shall fully comply with the California Public Utilities Commission general orders, including, but not limited to, General Order 95, as may be revised or superseded.

(C)    Light Poles. The maximum height of any antenna shall not exceed four feet above the existing height of a light pole. Any portion of the antenna or equipment mounted on a pole shall be no less than sixteen and one half feet above any drivable road surface.

(D)    Replacement Poles. If an applicant proposes to replace a pole that is an eligible support structure to accommodate the proposed facility, the replacement pole shall be designed to resemble the appearance and dimensions of existing poles near the proposed location, including size, height, color, materials and style to the maximum extent feasible.

(E)     Equipment mounted on a support structure shall not exceed four cubic feet in dimension.

(F)     No new guy wires shall be allowed unless required by other laws or regulations.

(G)    An exception pursuant to Section 13.20.080 shall be required to erect any new support structure (non-eligible support structure) that is not the replacement of an existing eligible support structure.

(H)    As applicable to all new support structures (non-eligible support structures), regardless of location, the following requirements shall apply:

(i)      Such new support structure shall be designed to resemble existing support structures of the same type in the right-of-way near that location, including size, height, color, materials and style, with the exception of any existing structural designs that are scheduled to be removed and not replaced.

(ii)     Such new support structures that are not replacement structures shall be located at least ninety feet from any eligible support structure to the extent feasible.

(iii)   Such new support structures shall be located to the extent feasible in an area where there is existing natural or other feature that obscures the view of the new support structure. The applicant shall further employ concealment techniques to blend the new support structure with said features including, but not limited to, the addition of vegetation if feasible.

(iv)    A justification analysis shall be submitted for all new support structures that are not replacements to demonstrate why an eligible support facility cannot be utilized and demonstrating the new structure is the least intrusive means possible, including a demonstration that the new structure is designed to be the minimum functional height and width required to support the proposed wireless telecommunications facility.

(I)      All cables, including, but not limited to, electrical and utility cables, shall be run within the interior of the support structure and shall be camouflaged or hidden to the fullest extent feasible. For all support structures wherein interior installation is infeasible, conduit and cables attached to the exterior shall be mounted flush thereto and painted to match the structure.

(6)     Space. Each facility shall be designed to occupy the least amount of space in the right-of-way that is technically feasible.

(7)     Wind Loads. Each facility shall be properly engineered to withstand wind loads as required by this code or any duly adopted or incorporated code. An evaluation of high wind load capacity shall include the impact of modification of an existing facility.

(8)     Obstructions. Each component part of a facility shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, incommode the public’s use of the right-of-way, or cause safety hazards to pedestrians and motorists.

(9)     Public Facilities. A facility shall not be located within any portion of the public right-of-way interfering with access to a fire hydrant, fire station, fire escape, water valve, underground vault, valve housing structure, or any other public health or safety facility.

(10)   Screening. All ground-mounted facility, pole-mounted equipment, or walls, fences, landscaping or other screening methods shall be installed at least eighteen inches from the curb and gutter flow line.

(11)   Accessory Equipment. Not including the electric meter, all accessory equipment shall be located underground, except as provided below:

(A)    Unless city staff determines that there is no room in the public right-of-way for undergrounding, or that undergrounding is not feasible, an exception pursuant to Section 13.20.080 shall be required in order to place accessory equipment above-ground and concealed with natural or manmade features to the maximum extent possible.

(B)    When above-ground is the only feasible location for a particular type of accessory equipment and will be ground-mounted, such accessory equipment shall be enclosed within a structure, and shall not exceed a height of five feet and a total footprint of fifteen square feet, and shall be fully screened and/or camouflaged, including the use of landscaping, architectural treatment, or acceptable alternate screening. Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened and/or camouflaged. Also, while pole-mounted equipment is generally the least favored installation, should pole-mounted equipment be sought, it shall be installed as required in this chapter.

(C)    In locations where homes are only along one side of a street, above-ground accessory equipment shall not be installed directly in front of a residence. Such above-ground accessory equipment shall be installed along the side of the street with no homes.

(12)   Landscaping. Where appropriate, each facility shall be installed so as to maintain and enhance existing landscaping on the site, including trees, foliage and shrubs. Additional landscaping shall be planted, irrigated and maintained by applicant where such landscaping is deemed necessary by the city to provide screening or to conceal the facility.

(13)   Signage. No facility shall bear any signs or advertising devices other than certification, warning or other signage required by law or permitted by the city.

(14)   Lighting.

(A)    No facility may be illuminated unless specifically required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other government agency. Beacon lights are not permitted unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other government agency.

(B)    Legally required lightning arresters and beacons shall be included when calculating the height of facilities such as towers, lattice towers and monopoles.

(C)    Any required lighting shall be shielded to eliminate, to the maximum extent possible, impacts on the surrounding neighborhoods.

(D)    Unless otherwise required under FAA or FCC regulations, applicants may install only timed or motion-sensitive light controllers and lights, and must install such lights so as to avoid illumination impacts to adjacent properties to the maximum extent feasible. The city may, in its discretion, exempt an applicant from the foregoing requirement when the applicant demonstrates a substantial public safety need.

(E)     The applicant shall submit a lighting study which shall be prepared by a qualified lighting professional to evaluate potential impacts to adjacent properties. Should no lighting be proposed, no lighting study shall be required.

(15)   Noise.

(A)    Backup generators shall only be operated during periods of power outages, and shall not be tested on weekends or holidays, or between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

(B)    At no time shall equipment noise from any facility exceed the noise levels permitted by Chapter 9.44 of this code.

(16)   Security. Each facility shall be designed to be resistant to, and minimize opportunities for, unauthorized access, climbing, vandalism, graffiti and other conditions that would result in hazardous situations, visual blight or attractive nuisances. The public works director or the approving city body, as applicable, may require the provision of warning signs, fencing, anti-climbing devices, or other techniques to prevent unauthorized access and vandalism when, because of their location and/or accessibility, a facility has the potential to become an attractive nuisance. Additionally, no lethal devices or elements shall be installed as a security device.

(17)   Modification. Consistent with current state and federal laws and if permissible under the same, at the time of modification of a wireless telecommunications facility, existing equipment shall, to the extent feasible, be replaced with equipment that reduces visual, noise and other impacts, including, but not limited to, undergrounding the equipment and replacing larger, more visually intrusive facilities with smaller, less visually intrusive facilities.

(18)   The installation and construction approved by a wireless telecommunications facility permit shall begin within one year after its approval or it will expire without further action by the city.

(19)   Conditions of Approval. All Major WTFPs shall be subject to such conditions of approval as reasonably imposed by the public works director or the approving city body, as applicable, as well as any modification of the conditions of approval deemed necessary by the public works director or the approving city body. (Ord. 2040 § 5, 2019; Ord. 2039 § 5, 2019)

 

13.20.080 Location restrictions—Exceptions for noncompliant major wireless telecommunications facilities.
(a)     Locations Requiring an Exception. Major WTFPs are strongly disfavored in certain areas and on certain support structures. Therefore the following locations are permitted only when an exception has been granted pursuant to subsection (b) hereof:

(1)     Public right-of-way within those zones as identified in the general plan as residential zones;

(2)     Public right-of-way within those zones as identified in the general plan as historic districts, or within one hundred feet of designated historic buildings;

(3)     Public right-of-way within those zones identified as Civic Center Area Plan (T4, T5, and T5a)

(b)     Required Findings for an Exception on Major WTFPs. For any Major WTFP requiring an “exception” under this chapter, no such exception shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates with clear and convincing evidence all the following:

(1)     The proposed wireless facility qualifies as a “personal wireless services facility” as defined in United States Code, Title 47, Section 332(c)(7)(C)(ii);

(2)     The applicant has provided the city with a clearly defined significant gap (as established under state and federal law) and a clearly defined potential site search area.

(A)    In the event the applicant seeks to install a wireless telecommunications facility to address service coverage concerns, full-color signal propagation maps with objective units of signal strength measurement that show the applicant’s current service coverage levels from all adjacent wireless telecommunications facilities without the proposed facility, predicted service coverage levels from all adjacent facilities serving applicant with the proposed facility, and predicted service coverage levels from the proposed facility without all adjacent facilities.

(B)    In the event the applicant seeks to address service capacity concerns, a written explanation and propagation maps identifying the existing facilities with service capacity issues together with competent evidence to demonstrate the inability of those facilities to meet capacity demands.

(3)     The applicant has provided the city with a meaningful comparative analysis that includes the factual reasons why any alternative location(s) or design(s) suggested by the city or otherwise identified in the administrative record, including, but not limited to, potential alternatives identified at any public meeting or hearing, are not technically feasible or reasonably available;

(4)     The applicant has provided the city with a meaningful comparative analysis that includes the factual reasons why the proposed location and design deviates is the least noncompliant location and design necessary to reasonably achieve the applicant’s reasonable objectives of covering an established significant gap (as established under state and federal law);

(5)     The applicant has demonstrated that strict compliance with the provision in this chapter for which the applicant seeks an exception would effectively prohibit the provision of personal wireless services.

(c)     Scope. The planning commission or public works director, as applicable, shall limit an exemption for a Major WTFP to the extent to which the applicant demonstrates such exemption is necessary to reasonably achieve its objectives of covering an established significant gap (as established under state and federal law). The planning commission or public works director, as applicable, may adopt conditions of approval as reasonably necessary to promote the purposes in this chapter and protect the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2040 § 5, 2019; Ord. 2039 § 5, 2019)

 

13.20.090 Operation and maintenance standards.
All wireless telecommunications facilities must comply at all times with the following operation and maintenance standards:

(a)     The permittee shall at all times maintain compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations and other rules, including, without limitation, those applying to use of the PROW. The permittee shall ensure that all equipment and other improvements to be constructed and/or installed in connection with the approved WTFP are maintained in a manner that is not detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, and general welfare and that the aesthetic appearance is continuously preserved, and substantially the same as shown in the approved plans at all times relevant to the WTFP.

(b)     Unless otherwise provided herein, all necessary repairs and restoration shall be completed by the permittee, owner, operator or any designated maintenance agent at its sole cost within forty-eight hours:

(1)     After discovery of the need by the permittee, owner, operator or any designated maintenance agent; or

(2)     After permittee, owner, operator or any designated maintenance agent receives notification from the city.

(c)     Insurance. The permittee shall obtain and maintain throughout the term of the permit a type and amount of insurance as specified by city’s risk management. The relevant policy(ies) shall name the city, its elected/appointed officials, commission members, officers, representatives, agents, and employees as additional insured. The permittee shall use its best efforts to provide thirty days prior notice to the public works director of to the cancellation or material modification of any applicable insurance policy.

(d)     Indemnities. The permittee and, if applicable, the owner of the property upon which the wireless facility is installed shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its agents, officers, officials, and employees: (1) from any and all damages, liabilities, injuries, losses, costs, and expenses, and from any and all claims, demands, law suits, writs of mandamus, and other actions or proceedings brought against the city or its agents, officers, officials, or employees to challenge, attack, seek to modify, set aside, void or annul the city’s approval of the permit; and (2) from any and all damages, liabilities, injuries, losses, costs, and expenses, and any and all claims, demands, law suits, or causes of action and other actions or proceedings of any kind or form, whether for personal injury, death or property damage, arising out of or in connection with the activities or performance of the permittee or, if applicable, the private property owner or any of each one’s agents, employees, licensees, contractors, subcontractors, or independent contractors. In the event the city becomes aware of any such actions or claims the city shall promptly notify the permittee and, if applicable, the private property owner and shall reasonably cooperate in the defense. The city shall have the right to approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, the legal counsel providing the city’s defense, and the property owner and/or permittee (as applicable) shall reimburse the city for any costs and expenses directly and necessarily incurred by the city in the course

(e)     Performance Bond. Prior to issuance of a wireless encroachment permit, the permittee shall file with the city, and shall maintain in good standing throughout the term of the approval, a performance bond or other surety or another form of security for the removal of the facility in the event that the use is abandoned or the permit expires, or is one hundred percent as that amount may be modified by the public works director in in the permit based on the characteristics of the installation. The permittee shall reimburse the city for staff time associated with the processing and tracking of the bond, based on the hourly rate adopted by the city council. Reimbursement shall be paid when the security is posted and during each administrative review.

(f)      Adverse Impacts on Adjacent Properties. Permittee shall undertake all reasonable efforts to avoid undue adverse impacts to adjacent properties and/or uses that may arise from the construction, operation, maintenance, modification, and removal of the facility. All facilities, including each piece of equipment, shall be located and placed in a manner so as to not interfere with the use of the PROW, impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, impair the primary use and purpose of poles/signs/traffic signals or other infrastructure, interfere with outdoor dining areas or emergency facilities, or otherwise obstruct the accessibility of the PROW.

(g)     Contact Information. Each permittee of a wireless telecommunications facility shall provide the public works director with the name, address and twenty-four-hour local or toll free contact phone number of the permittee, the owner, the operator and the agent responsible for the maintenance of the facility (“contact information”). Contact information shall be updated within seven days of any change.

(h)     All facilities, including, but not limited to, telecommunication towers, poles, accessory equipment, lighting, fences, walls, shields, cabinets, artificial foliage or camouflage, and the facility site shall be maintained in good condition, including ensuring the facilities are reasonably free of:

(1)     Subsidence, cracking, erosion, collapse, weakening, or loss of lateral support to city streets, sidewalks, walks, curbs, gutters, trees, parkways, street lights, traffic signals, improvements of any kind or nature, or utility lines and systems, underground utility line and systems (water, sewer, storm drains, gas, oil, electrical, etc.) that result from any activities performed in connection with the installation and/or maintenance of a wireless facility in the PROW.

(2)     General dirt and grease;

(3)     Chipped, faded, peeling, and cracked paint;

(4)     Rust and corrosion;

(5)     Cracks, dents, and discoloration;

(6)     Missing, discolored or damaged artificial foliage or other camouflage;

(7)     Graffiti, bills, stickers, advertisements, litter and debris. All graffiti on facilities must be removed at the sole expense of the permittee within forty-eight hours after notification from the city.

(8)     Broken and misshapen structural parts; and

(9)     Any damage from any cause.

(i)      All trees, foliage or other landscaping elements approved as part of the facility shall be maintained in neat, safe and good condition at all times, and the permittee, owner and operator of the facility shall be responsible for replacing any damaged, dead or decayed landscaping. No amendment to any approved landscaping plan may be made until it is submitted to and approved by the public works director.

(j)      The permittee shall replace its facilities, after obtaining all required permits, if maintenance or repair is not sufficient to return the facility to the condition it was in at the time of installation.

(k)     Each facility shall be operated and maintained to comply at all conditions of approval. The permittee, when directed by the city, must perform an inspection of the facility and submit a report to the public works director on the condition of the facility to include any identified concerns and corrective action taken. Additionally, as the city performs maintenance on city-owned infrastructure, additional maintenance concerns may be identified. These will be reported to the permittee. The city shall give the permittee thirty days to correct the identified maintenance concerns after which the city reserves the right to take any action it deems necessary, which could include revocation of the permit. The burden is on the permittee to demonstrate that it complies with the requirements herein. Prior to issuance of a permit under this chapter, the owner of the facility shall sign an affidavit attesting to understanding the city’s requirement for performance of annual inspections and reporting.

(l)      All facilities permitted pursuant to this chapter shall comply with the American with Disabilities Act.

(m)    The permittee is responsible for obtaining power to the facility and for the cost of electrical usage.

(n)     Failure to comply with the city’s adopted noise standard after written notice and reasonable opportunity to cure have been given shall be grounds for the city to revoke the permit.

(o)     Interference.

(1)     The permittee shall not move, alter, temporarily relocate, change, or interfere with any existing structure, improvement, or property without the prior consent of the owner of that structure, improvement, or property. No structure, improvement, or property owned by the city shall be moved to accommodate a permitted activity or encroachment, unless the city determines that such movement will not adversely affect the city or any surrounding businesses or residents, and the permittee pays all costs and expenses related to the relocation of the city’s structure, improvement, or property. Prior to commencement of any work pursuant to a wireless encroachment permit, the permittee shall provide the city with documentation establishing to the city’s satisfaction that the permittee has the legal right to use or interfere with any other structure, improvement, or property within the PROW or city utility easement to be affected by permittee’s facilities.

(2)     The facility shall not damage or interfere in any way with city property, the city’s operations or the operations of prior-existing, third party installations. The city will reasonably cooperate with the permittee and/or carrier to carry out such activities as are necessary to correct the interference.

(A)    Signal Interference. The permittee shall correct any such interference within twenty-four hours of written notification of the interference. Upon the expiration of the twenty-four-hour cure period and until the cause of the interference is eliminated, the permittee shall cease operation of any facility causing such interference until such interference is cured.

(B)    Physical Interference. The city shall give the permittee thirty days to correct the interference after which the city reserves the right to take any action it deems necessary, which could include revocation of the permit.

(3)     The city at all times reserves the right to take any action it deems necessary, in its sole discretion, to repair, maintain, alter, or improve the sites. Such actions may temporarily interfere with the operation of the facility. The city will in all cases, other than emergencies, give the applicant thirty days written notification of such planned, non-emergency actions.

(p)     RF Exposure Compliance. All facilities must comply with all standards and regulations of the FCC and any other state or federal government agency with the authority to regulate RF exposure standards. After transmitter and antenna system optimization, but prior to unattended operations of the facility, the permittee or its representative must conduct on-site post-installation RF emissions testing to demonstrate actual compliance with the FCC Office of Engineering and Technology Bulletin 65 RF emissions safety rules for general population/uncontrolled RF exposure in all sectors. For this testing, the transmitter shall be operating at maximum operating power, and the testing shall occur outwards to a distance where the RF emissions no longer exceed the uncontrolled/general population limit.

(1)     Testing of any equipment shall take place on weekdays only, and only between the hours of eight-thirty a.m. and four-thirty p.m., except that testing is prohibited on holidays that fall on a weekday. In addition, testing is prohibited on weekend days.

(q)     Records. The permittee must maintain complete and accurate copies of all permits and other regulatory approvals issued in connection with the facility, which includes, without limitation, this approval, the approved plans and photo simulations incorporated into this approval, all conditions associated with this approval and any ministerial permits or approvals issued in connection with this approval. In the event that the permittee does not maintain such records as required in this condition or fails to produce true and complete copies of such records within a reasonable time after a written request from the city, any ambiguities or uncertainties that would be resolved through an inspection of the missing records will be construed against the permittee.

(r)      Attorney’s Fees. In the event the city determines that it is necessary to take legal action to enforce any of these conditions, or to revoke a permit, and such legal action is taken, the permittee shall be required to pay any and all costs of such legal action, including reasonable attorney’s fees, incurred by the city, even if the matter is not prosecuted to a final judgment or is amicably resolved, unless the city should otherwise agree with permittee to waive said fees or any part thereof. The foregoing shall not apply if the permittee prevails in the enforcement proceeding. (Ord. 2040 § 5, 2019; Ord. 2039 § 5, 2019)

 

13.20.100 No dangerous condition or obstructions allowed.
No person shall install, use or maintain any wireless telecommunications facility that in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public right-of-way, when such installation, use or maintenance endangers or is reasonably likely to endanger the safety of persons or property, or when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or other governmental use, or when such facility unreasonably interferes with or unreasonably impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic including any legally parked or stopped vehicle, the ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business, the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, permitted sidewalk dining, permitted street furniture or other objects permitted at or near said location. (Ord. 2040 § 5, 2019; Ord. 2039 § 5, 2019)

 

13.20.110 Nonexclusive grant—No possessory interests.
(a)     No permit or approval granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public right-of-way of the city for any purpose whatsoever. Further, no approval shall be construed as a warranty of title.

(b)     No possessory interest is created by a WTFP. However, to the extent that a possessory interest is deemed created by a governmental entity with taxation authority, the permittee acknowledges that the city has given to the applicant notice pursuant to California Revenue and Taxation Code Section 107.6 that the use or occupancy of any public property pursuant to a WTFP may create a possessory interest which may be subject to the payment of property taxes levied upon such interest. Wireless telecommunications facility operators shall be solely liable for, and shall pay and discharge prior to delinquency, any and all possessory interest taxes or other taxes, fees, and assessments levied against their right to possession, occupancy, or use of any public property pursuant to any right of possession, occupancy, or use created by the WTFP.

(c)     The permission granted by a WTFP shall not in any event constitute an easement on or an encumbrance against the PROW. No right, title, or interest (including franchise interest) in the PROW, or any part thereof, shall vest or accrue in permittee by reason of a wireless encroachment permit or the issuance of any other permit or exercise of any privilege given thereby. (Ord. 2040 § 5, 2019; Ord. 2039 § 5, 2019)

 

13.20.120 Permit expiration—Abandonment of applications.
(a)     Permit Term. Unless Government Code Section 65964, as may be amended, authorizes the city to issue a permit with a shorter term, a permit for any wireless telecommunications facility shall be valid for a period of ten years, unless pursuant to another provision of this code it lapses sooner or is revoked. At the end of ten years from the date of issuance, such permit shall automatically expire.

(b)     A permittee may apply for a new permit within one hundred eighty days prior to expiration. Said application and proposal shall comply with the city’s current code requirements for wireless telecommunications facilities.

(c)     Timing of Installation. The installation and construction authorized by a WTFP shall begin within one year after its approval, or it will expire without further action by the city. The installation and construction authorized by a WTFP shall conclude, including any necessary post-installation repairs and/or restoration to the PROW, within thirty days following the day construction commenced.

(d)     Commencement of Operations. The operation of the approved facility shall commence no later than ninety days after the completion of installation, or the WTFP will expire without further action by the city. The permittee shall provide the public works director notice that operations have commenced by the same date. (Ord. 2040 § 5, 2019; Ord. 2039 § 5, 2019)

 

13.20.130 Cessation of use or abandonment.
(a)     A wireless telecommunications facility is considered abandoned and shall be promptly removed as provided herein if it ceases to provide wireless telecommunications services for ninety or more consecutive days unless the permittee has obtained prior written approval from the director which shall not be unreasonably denied. If there are two or more users of a single facility, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the facility.

(b)     The operator of a facility shall notify the public works director in writing of its intent to abandon or cease use of a permitted site or a nonconforming site (including unpermitted sites) within ten days of ceasing or abandoning use. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, the operator of the facility shall provide written notice to the public works director of any discontinuation of operations of thirty days or more.

(c)     Failure to inform the public works director of cessation or discontinuation of operations of any existing facility as required by this section shall constitute a violation of any approvals and be grounds for:

(1)     Litigation;

(2)     Revocation or modification of the permit;

(3)     Acting on any bond or other assurance required by this article or conditions of approval of the permit;

(4)     Removal of the facilities by the city in accordance with the procedures established under this code for abatement of a public nuisance at the owner’s expense; and/or

(5)     Any other remedies permitted under this code or by law. (Ord. 2040 § 5, 2019; Ord. 2039 § 5, 2019)

 

13.20.140 Removal and restoration—Permit expiration, revocation or abandonment.
(a)     Upon the expiration date of the permit, including any extensions, earlier termination or revocation of the WTFP or abandonment of the facility, the permittee, owner or operator shall remove its wireless telecommunications facility and restore the site to the condition it was in prior to the granting of the WTFP, except for retaining the landscaping improvements and any other improvements at the discretion of the city. Removal shall be in accordance with proper health and safety requirements and all ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city. Expired, terminated or revoked wireless telecommunications facility equipment shall be removed from the site at no cost or expense to the city.

(b)     Failure of the permittee, owner or operator to promptly remove its facility and restore the property within ninety days after expiration, earlier termination or revocation of the WTFP, or abandonment of the facility, shall be a violation of this code. Upon a showing of good cause, an extension may be granted by the public works director where circumstances are beyond the control of the permittee after expiration. Further failure to abide by the timeline provided in this section shall be grounds for:

(1)     Prosecution;

(2)     Acting on any security instrument required by this chapter or conditions of approval of permit;

(3)     Removal of the facilities by the city in accordance with the procedures established under this code for abatement of a public nuisance at the owner’s expense; and/or

(4)     Any other remedies permitted under this code or by law.

(c)     Summary Removal. In the event any city director or city engineer determines that the condition or placement of a wireless telecommunications facility located in the public right-of-way constitutes a dangerous condition, obstruction of the public right-of-way, or an imminent threat to public safety, or determines other exigent circumstances require immediate corrective action (collectively, “exigent circumstances”), such director or city engineer may cause the facility to be removed summarily and immediately without advance notice or a hearing. Written notice of the removal shall include the basis for the removal and shall be served upon the permittee and person who owns the facility within five business days of removal and all property removed shall be preserved for the owner’s pick-up as feasible. If the owner cannot be identified following reasonable effort or if the owner fails to pick-up the property within sixty days, the facility shall be treated as abandoned property.

(d)     Removal of Facilities by City. In the event the city removes a wireless telecommunications facility in accordance with nuisance abatement procedures or summary removal, any such removal shall be without any liability to the city for any damage to such facility that may result from reasonable efforts of removal. In addition to the procedures for recovering costs of nuisance abatement, the city may collect such costs from the performance bond posted and to the extent such costs exceed the amount of the performance bond, collect those excess costs in accordance with this code. Unless otherwise provided herein, the city has no obligation to store such facility. Neither the permittee, owner nor operator shall have any claim if the city destroys any such facility not timely removed by the permittee, owner or operator after notice, or removal by the city due to exigent circumstances. (Ord. 2040 § 5, 2019; Ord. 2039 § 5, 2019)

 

13.20.150 Effect on other ordinances.
Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall not relieve a person from complying with any other applicable provision of this code. In the event of a conflict between any provision of this chapter and other sections of this code, this chapter shall control. (Ord. 2040 § 5, 2019; Ord. 2039 § 5, 2019)

 

13.20.160 State or federal law.
The implementation of this chapter and decisions on applications for placement of wireless telecommunications facilities in the PROW shall, at a minimum, ensure that the requirements of this chapter are satisfied, unless it is determined that the applicant has established that denial of an application would, within the meaning of federal law, prohibit or effectively prohibit the provision of personal wireless services, or otherwise violate applicable laws or regulations. If that determination is made, the requirements of this chapter may be waived, but only to the minimum extent required to avoid the prohibition or violation. (Ord. 2040 § 5, 2019; Ord. 2039 § 5, 2019)

 

13.20.170 Legal nonconforming wireless telecommunications facilities in the right-of-way.
(a)     Legal nonconforming wireless telecommunications facilities are those facilities that existed but did not conform to this chapter on the date this chapter became effective.

(b)     Legal nonconforming wireless telecommunications facilities shall, within ten years from the date this chapter became effective, be brought into conformity with all requirements of this article; provided, however, that should the owner desire to expand or modify the facility, intensify the use, or make some other change in a conditional use, the owner shall comply with all applicable provisions of this code at such time, to the extent the city can require such compliance under federal and state law.

(c)     An aggrieved person may file an appeal to the city council of any decision of the public works director or other deciding body made pursuant to this section. In the event of an appeal alleging that the ten-year amortization period is not reasonable as applied to a particular property, the city council may consider the amount of investment or original cost, present actual or depreciated value, dates of construction, amortization for tax purposes, salvage value, remaining useful life, the length and remaining term of the lease under which it is maintained (if any), and the harm to the public if the structure remains standing beyond the prescribed amortization period, and set an amortization period accordingly for the specific property. (Ord. 2040 § 5, 2019; Ord. 2039 § 5, 2019)

Title 14 WATER
Chapter 14.04 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 14.08 WATER DIVISION
Chapter 14.12 ESTABLISHMENT AND PAYMENT OF SERVICE
Chapter 14.16 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter 14.20 RATES AND CHARGES
Chapter 14.24 REGULATIONS
Chapter 14.28 FIRE HYDRANTS
Chapter 14.32 WATER RIGHTS
Chapter 14.34 WATER CONSERVATION

Chapter 14.04 DEFINITIONS
14.04.010 Definitions generally.
For the purposes of this title the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this chapter. (Prior code § 22.1)

 

14.04.020 Apartment.
“Apartment” means a room or suite of rooms which is occupied or designed to be occupied by one family for living or sleeping purposes. (Prior code § 22.1)

 

14.04.030 Division.
“Division” means the water division of the public works department of the city. (Ord. 1784 § 2, 2003)

 

14.04.040 Family.
“Family” means every head of a family; every unmarried person maintaining a residence or place of abode for him or herself, or for himself or herself and others; every person other than a guest in a hotel, rooming house, lodging house or boarding house to whom water is furnished from the water system of the city for use in any building. (Prior code § 22.1)

 

14.04.050 Home.
“Home” means every building other than those otherwise defined in this section. (Prior code § 22.1)

 

14.04.060 Office.
“Office” means a room or suite of rooms used by a person, or two or more persons, as a place for the transaction of their business. (Prior code § 22.1)

 

14.04.070 Person.
“Person” means a natural person, his or her heirs, personal representatives, and also includes a firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, trust business, receiver, syndicate or any group or combination acting as a unit. (Prior code § 22.1)

 

14.04.080 Service.
“Service” means every meter through which water is furnished. (Prior code § 22.1)

 

14.04.090 Storeroom.
“Storeroom” means a room or suite of rooms located upon the ground floor of a building and used as a place for the transaction of business. (Prior code § 22.1)

 

14.04.100 Subdivider.
“Subdivider” means a person who causes land to be divided into a subdivision by the filing and recording of a map thereof, or by dividing land without making, filing or recording a map thereof for him or herself or for others. (Prior code § 22.1)

 

14.04.110 Subdivision.
“Subdivision” means any real property improved or unimproved which is divided for the purpose of sale, whether immediate or future, by any subdivider either by the filing and recording of a map thereof or in any other manner whether a map thereof is made or not made as long as property is or has been divided for sale or is sold, and whether descriptions thereof are or were by metes and bounds or otherwise. (Prior code § 22.1)

Chapter 14.08 WATER DIVISION
14.08.010 Water division established.
The water division of the public works department of the city is hereby established. (Ord. 1784 § 4, 2003)

 

14.08.020 Powers.
The water division shall have charge and control of the water system of the city and of all things necessary or incidental to the conduct and management of the water division. (Ord. 1784 § 4, 2003)

 

14.08.030 Compensation.
The compensation of the officials and the employees of the water division shall be paid out of the funds of the water division. (Ord. 1784 § 4, 2003)

 

14.08.040 Right of entry.
Any and all properly authorized officials and employees of the water division shall be admitted to all parts of the premises supplied with water from the system, at all reasonable times, to inspect the premises and to see that the rules and regulation of the water division are being observed. (Ord. 1784 § 4, 2003)

Chapter 14.12 ESTABLISHMENT AND PAYMENT OF SERVICE
14.12.010 Duties of the finance director.
It shall be the duty of the finance director to receive all applications for service from the water division and all notices of whatsoever kind in connection with the water division. (Ord. 1784 § 6, 2003)

 

14.12.020 Notice of discontinuance of service.
The finance director shall be given not less than twenty four hours notice of all requests for discontinuance of service. (Ord. 1784 § 6, 2003)

 

14.12.030 Reports to director of public works.
The adminstrative services director shall report to the director of public works all connections and all shutoffs to be made. (Ord. 2049 § 2, 2020; Ord. 2048 § 2, 2020; Ord. 1784 § 6, 2003)

 

14.12.040 Financial duties.
The finance director shall prepare all statements of charges of the water division, receive all moneys paid to the water division and pay the same to the appropriate water system funds at the times and in the manner provided by law. Statements of charges shall be billed to each water system customer bimonthly (every two months). (Ord. 1784 § 6, 2003)

 

14.12.050 Delinquencies.
The charges stated on each water system bill is due and payable upon receipt. On the forty-second day after the billing date, the finance director shall mail a reminder to pay notice to the customer and shall assess a ten percent late payment penalty. The notice shall advise the customer of the following: customer’s name and address; amount that is past due; date by which payment or payment arrangements are required to avoid discontinuation of service; description of the process to dispute or appeal a bill; description of the process to apply for an amortization plan; and city phone number and a web link to the city’s written collection policy. If the bill and the penalty is not paid in full within sixty days from the billing date, the administrative services director shall report the delinquency to the public works director who shall thereupon cause the service connection to be shut off. (Ord. 2049 § 3, 2020; Ord. 2048 § 3, 2020; Ord. 1784 § 6, 2003)

 

14.12.060 Bond.
The finance director shall be bonded in a minimum amount of one hundred fifty thousand dollars with a sufficient surety company authorized to conduct business in the state of California. Such bond shall be conditioned that such collector shall fully and faithfully perform all of the duties of such office and shall fully and faithfully account for and pay over all moneys received by him or her as such collection official. (Ord. 1784 § 6, 2003)

Chapter 14.16 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS
14.16.010 Office created.
The public works director shall supervise the operations of the water division of the public works department. (Ord. 1784 § 8, 2003)

 

14.16.030 Duties.
The director of public works shall cause all connections and all shutoffs to be made.

He or she shall cause all meters to be read as required by the council and shall perform such duties as may be required of him or her by the council. (Prior code § 22.16)

Chapter 14.20 RATES AND CHARGES
14.20.010 Establishment of rates and charges.
The fees, rates, and charges for water services provided by the water division shall be established pursuant to ordinance by the city council. (Ord. 1784 § 11, 2003)

 

14.20.020 Adjustment of charges.
The city manager or designee shall have the authority to make adjustments to water bills if he or she deems an adjustment is appropriate. He or she shall make a thorough investigation of any complaints of unusually high bills and the circumstances therefor, make the adjustment, if appropriate, and notify the customer and the collector. (Ord. 2049 § 4, 2020; Ord. 2048 § 4, 2020; Ord. 1536 § 12, 1989)

 

14.20.030 Delinquency—Cutting off service.
All accounts which have not been paid by the close of business on the sixtieth day following date of the bill are subject to disconnection. A penalty shall be added to the bill equal to ten percent of the bill. The director of public works may cut off the water from all such delinquent services if not paid within sixty days of date of the bill, and the same shall not be connected until all charges as provided in this chapter have been paid to the city. (Ord. 2049 § 5, 2020; Ord. 2048 § 5, 2020; Ord. 1536 § 12, 1989)

 

14.20.040 Reimbursement contracts with subdividers.
The city council may, by ordinance, require that improvements installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision contain supplemental size, capacity, number, or length for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, and that those improvements be dedicated to the public. Upon the installation of the supplemental improvements, the city shall enter into an agreement with the subdivider to reimburse the subdivider for the cost, including interest, of constructing the supplemental improvements. (Ord. 1536 § 12, 1989)

 

14.20.050 Refund and reimbursement contracts with nonsubdividing developers.
In the event it is necessary for a private party or developer other than a subdivider to construct a water line of greater size than required to serve the development in order to serve other areas of the city’s water distribution system, or it is necessary to install a water line which will provide direct benefit to adjacent undeveloped property, the cost thereof shall be advanced by the developer and the city at its option and upon written request may enter into an agreement to refund, based on benefit, the additional cost or differential in cost so advanced by him or her, without interest, but in no case shall the total refund exceed the amount so advanced. (Ord. 1536 § 12, 1989)

 

14.20.060 Conditions concerning refunds on reimbursement contracts.
(a)     Refunds shall not be made on any mains eight inches in diameter or smaller.

(b)     Refunds shall not exceed one-third of the gross revenue from water sold to consumers supplied within the subdivision or development during the life of the agreement.

(c)     Refunds shall not be made after the expiration of ten years from the date of the agreement or contract.

(d)     Refunds shall be made from a special water fund provided therefor and shall not constitute a claim on the general funds of the city.

(e)     Undeveloped property benefit fees shall first be collected by the city at time of development from benefited property and then refunded in the manner and at the rate specified in the reimbursement contract. (Ord. 1536 § 12, 1989)

 

14.20.070 Readiness to serve charge.
Effective January 1, 2017, and subject to adjustment as set forth in Section 14.20.085, the bimonthly base charge for each metered connection within the city of Glendora’s service boundaries shall be as follows:

 

 

Meter Size

Bimonthly Base Charge

< 1 inch

$    79.29

1 inch

    103.08

1-1/2-inch

   171.17

2-inch

   245.81

3-inch

   364.75

4-inch

   555.09

6-inch

   967.44

8-inch

1,363.91

(Ord. 2010 § 4, 2016)

 

14.20.080 Quantity rates for water used.
(a)     In addition to the bimonthly base charge established by Section 14.20.070 of this code, each customer shall pay a charge, calculated as set forth in this section, for each unit of one hundred cubic feet of water consumed at his or her connection during a bimonthly billing period.

(b)     Each water connection is assigned a “baseline” consumption allowance, in units of one hundred cubic feet of water, based upon the size of the water meter for that connection. The baseline allocations shall be as follows:

 

 

Meter Size

Bi-Monthly Baseline Allocation, Units

< 1 inch

38

1 inch

67

1-1/2-inch

134

2-inch

220

3-inch

838

4-inch

1,316

6-inch

4,682

8-inch

4,682

Each unit of water consumed at a connection during a bi-monthly billing period, other than a unit in excess of the baseline allocation for that connection, shall be deemed a “Tier 1 Unit.” Each unit in excess of the baseline allocation shall be deemed a “Tier 2 Unit.”

 

(c)     The rate for each Tier 1 unit consumed shall be the sum of the “energy component rate,” and the “other costs component (T1) rate” set forth in this section. The rate for each Tier 2 unit consumed shall be the sum of the “purchased water component rate,” the “energy component rate,” and the “other costs component (T2) rate” set forth in this section.

(d)     Beginning January 1, 2017, and subject to adjustment as set forth in Section 14.20.085, the “purchased water component rate” shall be one dollar ninety-one cents per unit of water consumed.

(e)     Beginning January 1, 2017, and subject to adjustment as set forth in Section 14.20.085, the “energy component rate” shall be twenty-three cents per unit of water consumed at a connection located in pressure zone 1, thirty-five cents per unit of water consumed at a connection located in pressure zone 2, fifty-six cents per unit of water consumed at a connection located in pressure zone 3, and one dollar thirty-six cents per unit of water consumed at a connection located in any other pressure zone. The pressure zone in which a connection is located shall be determined by reference to the 2012 Water Master Plan, which is on file in the office of the city clerk and available for public inspection.

(f)      Beginning January 1, 2017, the “other costs component (T1) rate” shall be one dollar ninety cents per unit of water consumed.

Beginning January 1, 2018, and subject to adjustment as set forth in Section 14.20.085, the “other costs component (T1) rate” shall be two dollars seven cents per unit of water consumed.

Beginning January 1, 2019, and subject to adjustment as set forth in Section 14.20.085, the “other costs component (T1) rate” shall be two dollars twenty-six cents per unit of water consumed.

Beginning January 1, 2020, and subject to adjustment as set forth in Section 14.20.085, the “other costs component (T1) rate” shall be two dollars forty-six cents per unit of water consumed.

Beginning January 1, 2021, and subject to adjustment as set forth in Section 14.20.085, the “other costs component (T1) rate” shall be two dollars sixty-seven cents per unit of water consumed.

(g)     Beginning January 1, 2017, “other costs component (T2) rate” shall be one dollar sixty-seven cents per unit of water consumed.

Beginning January 1, 2018, and subject to adjustment as set forth in Section 14.20.085, the “other costs component (T2) rate” shall be one dollar eighty-three cents per unit of water consumed.

Beginning January 1, 2019, and subject to adjustment as set forth in Section 14.20.085, the “other costs component (T2) rate” shall be two dollars per unit of water consumed.

Beginning January 1, 2020, and subject to adjustment as set forth in Section 14.20.085, the “other costs component (T2) rate” shall be two dollars nineteen cents per unit of water consumed.

Beginning January 1, 2021, and subject to adjustment as set forth in Section 14.20.085, the “other costs component (T2) rate” shall be two dollars forty cents per unit of water consumed. (Ord. 2010 § 6, 2016)

 

14.20.085 Automatic rate adjustments.
(a)     No later than December 1st of each year, beginning in 2017, the director of public works shall file with the city clerk a schedule of revised rates, calculated pursuant to this section, to be effective on the first billing cycle of the following year. At least thirty days prior to implementing revised rates, the director of public works shall notify all customers regarding the rate revisions.

(b)     Unless the city council takes action, by ordinance or resolution, to cause such revised rates to not become effective, the revised rates shall take effect automatically, and shall be deemed to have been approved and imposed by the city council pursuant to the ordinance codified in this section.

(c)     The purchased water component rate, imposed pursuant to Section 14.20.080(d) of this chapter shall be calculated by adjusting that rate (including any previous adjustments made pursuant to this section) by the percentage change between the previous year and the year for which the rate is being calculated, of the cost of water if purchased by the city from Three Valley’s Municipal Water District at the District’s published rates applicable to the city.

(d)     Each energy component rate imposed pursuant to Section 14.20.080(e) of this chapter shall be calculated by adjusting that rate (including any previous adjustments made pursuant to this section) by the percentage change between the previous year and the year for which the rate is being calculated, of the sum of the published rate for a kilowatt hour of electricity provided to the city by Azusa Power and the tariffed rate for a kilowatt hour of electricity provided to the city by Southern California Edison.

(e)     Each rate set forth in Sections 14.20.070, 14.20.080(f) and 14.20.080(g) of this chapter shall be calculated by adjusting that rate by the percentage change in the consumer price index for all urban consumers for Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside published by the U.S. Department of Labor between October 1, 2016 and the most recently published index as of October of the year prior to the date on which the adjustment will go into effect, but not to exceed a total increase of five percent for each year since 2017. (Ord. 2010 § 8, 2016)

 

14.20.090 Miscellaneous rates.
All water used other than through a service connection and meter shall be through a fire hydrant meter. The applicant shall deposit one thousand twenty dollars with the city, which will be returned when the account is closed, for such service and shall pay a minimum charge of one hundred dollars per month or portion thereof for such use. Quantity charges shall be at the rate of one dollar ninety three cents per one hundred cubic feet in Zone 1, two dollars and four cents per one hundred cubic feet in Zone II, two dollars and seventeen cents per one hundred cubic feet in Zone III and two dollars and eighty seven cents per one hundred cubic feet in Zone IV and above. (Ord. 1873 § 6, 2007)

 

14.20.130 Fire service readiness to serve charge.
A monthly readiness to serve charge of five dollars per diameter-inch for fire service installations shall be made. This is a fire service readiness to serve charge for all installations which are specifically installed for fire protection only, not including fire hydrants. (Ord. 1784 § 18, 2003)

 

14.20.140 Deposits.
Deposits shall be required from applicants for water service as follows: if the applicant is the owner of the real property to be served, the deposit will not be required on proof of ownership established to the satisfaction of the water division. All other applicants shall deposit with the water division the sum of two hundred dollars. (Ord. 1784 § 19, 2003)

 

14.20.150 Extension service fee—Service acreage fee.
On application made for an extension of the water distributing system of the water division or for water service, the applicant shall pay an additional charge based upon the cost of the supply main distributing line or transmission line serving the territory in which the applicant’s property is located. The city engineer shall determine the ratio which the applicant’s property bears to the total area to be served by the area of such system and such main distributing line or transmission line, and shall determine the charge in direct relationship to such ratio as it bears to the cost of installation of such main distributing line or transmission line. The city engineer shall recommend to the city council that the charge as calculated by him or her be imposed upon the applicant as a condition precedent to receiving the requested service. The city council shall determine the fees to be charged to the applicant upon consideration of the city engineer’s recommendations. The charge imposed by this section is denominated as service acreage fee. (Ord. 1784 § 20, 2003)

 

14.20.160 Connection charge.
There shall be imposed a charge of eight dollars per front foot for each parcel of land proposed to be developed or redeveloped and to be served with water from an existing city water main expressly covered under a reimbursement contract, to be paid by the owner of the property. (Ord. 1784 § 21, 2003)

 

14.20.170 Installing mains.
Whenever water is to be supplied to a new development or subdivision in which water mains are not installed, or are installed but which must increase in size to adequately supply water to such subdivision or development or to conform to required capacities to serve other areas of the city’s water distribution system, the developer or subdivider is required to pay one hundred percent of the cost. Any new pipelines and appurtenances shall be installed by him or her in accordance with plans and specifications approved by, under the supervision of, and to the satisfaction of the director of public works. (Ord. 1784 § 22, 2003)

 

14.20.180 Reconnect fee.
A reconnect fee of seventy dollars during regular working hours and one hundred and fifty dollars after regular working hours shall be paid to the city prior to reconnection. After hours reconnections have until ten a.m. the next working day to pay the reconnection fee or service will be turned off. For a customer with a household income below two hundred percent of the federal poverty line or if the customer or any member of the customer’s household is a current recipient of the following benefits: CalWORKS, CalFresh, general assistance, Medi-Cal, SSI/State Supplementary Payment Program or California Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and Children, then the reconnection fee during the city’s regular working hours is limited to fifty dollars, or one hundred and fifty dollars after regular working hours. (Ord. 2049 § 6, 2020; Ord. 2048 § 6, 2020; Ord. 1784 § 23, 2003)

Chapter 14.24 REGULATIONS
14.24.010 Installation of meters.
The water division shall install meters for all connections for all users of water therefrom. (Ord. 1784 § 26, 2003)

 

14.24.020 Meters to remain property of city.
All meters, irrespective of installer, are the property of the city. (Prior code § 22.22)

 

14.24.030 Application for service.
Application for service must be made in writing to the office of the water division and signed by the applicant to be served or by his or her duly authorized agent. The applicant or his or her duly authorized agent must submit with the application evidence satisfactory to the water division of his or her right to have such service connected. The application shall be accompanied by a fee, established pursuant to resolution of the city council, for the processing of such application. (Ord. 1784 § 28, 2003)

 

14.24.040 Separate service pipe required—Exception.
Each and every house must have a separate service pipe; provided, however, that when there are two or more houses upon a single parcel of land or upon contiguous parcels of land under the ownership and management of one and the same person, there need be but one meter installed, but each house must have a separate, independent cutoff upon the pipe leading to such house. (Prior code § 22.24)

 

14.24.050 Installation of meter gate valve.
A three-quarters inch gate valve to be furnished by the city shall be installed upon the consumer’s side of the meter of all connections hereafter made. The cost of such gate valve and the installation thereof shall be paid by the consumer. (Prior code § 22.25)

 

14.24.060 Removal of old service pipe.
In cases where service pipes are required other than those already in use, the old service must be taken out. (Prior code § 22.26)

 

14.24.070 Right to shut off service for repairs.
The water division reserves the right to shut off the water from the mains and services at any time when the same may become necessary for the purpose of making repairs, connections or any other necessary act incident thereto, without notice to the consumer. (Ord. 1784 § 30, 2003)

 

14.24.080 Responsibility for pipes and equipment.
The city is not responsible for the condition of any pipes or equipment connected therewith, except those between the main lines of the system and the meter which is installed and users will be held liable for any injury which may result by reason of the condition of the pipes and equipment under their control. (Ord. 1784 § 32, 2003)

 

14.24.090 Cross connections.
The regulations of the state department of public health insofar as the same are applicable to the protection of the water supply of the water division (including all applicable State Administrative Codes) are hereby adopted, incorporated herein and made a part hereof.

No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the water division unless the water supply is protected, as required by the state regulations and this rule.

Backflow preventive devices required under this section shall be approved by the water division and shall be installed by and at the expense of the customer.

The customer shall regularly test and service such devices to maintain them in satisfactory operating condition and shall overhaul or replace such devices if they are found defective.

Records of such tests, repairs and overhauling shall be kept by the customer and made available to the water division.

Service of water to any premises may be discontinued by the water division if a backflow preventive device required by this rule and regulation is not installed, tested and maintained, or if any defect is found in an installed backflow preventive device, or if it is found that a backflow preventive device has been removed or bypassed, or if unprotected cross connections exist on the premises and service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. (Ord. 1784 § 34, 2003)

 

14.24.100 Discontinuance of service.
The water division shall have the right to discontinue the supply of water to and to seal or disconnect the service to the premises of, any consumer for the latter’s failure to comply with, or a violation or infraction of, any rule and regulation of the water division relative to the inspection of consumer’s premises for, to the prohibition of, or the protection of the public water supply against, cross connections, backflow or back siphonage, which shall, from time to time, be in force and effect.

A consumer shall be entitled to a reasonable notice of the intent of the water division to discontinue his or her service for his or her noncompliance with, or his or her violation or infraction of, any such rule and regulation and to a reasonable opportunity to comply therewith or to cease the violation or infraction thereof.

Provided, however, no such notice or opportunity to comply with or to cease a violation or infraction of, any such rule and regulation need be given in those instances in which the noncompliance, violation or infraction by the consumer has created, is creating or is likely to create, on the consumer’s premises or in the water supply system of the water division, conditions dangerous and detrimental to public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 1784 § 36, 2003)

 

14.24.110 Unlawful use of water and connections.
No person supplied with water from the water division shall allow, suffer or permit any other person to obtain water through his or her connections for use upon any other property other than that for which the connection was made.

Upon discovery of any violation of this section, it shall be the duty of the director of public works to notify the police department and to cause the meter at the connection of the party so violating this section to be taken out. The meter shall not be reinstalled until the person so violating this section shall have paid the sum of one hundred dollars plus all other accrued costs. (Ord. 1784 § 38, 2003)

 

14.24.120 Damage to meters by users.
After the meter has been installed, the cost of repairing any damage to such meter resulting from the negligence of the owner or occupant of such premises shall be paid to the collector upon presentation of a statement therefor. In the event of a failure, refusal or neglect to pay such charges on demand, the director of public works shall cause such meter to be taken out immediately, and the same shall not be reinstalled until all such charges for repairing the meter plus one hundred dollars shall have been paid. (Ord. 1336 § 2, 1980; prior code § 22.33)

 

14.24.130 Tampering or interfering with meter.
All persons are forbidden to interfere with, tamper with or remove any meter from any service where the same has been installed.

Upon discovery that any user has been interfering with, tampering with or removing the meter installed at his or her connection, the director of public works shall cause such meter to be taken out immediately and the same shall not be replaced until such user shall have paid to the collector the cost of a meter box, a lock and seal for such meter and the cost of installing such meter, lock, box and seal. (Prior code § 22.34)

 

14.24.140 User turning on water.
Should the occupant of the premises turn on the water or allow, suffer or permit the same to be turned on after it has been turned off by the water division, the meter at such connection may be immediately taken out, and shall not be reinstalled until the water division has been paid the sum of one hundred dollars plus all other accrued costs. (Ord. 1784 § 40, 2003)

 

14.24.150 Form of notice—Payment to finance director.
Whenever this title provides that a notice shall be given to the water division or a payment be made to the water division, such notice must be in writing and such notice and such payment shall be given to the finance director only. (Ord. 1784 § 42, 2003)

 

14.24.170 Wasting water.
No one shall use, suffer, permit or allow any water to run to waste either inside or outside of his or her premises. (Prior code § 22.38)

 

14.24.180 Curtailment of use during water shortage.
Whenever the city shall be suffering a shortage of water caused by any means whatsoever, the council shall have the right to determine that no water shall be used for the purpose of spraying trees, irrigating lawns, flowers, trees, garden truck and all other things, save and except such as may be necessary to be used within houses for cooking, bathing and toilet purposes and such as may be necessary to water such animals and fowl as the occupant of the premises may have thereon.

When the city council so elects and a notice thereof is given to the consumers of the water division, either in person or by publication in a newspaper published in the city, such rule shall become operative, and whenever any person violates the foregoing rule when in force, the council may instruct the director of public works or other person in charge of such department to shut off the water from the service of such person.

The water shall not be turned on again until the person to whom such service is charged shall have paid in to the water division the sum of one hundred dollars. (Ord. 1784 § 44, 2003)

 

14.24.190 Consumers deemed to consent to conditions of pressure and service.
In the event that water pressures are inadequate to serve the requirements of any consumer, it shall be the responsibility of that consumer to install, on his or her own premises and at his or her own expense, whatever devices are necessary to boost the pressure on his or her own premises. In the event water pressures are in excess of any consumer’s requirement, it shall be the responsibility of that consumer to install, on his or her own premises and at his or her own expense, whatever devices are necessary to protect his or her property and reduce the pressure on his or her own premises.

All persons applying for or receiving water service shall be required to accept and shall be deemed to have consented to all provisions of this chapter and to such conditions of pressure and service as are provided by the system at the location served, and to hold the city harmless from any damages arising out of low pressure or high pressure conditions or interruptions of service. (Ord. 1440 § 1, 1984)

Chapter 14.28 FIRE HYDRANTS
14.28.010 Permit required for use—Exception.
No person other than members of the fire department or water division shall use any of the fire hydrants connected with the water system of the city, for any purpose, without securing a permit to do so from the fire department and the water division. (Ord. 1784 § 46, 2003)

 

14.28.020 Fire hydrant meter.
Any use of water from a fire hydrant shall be through a fire hydrant meter. The deposit required and the rates for said use shall be in accordance with Section 14.20.090. Any person using water except through a fire hydrant meter shall be subject to a penalty of five hundred dollars. (Ord. 1336 § 7, 1980; prior code § 22.62)

Chapter 14.32 WATER RIGHTS
14.32.010 Transfer of water rights.
Water rights which have been adjudicated to users or producers within the city shall not be sold, leased or disposed of to other users or producers without prior consent of the city. (Ord. 1190 § 2, 1973)

Chapter 14.34 WATER CONSERVATION
14.34.010 Definitions.
“Account holder” means the person or entity responsible for payment of water services provided by the city of Glendora at a particular property, as shown in the city’s water billing records.

“Consumer” means a person or entity who uses water provided by the city of Glendora.

“Director” means the director of the department of public works or a designated representative.

“Drought condition” means a condition in which the existing or projected water supply available to the city is not anticipated to meet the ordinary water requirements of consumers. This condition may be the result of factors including but not limited to voluntary or mandatory curtailment of the city’s water allocation from the Upper San Gabriel Valley Watermaster, from the Metropolitan Water District, emergency conditions, and/or failure of the city’s or its supplier’s water distribution systems.

“Independent hearing officer” means a neutral person designated by the city manager. The independent hearing officer may be selected from programs such as the Los Angeles County Bar Association, JAMS or other similar programs offering the services of qualified independent hearing officers to hear such matters.

“Flow restrictor” means a device for reducing the flow of water through a meter.

“Third party purveyor” means water purveyors to which the city provides water, including but not limited to suburban water, Covina Irrigating Company and the city of Azusa.

“Waste” means, including, but not limited to, any use of water which causes unnecessary water runoff beyond the boundaries of any property as a result of overwatering the landscaping or vegetation, a broken irrigation system, improper spray direction of sprinkler nozzles, or failure to implement best practices irrigation planning. Waste also includes any failure to repair as soon as reasonably possible any leak or rupture in any water pipes, faucets, valves, plumbing fixtures or other water service appliances. Waste shall also mean the use of running water through an exterior hose, pipe or faucet not equipped with an automatic shut-off nozzle. (Ord. 1895 § 1, 2008)

 

14.34.020 Application.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all customers and property served water by the city’s water division wherever situated, and shall also apply to all property and facilities owned, maintained, operated, or under the jurisdiction of the various officers, departments, commissions, and agencies of the city. (Ord. 1895 § 1, 2008)

 

14.34.030 Prohibition against waste of water.
It shall be a violation of the Glendora Municipal Code for any consumer or account holder to waste any water obtained from or through the water facilities of the city. (Ord. 1895 § 1, 2008)

 

14.34.040 Access to water meters.
The city shall be given access to a consumer’s water meter for meter reading and repairing, shutting off or turning on water service and installation or removal of flow restrictors, wherever the meter is located. Such access shall not inhibit the operations of the city’s water division. (Ord. 1895 § 1, 2008)

 

14.34.050 Place of use of water.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or as specifically authorized by the director, water received from or through a consumer’s water meter shall be used only on and for the property served by that meter. (Ord. 1895 § 1, 2008)

 

14.34.060 Voluntary water conservation drought condition.
(a)     Upon adoption by the city council of a resolution declaring a voluntary conservation drought condition and for as long as the city is needing or projecting to import at least twenty-five percent of its water needs during any twelve-month period, all water consumers will be encouraged to voluntarily reduce water consumption to a level by at least ten percent. This shall apply to all public and private properties and facilities.

(b)     The city shall implement the following programs if a voluntary conservation drought condition has been declared:

(1)     Educational outreach:

(A)    Public mailings to residents on at least a bi-monthly basis requesting voluntary conservation and offering conservation measures suggestions;

(B)    Purchase conservation materials that can be used to educate customers directly or indirectly through community based organization events;

(C)    Inform restaurants and motel/hotel establishments of the need to reduce water offerings. Supply materials and signs to assist with the implementation of voluntary conservation measures.

(2)     Conservation capital program:

(A)    Offer a conservation capital program to customers based on similar economic formulas adopted by the California Public Utilities Commission;

(B)    Offer a conservation capital program based on any program adopted by the California Public Utilities Commission for other water purveyors.

(3)     The director or his or her designee is authorized to turn off the water of any property that fails to make corrective changes to any broken water system, sprinkler, etc., within seventy-two hours of being notified by the city by posting in a conspicuous location on the property. (Ord. 1895 § 1, 2008)

 

14.34.065 Stage one drought condition.
(a)     A stage one drought condition may be implemented by the city council when one or more of the following conditions exists:

(1)     Imported water is needed to meet forty percent of the city’s water system demand for the current or next fiscal year;

(2)     The city’s water well production for the current fiscal year is reduced by twenty-five percent below the production level for the same period of the preceding year;

 

(3)     Upon recommendation by the water commission that a water shortage exists, such as when the projected supply and demand for water reduces storage capacities and/or a reduction in the city’s ability to purchase water.

(b)     Prior to implementation of a stage one drought condition plan as provided in this chapter, the city council shall hold a public hearing for the purposes of determining whether the need for implementing a stage one drought condition exists. Notice of the time and place of said public hearing shall be published not less than ten days before the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The city council may, upon finding that the need for implementing a stage one drought condition exists, order implementation of a stage one drought condition plan as provided in this chapter. Said order shall be made by resolution of the city council and shall be published one time only in a daily newspaper of general circulation and shall become effective immediately upon such publication. The provisions of this section shall take effect with the first full billing period commencing on or after the effective date of the city council’s resolution. At any time during the stage one drought condition period, the city council may discontinue any plan or may implement another plan as provided in this chapter. Upon a finding by the city council that a stage one drought condition no longer exists, the stage one drought condition then in effect shall terminate.

(c)     Upon adoption by the city council of a resolution declaring a stage one drought condition and for as long as that condition exists, the following water use regulations, and such other regulations as may be adopted by resolution of the city council, shall apply to all use of water that is provided by or through the water distribution facilities of the city:

(1)     Each of the voluntary conservation drought condition regulations shall be applicable as long as they are not in conflict with the more restrictive regulations of the stage one drought condition;

(2)     The use of continuous running water from a hose, pipe, or faucet for the purpose of cleaning buildings and paved, tile, wood, plastic or other surfaces shall be prohibited, except in the event the director determines that such use is the only feasible means of correcting a potential threat to health, sanitation or safety;

(3)     Every operator of a restaurant providing table service shall offer water only upon request and post table signs notifying its customers of drought conditions and that water is available upon request;

(4)     Every operator of a hotel, motel, or other commercial establishment offering lodgings shall institute daily washing of towels and linens only upon request and shall post signs in each room notifying customers of the drought condition;

(5)     Any use of water that causes runoff to occur beyond the immediate vicinity of use shall be prohibited;

(6)     Watering shall be prohibited from eight a.m. to five p.m. of any yard, orchard, park, golf course, recreational area, or other area containing vegetation with the following exceptions:

(A)    The irrigation of trees and shrubs shall be allowed by any means and at any time of the day provided that:

(i)      The irrigation shall be confined to the area within the drip line of a tree or shrub,

(ii)     There shall be no run-off as a result of the irrigation,

(iii)   That the irrigation shall not exceed five minutes to each tree or shrub during any twenty-four-hour period,

(B)    The irrigation of plant material within commercial nurseries shall be allowed at any time of the day provided that:

(i)      The water is applied only to one plant or container of plants at a time, and

(ii)     The water is applied by means of a hose equipped with an automatic shut-off nozzle,

(C)    The irrigation of golf course greens and city parks shall be allowed by any means and at any time of the day for the purpose of germinating seed, promoting growth of sod, or leaching minerals from the soil for new growth purposes only;

(7)     When a stage one drought condition is declared, all consumers shall reduce their water consumption by at least ten percent below their average consumption for the same period of the previous year, or the year prior to the stage one drought condition being declared.

(d)     The director or designee is authorized to turn off the water of any property that fails to make corrective changes to any broken water system, sprinkler, etc., within twenty-four hours of being notified by the city by posting in a conspicuous location on the property. (Ord. 1925 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1895 § 1, 2008)

 

14.34.070 Stage two drought condition.
(a)     A stage two drought condition may be implemented by the city council when any of the following conditions exist:

(1)     City well production losses and metropolitan water district purchased water restrictions threaten the city’s ability to meet system demand;

(2)     Imported water is needed to meet sixty percent of the system demand;

(3)     Upon recommendation by the water commission that a water shortage exists when the projected supply and demand for water reduces storage capacities and/or the ability to purchase water.

(b)     Prior to implementation of a stage two drought condition as provided in this chapter, the city council shall hold a public hearing for the purposes of determining whether a need to implement a stage two drought condition exists. Notice of the time and place of said public hearing shall be published not less than ten days before the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The city council may, upon finding that a need to implement a stage two drought condition exists, order implementation of a stage two drought condition as provided in this chapter, or other measures which it deems appropriate to address the water shortage. Said order shall be made by resolution and shall be published one time only in a daily newspaper of general circulation and shall become effective immediately upon such publication. The provisions of this section shall take effect with the first full billing period commencing on or after the effective date of the city council’s resolution. At any time during the stage two drought condition period, the city council may discontinue the stage two drought condition or may implement another plan as provided in this chapter. Upon a finding by the city council that a stage two drought condition no longer exists, the stage two drought condition then in effect shall terminate.

(c)     Upon adoption by the city council of a resolution declaring a stage two drought condition and for as long as that condition exists, the following water use regulations, and such other regulations as may be adopted by resolution of the city council, shall apply to all use of water that is provided by or through the water distribution facilities of the city.

(1)     Each of the stage one drought condition regulations shall be applicable as long as they are not in conflict with any more restrictive regulations of the stage two drought condition;

(2)     With the exception of subsection (c)(3) of this section, the use of water through a meter that is used solely for irrigation purposes shall be prohibited, and the city shall have the right to shut off water service to any such meter without notice to the customer, account holders or any other person;

(3)     The watering of any yard, orchard, hillside, park, golf course, recreational area, or other area containing vegetation shall be limited to Monday, Wednesday and Friday for all even address locations and shall be limited to Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday for all odd address locations. Such watering times shall be limited to no more than five minutes for each water cycle station and done only between the hours of five p.m. and eight a.m.;

(4)     The private washing of all recreational vehicles and other vehicles shall be prohibited, except by use of a bucket and hose equipped with a self-closing valve that requires operator pressure to activate the flow of water;

(5)     The director is authorized to discontinue the supply of water to third party water purveyors during a stage two drought condition;

(6)     When a stage two drought condition is declared, all consumers shall reduce their water consumption by at least fifteen below their average consumption for the same period of the previous year, or the year prior to the stage two drought condition being declared. (Ord. 1925 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1895 § 1, 2008)

 

14.34.080 Exemptions.
(a)     Exemptions to the water use regulations set forth in this chapter may be granted by the director for specific uses of water on the basis of hardship, or if necessary to protect the public health, sanitation or safety and in accordance with such guidelines for exemptions as the city council may adopt, upon written application of the affected account holder.

(b)     In determining whether to grant exemptions to the water regulations, the director shall take into consideration all factors relevant to the customer’s water usage, including, but not limited to:

(1)     Whether any additional reduction in the customer’s water consumption will result in unemployment;

(2)     Whether additional members have been added to the customer’s household;

(3)     Whether any additional landscaped property has been added to the customer’s property subsequent to the base period;

(4)     Changes in vacancy factors in multifamily housing;

(5)     Increased number of employees in commercial, industrial and governmental offices;

(6)     Increased production requiring increased process water;

(7)     Water uses during new construction;

(8)     Adjustments to water use caused by emergency, health or safety hazards;

(9)     First filling of a permit-constructed swimming pool;

(10)   Water use necessary for reasons related to family illness or health; and

(11)   Whether the customer had, prior to the implementation of the applicable drought condition plan, taken measures to reduce the customer’s water consumption to the greatest extent possible.

(c)     Relief shall be granted only on a showing by the customer that the customer has achieved the maximum practical reduction in water consumption in the customer’s residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural or governmental water consumption, as the case may be, other than in the specific areas in which relief is being sought. No relief shall be granted to any customer who, when requested by the department, fails to provide the department with relevant information.

(d)     A denial of a request for an exemption shall be made within five calendar days after the application was received. The denial may be appealed to the water commission by filing a written request with the city clerk within ten calendar days after written notice of the director’s decision was deposited in the U.S. mail addressed to the account holder at the address shown on the application. The decision of the water commission shall be rendered within forty-five calendar days after the request was received by the city clerk. The decision of the water commission shall be final.

(e)     The prohibited uses of water from the water division provided in this chapter are not applicable to that use of water necessary for public health and safety or for essential governmental services such as police, fire, and emergency services. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to require the division to curtail the supply of water to any customer when, in the discretion of the division, such water is required by that customer to maintain an adequate level of public health and safety.  (Ord. 1895 § 1, 2008)

 

14.34.090 Violations.
(a)     Any failure to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as an infraction or misdemeanor as set forth herein. Every person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which the violation is committed, continued or permitted by such person.

(b)     The director or his or her designee is authorized to turnoff the water to any property that fails to make emergency repairs to any broken water system or sprinkler.

(c)     Violations of the regulations of the stage one or stage two drought conditions shall be punishable as follows:

(1)     The director or his or her designee shall give first-time violators a courtesy notice of the violation. The first citation shall specify the nature of the violations, the date on which it occurred and the corrective measures to be taken. No prosecution or punishment shall be initiated or levied in connection with the first violation.

(2)     Upon a second violation within the preceding twelve consecutive calendar months, the water account holder shall be punishable as an infraction. The director shall issue a written notice of violation to the account holder for the property where the violation occurred or is occurring, and impose a fine in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars.

(3)     Upon a third violation within the preceding twelve consecutive calendar months, the water account holder shall be punishable as an infraction. The director shall issue a written notice of violation to the account holder for the property where the violation occurred or is occurring, and impose a fine in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars.

(4)     Upon a fourth, or more violations within the preceding twelve consecutive calendar months, the water account holder shall be punishable as a misdemeanor with a fine to be imposed in the amount of one thousand dollars.

(d)     Violations of the regulations of the stage one or stage two drought conditions may result in the city installing a flow restrictor on the service to the property where the violation occurred or is occurring, for a period to be determined by the director.

(e)     Any penalty imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be added to the account of the account holder for the property where the violation occurred or is occurring and shall be due and payable on the same terms and subject to the same conditions as any other charge for regular water service. The maximum amount of penalties which an account holder may be required to pay during any twelve consecutive calendar month period are hereby established by this chapter of the Glendora Municipal Code. Penalties must be paid in full prior to restoration of water service.

(f)      Nothing in this chapter shall limit or be construed to limit the right of an account holder to seek reimbursement of a penalty from a tenant or other consumer. (Ord. 1895 § 1, 2008)

 

14.34.100 Notice of violation and request for hearing.
(a)     For each violation of this chapter, the director shall give notice as follows:

(1)     By sending written notice through the U.S. mail to the account holder for the property where the violation occurred or is occurring, at the current billing address shown in the city’s water billing records; and

(2)     By affixing written notice in a conspicuous place on the property where the violation occurred or is occurring.

(b)     Any written notice given under this section shall contain a statement of:

(1)     The date of the notice;

(2)     The time, place and nature of the violation;

(3)     The person(s) committing the violation, if known;

(4)     The provision(s) of this chapter violated;

(5)     The possible penalties for each violation;

(6)     The account holder’s right to request a hearing on the violation and the time within which such a request must be made; and

(7)     The account holder’s loss of the right to a hearing in the event the account holder fails to request a hearing within the time required.

(c)     Any account holder receiving a notice of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation of the code or that he or she is the responsible party by submitting a request for hearing form and returning it to the city within ten calendar days of the date of the notice of violation. The account holder must also post with the director a check/money order/cashier’s check in the amount of the proposed penalty for the violation(s) at the same time the request for a hearing is made.

(d)     Within thirty calendar days after the request for hearing form is received, an independent hearing officer shall conduct the hearing, at which both written and oral evidence may be presented, and shall decide whether a violation occurred and the appropriate penalty. In determining the appropriate penalty, the independent hearing officer may consider all mitigating factors associated with the violation. The director shall give written notice of the decision in accordance with subsection (a)(1) of this section.

(e)     For all appeals under this chapter the decision of the independent hearing officer shall be final.

(f)      There shall be no surcharge added to the account of the account holder and no installation of a flow restrictor until the notice of violation has become final or there is a final decision of the independent hearing officer ordering the penalty and installation of a flow restrictor or shut off of water service. (Ord. 1895 § 1, 2008)

 

14.34.110 Water conservation standards.
(a)     Plumbing Standards for Water Conservation. Plumbing standards for water conservation shall be as contained in the California Plumbing Code as adopted and amended by the city of Glendora in Chapter 19.08 of the Glendora Municipal Code.

(b)     Water Conservation Landscape Design Standards. All development proposals that are subject to review by the department of planning and redevelopment, project review committee or planning commission shall be required to install drought resistant landscaping in compliance with Section 21.03.060 of the Glendora Municipal Code. Each development proposal not subject to such review shall comply with such other water conservation landscape requirements as may be adopted by the department of planning and redevelopment.  (Ord. 1895 § 1, 2008)

 

14.34.120 Emergency water conservation drought condition.
(a)     An emergency water drought condition may be ordered by the city council in order to comply with the Governor’s Executive Order B-29-15, which is implemented by the State Water Resources Control Board’s adoption of Resolution 2015-0032 detailing emergency regulations for a statewide twenty-five percent reduction in potable urban water use, and other emergency water drought orders and regulations ordered by the Governor or other state boards or agencies.

(b)     Prior to implementation of an emergency water drought condition as provided in this chapter, the city council may, upon finding that a need to order an emergency water drought condition exists, order an emergency water drought condition, or other measures which it deems appropriate to address the water shortage emergency. Said order shall be made by resolution and shall be published one time only in a daily newspaper of general circulation and shall become effective immediately upon such adoption. The provisions of this section shall take effect immediately upon the effective date of the city council’s resolution.

(c)     Upon order of an emergency water drought condition and for as long as that condition exists, the following water use regulations, and such other regulations as may be adopted by resolution of the city council, shall apply to all use of water that is provided by or through the water distribution facilities of the city:

(1)     Each of the stage one drought condition regulations shall be applicable as long as they are not in conflict with more restrictive regulations of the emergency water conservation regulations.

(2)     All residential users, inclusive of single-family, and multi-family two to four units shall reduce their water consumption to the R-GPCD consumption levels set forth in a formal resolution adopted by the city council, which will comply with the state of California mandated consumption reduction level regulations.

(3)     All nonresidential users with landscape areas greater than five hundred square feet shall reduce their water consumption by twenty-five percent compared to the same billing months from the year 2013.

(4)     All nonresidential users with no landscape areas of five hundred square feet or less shall reduce their water consumption by ten percent compared to the same billing months from the year 2013.

(5)     All outdoor ornamental turf watering shall be limited as follows:

(A)    No more than a total of thirty minutes per station per week.

(B)    No station shall run more than six minutes per station per cycle.

(C)    A cycle must be complete with water shutoff for at least forty-five minutes before a new cycle can begin.

(6)     To prevent the waste and unreasonable use of water and to promote water conservation, each of the following actions is prohibited, except where necessary to address an immediate health and safety need or to comply with a term or condition in a permit issued by a state or federal agency:

(A)    The application of potable water to outdoor landscapes in a manner that causes runoff such that water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, private and public walkways, roadways, parking lots, or structures;

(B)    The use of a hose that dispenses potable water to wash a motor vehicle, except where the hose is fitted with a shut-off nozzle or device attached to it that causes it to cease dispensing water immediately when not in use;

(C)    The application of potable water to driveways and sidewalks;

(D)    The use of potable water in a fountain or other decorative water feature, except where the water is part of a recirculating system;

(E)     The application of potable water to outdoor landscapes during and within forty-eight hours after measurable rainfall;

(F)     The serving of drinking water other than upon request in eating or drinking establishments, including, but not limited to, restaurants, hotels, cafés, cafeterias, bars, or other public places where food or drink are served and/or purchased;

(G)    The irrigation with potable water of ornamental turf on public street medians; and

(H)    The irrigation with potable water of landscapes outside of newly constructed homes and buildings in a manner inconsistent with regulations or other requirements established by the California Building Standards Commission and the Department of Housing and Community Development.

(7)     All operators of hotels, motels, or other commercial establishments offering lodgings shall provide guests with the option of choosing not to have towels and linens laundered daily. The operators of these facilities shall prominently display notice of this option in each guestroom using clear and easily understood language and ensure such notices are maintained.

(d)     The city manager or designee is hereby authorized to implement all necessary measures or actions mandated or required to meet water conservation mandates imposed by the California State Water Resources Control Board or other state agencies without any further action by the city council. All such actions shall be reported to the city council for adoption by resolution prior to implementation.

(e)     Violation of the emergency water drought condition regulations shall be punishable as an infraction or misdemeanor as set forth herein. Every person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which the violation is committed, continued or permitted by such person. Violations shall be punishable as follows:

(1)     The director or designee shall give first-time violators a courtesy notice of the violation. The courtesy notice shall specify the nature of the violation(s), the date on which it occurred, the corrective measures to be performed, and notice that the violator shall:

(A)    Perform the corrective action;

(B)    Request a water use efficiency audit with the city within ten days; and

(C)    Undertake the relevant corrective action within ten days after completion of the water use efficiency audit.

(2)     Upon a second violation the violation by the water account holder shall be punishable as an infraction. The director or designee shall issue a written notice of violation to the account holder for the property where the violation occurred or is occurring, and impose a fine in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars.

(A)    Failure to comply with the corrective actions identified in the remedial water use efficiency audit in the first violation shall be deemed second violation subject to a two hundred fifty dollar fine.

(B)    Failure to comply with the corrective actions identified in the remedial water use efficiency audit in the first violation shall be deemed a separate violation every three days thereafter until the corrective action is completed.

(3)     Upon a third violation the violation by the water account holder shall be punishable as an infraction. The director shall issue a written notice of violation to the account holder for the property where the violation occurred or is occurring, and impose a fine in the amount of one thousand dollars.

(4)     Violations of the emergency water drought condition regulations may result in the city installing a flow restrictor on the service to the property where the violation occurred or is occurring, for a period to be determined by the director.

(5)     Any penalty imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be added to the account of the account holder for the property where the violation occurred or is occurring and shall be due and payable on the same terms and subject to the same conditions as any other charge for regular water service. The maximum amount of penalties which an account holder may be required to pay during any twelve consecutive calendar month period are hereby established by this chapter of the Glendora Municipal Code. Penalties must be paid in full prior to restoration of water service.

(6)     Nothing in this chapter shall limit or be construed to limit the right of an account holder to seek reimbursement of a penalty from a tenant or other consumer. (Ord. 2000 § 1, 2015; Ord. 1997 § 1, 2015; Ord. 1996 § 1, 2015)

Title 15 SEWERS
Chapter 15.04 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 15.08 APPLICABILITY OF TITLE
Chapter 15.12 PERMITS
Chapter 15.16 CONNECTION FEES
Chapter 15.20 SPECIFICATIONS
Chapter 15.24 REGULATIONS
Chapter 15.30 FATS, OILS AND GREASE CONTROL PROGRAM

Chapter 15.04 DEFINITIONS
15.04.010 Recorded in uniform code.
All definitions pertaining to the construction, maintenance and operation of the sanitary sewers under the jurisdiction of the city are as recorded in the Uniform Plumbing Code, 1961 Edition. (Ord. 907 § 1, 1963; prior code § 16.1)

Chapter 15.08 APPLICABILITY OF TITLE
15.08.010 Provisions applicable to property line only.
The provisions of this title and applicable permits, fees and inspection herein are limited to street sewers and house connection laterals to the property line only. All inspection and permits covering the building sewer from the property line to the building are covered under the Uniform Plumbing Code, 1961 Edition, as amended, and fall within the jurisdiction of the building director. (Ord. 907 § 1, 1963; prior code § 16.2)

Chapter 15.12 PERMITS
15.12.010 Connection permit required.
It is unlawful for any person other than the city engineer to commence or make any connection with any public or house connection sewer, or do or cause the same to be done, or to construct or cause to be constructed, or to use or cause to be used, or to alter or cause to be altered, any public or house connection sewer within the city without first obtaining a permit from the city engineer to do so. (Prior code § 16.13)

 

15.12.020 Application.
Any person desiring a permit for any of the purposes enumerated in this chapter, shall make application to the city engineer, giving such information as may be required, and if it appears therefrom that the work to be performed thereunder is to be done according to the regulations contained in this title and otherwise provided by law governing the construction of such work, a permit shall be issued upon payment of the fees as fixed by this title. (Prior code § 16.13)

 

15.12.030 Not required for repairs.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to require the application for, the issuance of, a permit for the purpose of removing stoppages or repairing a leak in any public or house connection sewer, except when it is necessary to replace any part of such sewer. (Prior code § 16.13)

 

15.12.040 Fees enumerated.
A fee of ten dollars shall be paid to the director of finance or his or her authorized representative at the time an application for a permit is filed under the provisions of Section 15.12.020. In addition to the permit fee of ten dollars, all main sewer construction applicants shall pay an inspection fee at the rate of twenty-five cents per lineal foot of sewer main constructed. An additional fee of twenty-five dollars shall be paid in the event a sewer pipe saddle is required and installed. In the event that any sewer connection requires excavation under a public sidewalk or other public improvement an additional fee of fifteen dollars shall be paid. Over and above all other fees provided for herein, an additional fee of twenty-five dollars shall be paid for the inspection of installation of manholes, junction structures, and any other structures constructed on the sewer line. (Ord. 1542 § 1, 1989; Ord. 1043 § 2, 1967; prior code § 16.13)

 

15.12.060 Duration of permit.
If the work authorized by a permit is not commenced within one hundred eighty days from the date of its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit and commenced thereunder shall be suspended or abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty days, then such permit shall thenceforth be null and void, and before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be taken out under the provisions of this chapter and the same fees as set forth in Section 15.12.040 shall be paid therefor. (Ord. 1542 § 3, 1989; prior code § 16.13)

 

15.12.070 Exceptions.
(a)     Subdivisions complying with the provisions of Title 20, relating to subdivisions, which have paid sewer inspection fees as prescribed in the S.M.-2 forms are exempt from the permit fees herein provided.

(b)     Contractors constructing sewers and appurtenances under contracts awarded and entered into by the city council for the construction of sewers and appurtenances are exempt from the permit fees and inspection charges herein provided. (Prior code § 16.13)

Chapter 15.16 CONNECTION FEES
15.16.010 New subdivisions.
Where the city sewer does not exist and the subdivision lies within approximately five hundred feet or as specified by the city engineer and ratified by the city council from existing sewers, the subdivider must construct the city sewer according to the city’s master plan of sewers and the city specifications. The initial cost of constructing the city sewer shall be borne by the subdivider. The city may enter into a refund agreement, not to exceed ten years, to reimburse the subdivider, based on benefit, the cost of constructing the sewer, excluding interest, for all property fronting the sewer not included in the subdivision at such time when the property conducts to the sewer. (Ord. 1542 § 5, 1989; Ord. 907 § 1, 1963; prior code § 16.14)

 

15.16.020 Property adjacent to existing sewer.
If the real property to be connected fronts on a street where a sewer exists and the boundary lines thereof are substantially parallel, the connection fee shall be six dollars and fifty cents per front foot of lot or parcel, measured parallel to the street front; but where the boundary lines thereof are not substantially parallel, the connection fee shall be six dollars and fifty cents per foot average width of such lot or parcel, as determined by the city engineer. The connection fee shall cover and permit the connection of only that portion of the lot or parcel to be connected which is within one hundred fifty feet from the street front of the property. The remainder of the lot or parcel, if any, shall not be connected to or use the sewer, either directly or indirectly, unless a permit is obtained therefor and an additional connection fee is paid at the rate of seven hundred thirty dollars per acre of area of such remaining property. A corner lot or parcel shall be considered to have one street front. All real property will be subject to charges made necessary by virtue of any refund agreement entered into by the city as a result of construction of any sewer connection or trunk lines. This charge will be in addition to the front footage charges herein provided. (Ord. 1542 § 6, 1989; Ord. 907 § 1, 1963; prior code § 16.14)

 

15.16.030 Property already assessed for sewer.
No connection fee should be required when the real property to be connected has been directly assessed for the cost of the street sewers. No connection fee shall be required when the street sewer has been installed with the approval of the city for the benefit of the real property to be connected, providing said property has contributed its pro rata share to the cost of the sewer installation, except as provided under a refund agreement with a third party. (Ord. 907 § 1, 1963; prior code § 16.14)

 

15.16.040 Refund for oversize lines.
In the event it is necessary to construct a sewer line exceeding eight inches in diameter, the city may enter into a refund agreement with the subdivider, owner or land developer in the amount of fifty cents per diameter inch per lineal foot sewer line, in excess of eight-inch diameter. The refund amount is to be paid over a period not to exceed five years. The amount of refund is to be paid from formal budget allocations and moneys received from sewer connection charges. (Ord. 907 § 1, 1963; prior code § 16.14)

 

15.16.050 Liability for connection fees.
The amount of any sewer connection fee shall be deemed a debt owing to the city, and any person who connects to a street sewer without having paid the connection fee in full as provided in this section, or any portion thereof, shall be liable to an action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction or the amount of such fee. The conviction and punishment of any person for connecting to a street sewer without obtaining a permit to do so shall not relieve such person from paying the connection fee due and unpaid at the time of such conviction, nor shall the payment of any connection fee prevent a criminal prosecution for the violation of any of the provisions of this title. All remedies prescribed hereunder shall be cumulative, and the use of any one or more remedies shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this title. (Ord. 907 § 1, 1963; prior code § 16.14)

Chapter 15.20 SPECIFICATIONS
15.20.010 Adoption of specification number 30.
All provisions specified in Specification Number 30, as revised August, 1960, are adopted as part of this title. (Prior code § 16.5)

 

15.20.020 Industrial waste connections.
All industrial waste connections shall be governed by the “Policy Governing Use of District Trunk Sewers” particularly part C—“Industrial Waste Connections” as specified by the Los Angeles County Sanitation District and the Sanitary Sewer and Industrial Waste Ordinance No. 6130 of Los Angeles county in addition to the conditions contained herein. (Prior code § 16.5)

 

15.20.030 Ground water pollution.
When it becomes necessary to construct septic tanks to satisfy the needs for sanitary or industrial disposal, plans shall be submitted to the building department of the city and all permits and fees pertaining thereto shall be paid to that department. Specifications governing the construction of the structure, and control of pollution to ground waters by use of such structure shall be determined by Los Angeles County Ordinance 6130 and the water pollution control board provisions applicable thereto. A copy of Los Angeles County Ordinance 6130 and the water pollution control board provisions applicable thereto has been deposited in the office of the city clerk and shall be at all times maintained by the city clerk for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 2042 § 2, 2019; prior code § 16.5)

Chapter 15.24 REGULATIONS
15.24.010 Enforcement of state law relating to connections.
Sections 17452 to 17456, inclusive, of the Health and Safety Code of the state, which require connection to a street sewer for the disposal of sewage and waste, shall be enforced by the city engineer. (Prior code § 16.3)

 

15.24.020 Connection to sewer required—Exception.
All plumbing affecting the sanitary condition of any building, habitation or structure within the boundaries of any lot shall be connected with a public sewer, provided, however, that if there is no public sewer in a public street, alley, or right-of-way on which the property abuts, or if the building or structure is located beyond the prescribed limit from such sewer, according to Sections 15.24.030 through 15.24.060, such building or structure may be connected to a septic tank. (Ord. 2042 § 3, 2019; prior code § 16.4)

 

15.24.030 Subdivisions.
The prescribed distance from existing sewers within which the subdivider shall be required to construct sewer mains is established at approximately five hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision. In the event the subdivision is located more than five hundred feet from an existing sewer, the city engineer may deem it advisable to require construction of additional lines to connect. The request of the city engineer must be ratified by the city council. If the subdivider feels that the request to connect to the sewers constitutes undue hardship regardless of the distance from existing sewers, he or she may request council consideration for a waiver of the requirements herein prescribed. (Prior code § 16.4)

 

15.24.040 Lot split.
The prescribed distance from existing sewers within which the property being split shall be required to construct sewers is established at approximately two hundred feet. In the event the property is located more than two hundred feet from an existing sewer, the city engineer may deem it advisable to request construction of additional lines. The request of the city engineer must be ratified by the city council. (Prior code § 16.4)

 

15.24.050 Individually owned dwelling.
If there is no public sewer in a public street, alley or right-of-way on which the property abuts, such building or structure may be connected to a cesspool and septic tank as permitted under Section 1101 of the Uniform Plumbing Code unless otherwise specified by the city engineer. In such instance, the city engineer’s recommendation must be ratified by the city council. (Prior code § 16.4)

 

15.24.060 Commercial—Manufacturing.
The need for extending sewer lines to connect to existing facilities will be determined by the city engineer in approving the plans according to the type of sewage to be disposed. The specifications governing such requests are to be in accordance with Sections 15.24.080 through 15.24.110, on industrial waste, and in accordance with the water pollution control board. (Prior code § 16.4)

 

15.24.070 Dry sewers.
In the event the city engineer or the city council determines that the off site sewer construction is an undue hardship on a subdivision, lot split or individually owned parcel then the developer of the property shall construct a “dry line” sewer including laterals and appurtenances for future service within the development and adjacent thereto as prescribed by the city engineer.

In addition to the “dry line” sewer the developer shall also install private sewage disposal in accordance with the requirements of the Glendora Plumbing Code. (Ord. 907 § 1, 1963; prior code § 16.4)

 

15.24.080 Discharge of industrial waste.
The city authorizes the discharge of industrial waste to the sewer subject to the general provision that no harm will result from such discharge. Reference is made to the county sanitation district policy governing the use of district trunk sewers and the industrial waste sections of the Los Angeles County Industrial Waste and Sewer Ordinance No. 6130 which provisions are adopted as part of this title. (Prior code § 16.6)

 

15.24.090 Industries connecting to city laterals.
An industry in the city, seeking to connect to a city lateral, will make application for a connection permit and an industrial waste disposal permit to the city. The city will process the application, conferring with the sanitation districts if it is deemed advisable, and will transmit to the sanitation districts the following information:

(1)     The name and address of the applicant;

(2)     The type of industry;

(3)     The type of pretreatment proposed; and

(4)     The quantity and character of effluent. (Prior code § 16.6)

 

15.24.100 Direct connection to district trunk sewers.
An industry in the city seeking to connect directly to a district trunk sewer will make application to the chief engineer of the Los Angeles sanitation district. Complete plans, specifications and descriptions of the proposed connection will be submitted to the chief engineer of the district, together with the following information:

(1)     The name and address of the applicant;

(2)     The type of industry;

(3)     The quantity and character of effluent; and

(4)     The type of pretreatment proposed.

Upon receipt of such plans, specifications and descriptions, the district chief engineer, if he or she shall find that the proposed connection complies with the requirements of the sanitation districts, shall approve the proposed connection and so certify upon the plans. Two sets of approved prints shall be returned to the district office. After such approval, the chief engineer or his or her representative shall inspect the actual work and for that purpose will require at least forty-eight hours’ notice prior to the inspection. The inspection will be completed within forty-eight hours of such notice. An industry waste disposal permit must also be obtained from the city. (Prior code § 16.6)

 

15.24.110 Discharge of waste by tank trucks.
(a)     Industries desiring to discharge industrial wastes by tank truck to manholes on lateral or collecting sewers will make application for an industrial waste disposal permit to the city engineer. The city engineer will, in turn, transmit to the sanitation district the following information:

(1)     The name and address of the applicant;

(2)     The quantity and character of discharge; and

(3)     The location of manholes used for discharge.

(b)     Industries desiring to discharge industrial wastes by tank truck to manholes on district trunk sewers will make application directly to the sanitation districts and will submit to the sanitation districts the following information:

(1)     The name and address of the applicant;

(2)     The name and address of the tank truck operator; and

(3)     The quantity and character of discharge.

The office of the district chief engineer will designate suitable manholes for discharge. An industrial waste disposal permit must also be obtained from the city engineer. (Prior code § 16.6)

 

15.24.120 Direct connection with cellar drain, yard shower.
It is unlawful for any person to connect any cellar drain or basement or yard shower directly with the soil or waste pipe, but such cellar drain or shower shall be trapped by a sand trap or any approved fitting according to the Uniform Plumbing Code. (Prior code § 16.8)

 

15.24.130 Special waste pipe connections.
It is unlawful for any person to connect any special waste pipe from any establishment or piece of equipment directly to any public sewer of the city, or house connection sewer leading thereto, but such special waste pipe shall discharge into a water supplied sink or similar plumbing fixture which may in turn be connected to the sewer. (Prior code § 16.9)

 

15.24.140 Engine blowoff or bailer exhaust connections.
It is unlawful for any person to cause, suffer, allow or permit the exhaust from any engine or the blowoff from any boiler to be connected directly to any public sewer of the city, or house connection sewer leading thereto, but such exhaust or blowoff shall first connect with a watertight sump which may, in turn, be connected to the public sewer. (Prior code § 16.10)

 

15.24.150 Cost and specifications for installation of connections.
The cost of the installation of house connections from the street sewer to the house shall be borne by the owner or subdivider. The cost shall include:

(1)     Permit to excavate in public street as required by Sections 13.12.030—13.12.130;

(2)     Inspection fees required by the building inspector covering inspection of the sewer from the property line to the building;

(3)     All sewer connection permits and fees herein required;

(4)     All construction costs as follows:

(A)    Excavation according to Chapter 13.12,

(B)    Laying pipe as specified in Specification No. 30,

(C)    Backfill and compaction in accordance with Specification No. 30,

(D)    Temporary patching.

Permanent resurfacing shall be performed by the city street forces. All sewer work shall be performed in a workmanlike manner by a qualified state licensed sewer contractor in accordance with Specification No. 30. (Prior code § 16.11)

 

15.24.160 Inspection of work.
All work done under the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to inspection. Notice must be given to the city engineer by the person doing the work, or causing the same to be done, immediately after the work is ready for inspection. Up to the time of the inspection, all work must be and remain uncovered and convenient for the inspector’s examination, and every facility must be given the inspector to make a thorough examination. If any pipes are enclosed, or covered in any way whatsoever, so as to tend to obstruct a thorough inspection of the drainage system, such obstruction must be removed upon notice to do so from the city engineer before an inspector shall be required to inspect the work. When, upon examination by the inspector, it appears that any such work is defective either in its construction or material, the same shall be made to conform to the requirements set forth in this chapter in default whereof, the permit therefor shall be revoked by the city engineer. (Prior code § 16.12)

 

15.24.170 Certificate of final inspection.
When it appears to the satisfaction of the city engineer that any work mentioned in this title has been constructed according to, and meets the requirements of, all provisions of this title and other applicable laws, and that all the fees for the doing and inspection thereof have been paid, the city engineer shall cause to be issued to the person constructing such work a certificate of final inspection, which certificate shall recite that such work has been done pursuant to the permit, has been constructed according to this code and other ordinances of the city and that the work is in a sanitary condition. The city engineer shall not issue such certificate of inspection, unless the requirements of this title have been adhered to. (Prior code § 16.12)

Chapter 15.30 FATS, OILS AND GREASE CONTROL PROGRAM
15.30.010 Scope and purpose.
To aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions from contributions and accumulation of fats, oils, and greases into the sanitary sewer system from industrial or commercial establishments, particularly food preparation and serving facilities. (Ord. 1918 § 1, 2009)

 

15.30.020 Definitions.
“Fats, oils, and greases” means organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in the United States Code of Federal Regulations 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as “grease” or “greases.”

“Food service establishments” means those establishments primarily engaged in activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for consumption by the public such as restaurant, commercial kitchen, caterer, hotel, school, hospital, prison, correctional facility, and care institution. These establishments use one or more of the following preparation activities: cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods), grilling, sautéing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching. Also included are infrared heating, searing, barbecuing, and any other food preparation activity that produces a hot, non-drinkable food product in or on a receptacle that requires washing.

“Grease interceptor” means a structure or device designed for the purpose of removing and preventing fats, oils, and grease from entering the sanitary sewer collection system. These devices are often below-ground units in outside areas and are built as two or three chamber baffled tanks.

“Grease trap” means a device for separating and retaining waterborne greases and grease complexes prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. Such traps are typically compact interior under-the-sink units that are located away from food preparation areas.

“Minimum design capability” means the design features of a grease interceptor and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and retain greases from grease-laden wastewaters discharged to the public sanitary sewer.

“User” means any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional limits of the city of Glendora, who contributes, causes or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into sewers within the city’s boundaries, including persons who contribute such wastewater from mobile sources, such as those who discharge hauled wastewater. (Ord. 1918 § 1, 2009)

 

15.30.030 Food service establishment permit requirement.
All permitted food service establishments discharging wastewater to the city of Glendora sanitary sewer collection system are subject to the following requirements:

(a)     Grease Interceptor Requirements. All permitted food service establishments are required to install, operate, and maintain an approved type and adequately sized grease interceptor necessary to maintain compliance with the objectives of this chapter. All grease interceptors must meet the requirements of the 2007 California Plumbing Code, or the most recently adopted plumbing code administered by the jurisdiction.

(b)     Implementation. All new food service establishment facilities are subject to grease interceptor requirements. All such facilities must obtain prior approval from the public works director for grease interceptor sizing prior to submitting plans for a building permit. All grease interceptors shall be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Existing facilities with planned modification in plumbing improvements, with a building permit evaluation of ten thousand dollars or more, or as established by the most recently adopted fee resolution, will be required to include plans to comply with the grease interceptor requirements. These facilities must obtain approval from the public works director for grease interceptor sizing prior to submitting plans for a building permit. All existing food service establishments, determined by the public works director, to have a reasonable potential to adversely impact the city’s sewer system will be notified of their obligation to install a grease interceptor within the specified period set forth in the notification letter.

(c)     Variance from Grease Interceptor Requirements. Grease interceptors required under this chapter shall be installed unless the public works director authorizes the installation of an indoor grease trap or other alternative pretreatment technology and determines that the installation of a grease interceptor would not be feasible. The food service establishment bears the burden of demonstrating that the installation of a grease interceptor is not feasible. The public works director may authorize the installation of an indoor grease trap where the installation of a grease interceptor is not feasible due to space constraints or other considerations. If an establishment believes the installation of a grease interceptor is infeasible, because of documented space constraints, the request for an alternate grease removal device shall contain the following information:

(1)     Location of sewer main and easement in relation to available exterior space outside building;

(2)     Existing plumbing at or in a site that uses common plumbing for all services at that site.

Alternative pretreatment technology includes, but is not limited to, devices that are used to trap, separate and hold grease from wastewater and prevent it from being discharged into the sanitary sewer collection system. All alternative pretreatment technology must be appropriately sized and approved by the public works director. (Ord. 1918 § 1, 2009)

 

15.30.040 Wastewater discharge limitations.
No user shall allow wastewater discharge concentration from subject grease interceptor, grease trap or alternative pretreatment technology to exceed six hundred milligrams per liter2, as defined by method EPA test method 1664 or six hundred milligrams per liter, as identified by method EPA test method 413. (Ord. 1918 § 1, 2009)

 

15.30.050 Grease interceptor requirements.
(a)     Grease interceptor sizing and installation shall conform to the 2007 California Plumbing Code or the most recently adopted plumbing code administered by the jurisdiction.

(b)     Grease interceptors shall be constructed in accordance with design approved by the public works director and shall have a minimum of two compartments with fittings designed for grease retention.

(c)     Grease interceptors shall be installed at a location where it shall be easily accessible for inspection, cleaning, and removal of intercepted grease. The grease interceptor may not be installed in any part of the building where food is handled. Location of the grease interceptor must meet the approval of the public works director.

(d)     All such grease interceptors shall be serviced and emptied of accumulated waste content as required in order to maintain minimum design capability or effective volume. These devices shall be inspected at least monthly. Users who are required to maintain a grease interceptor shall:

(1)     Provide for a minimum hydraulic retention time in accordance with the 2007 California Plumbing Code (or the most recently adopted plumbing code used by the local agency);

(2)     Remove any accumulated grease cap and sludge pocket as required. Grease interceptors shall be kept free of inorganic solid materials such as grit, rocks, gravel, sand, eating utensils, cigarettes, shells, towels, rags, etc., which could settle into this pocket and thereby reduce the effective volume of the device.

(e)     The user shall maintain a written record of inspection and maintenance for three years. All such records will be made available for on-site inspection by representative of the city of Glendora during all operating hours.

(f)      Sanitary wastes are not allowed to be connected to sewer lines intended for grease interceptor service.

(g)     Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of twenty-four inches, shall be provided over each grease interceptor chamber and sanitary tee. The access manholes shall extend at least to finished grade and be designed and maintained to prevent water inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease removal, and wastewater sampling activities. (Ord. 1918 § 1, 2009)

 

15.30.060 Grease trap requirements.
(a)     Upon approval by the public works director, a grease trap complying with the provisions of this section must be installed in the waste line leading from sinks, drains, and other fixtures or equipment in food service establishments where grease may be introduced into the drainage or sewage system in quantities that can effect line stoppage or hinder sewage treatment or private sewage disposal.

(b)     Grease traps sizing and installation shall conform to the 2007 California Plumbing Code or the most recently adopted plumbing code used by the local agency).

(c)     No grease trap shall be installed which has a stated rate flow of more than fifty-five gallons per minute, nor less than twenty gallons per minute, except when specially approved by the public works director.

(d)     Grease traps shall be maintained in efficient operating conditions by periodic removal of the accumulated grease. No such collected grease shall be introduced into any drainage piping, or public or private sewer.

(e)     No food waste disposal unit or dishwasher shall be connected to or discharge into any grease trap.

(f)      Wastewater in excess of one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F)/(60°C) shall not be discharged into a grease trap. (Ord. 1918 § 1, 2009)

 

15.30.070 Monitoring, reporting, and recordkeeping.
Food service establishments are subject to the following compliance monitoring requirements:

(a)     Food service establishments, at the discretion of the public works director may be required to construct and maintain in proper operating condition at the food service establishment’s sole expense, flow monitoring, constituent monitoring and/or sampling facilities.

(b)     The location of the monitoring or metering facilities shall be subject to approval by the public works director.

(c)     Food service establishments may also be required by the public works director to submit waste analysis plans, contingency plans, and meet other necessary requirements to ensure proper operation and maintenance of the grease control device or grease interceptor and compliance with this chapter.

(d)     Food service establishments shall not increase the use of water or in any other manner attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for treatment to achieve compliance with this chapter.

(e)     The public works director may require periodic reporting of the status of implementation of best management practices implemented at food service establishments.

(f)      The public works director may require visual monitoring at the sole expense of the food service establishment which generates FOG to observe the actual conditions of any food service establishment, including food service establishments that generate FOG, sewer lateral and sewer lines downstream.

(g)     The public works director may require reports for self-monitoring of wastewater constituents and FOG characteristics of the food service establishment needed for determining compliance with this chapter. Failure by the food service establishment to perform any required monitoring, or to submit monitoring reports required by the public works director constitutes a violation of this chapter and be cause for the city to initiate all necessary tasks and analyses to determine the wastewater constituents and FOG characteristics for compliance with any conditions and requirements specified in this chapter. The food service establishment shall be responsible for any and all expenses of the city in undertaking such monitoring analyses and preparation of reports.

(h)     Other reports may be required such as compliance schedule progress reports, FOG control monitoring reports, and any other reports deemed reasonably appropriate by the public works director to ensure compliance with this chapter.

(i)      Food service establishments are required to keep all manifests, receipts and invoices of all cleaning, maintenance, grease removal of/from the grease control device, disposal carrier and disposal site location for no less than four years.

(j)      Food service establishments shall, upon request, make the manifests, receipts and invoices available to the public works director or his or her designee. These records may include:

(1)     A logbook of grease control device cleaning and maintenance practices;

(2)     A record of best management practices being implemented including employee training;

(3)     Copies of records and manifests of waste-hauling interceptor contents and/or waste cooking oil disposal;

(4)     Records of sampling data and sludge height monitoring for FOG and solids accumulation in the grease interceptors;

(5)     Any other information deemed appropriate by the public works director to ensure compliance with this chapter.

(k)     It is unlawful to make any false statement, representation, record, report, plan or other document that is filed with the city, or to tamper with or knowingly render inoperable any grease control device, monitoring device or method or access point required under this chapter. (Ord. 1918 § 1, 2009)

 

15.30.080 Best management practices required.
All food service establishments shall implement best management practices in its operation to minimize the discharge of FOG to the sewer system and in accordance with the requirements and guidelines established by the city in an effort to minimize the discharge of FOG to the sewer system, which shall, at a minimum, include the following:

(a)     Installation of Drain Screens. Drain screens shall be installed on all drainage pipes in food preparation and kitchen areas.

(b)     Segregation and Collection of Waste Cooking Oil. All employees must comply with all provisions of this chapter relating to segregation, disposal and recycling of FOG.

(c)     Disposal of Food Waste. All food waste shall be disposed of directly into the trash or garbage, and not in sinks or toilets.

(d)     Food Grinders. All employees shall not pour, dispose, or place any food product, prepared or unprepared, containing FOG materials into a sink or other device equipped with a food grinder.

(e)     Employee Training. Employees of the food service establishment shall be trained within one hundred eighty days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and twice each calendar year thereafter, on the following subjects:

(1)     How to “dry wipe” pots, pans, dishware and work areas before washing to remove grease;

(2)     How to properly dispose of food waste and solids prior to disposal in trash bins or containers to prevent leaking and odors;

(3)     The location and use of absorption products to clean under fryer baskets and other locations where grease may be spilled or dripped;

(4)     How to properly dispose of grease or oils from cooking equipment into a grease receptacle such as a barrel or drum without spilling;

(5)     Training shall be documented and employee signatures retained indicating each employee’s attendance and understanding of the practices reviewed. Training records shall be available for review at any reasonable time by the public works director or his or her designee;

(6)     Maintenance of Kitchen Exhaust Filters. Filters shall be cleaned as frequently as necessary to be maintained in good operating condition. The wastewater generated from cleaning the exhaust filter shall be disposed of properly;

(7)     Kitchen Signage. Best management and waste minimization practices shall be posted conspicuously in the food preparation and dishwashing areas at all times.

(f)      Employee Training Verification. Employee training shall be documented and employee signatures retained indicating each employee’s attendance and understanding of the practices reviewed. Training records shall be available for review at any reasonable time by the public works director or his or her designee.

(g)     Maintenance of Kitchen Exhaust Filters. Filters shall be cleaned as frequently as necessary to be maintained in good operating condition. The wastewater generated from cleaning the exhaust filter shall be disposed properly.

(h)     Kitchen Signage. Best management and waste minimization practices shall be posted conspicuously in the food preparation and dishwashing areas at all times. (Ord. 1918 § 1, 2009)

 

15.30.090 Inspections and sampling.
The public works director may inspect or order the inspection and sample the wastewater discharges of any food service establishment subject to this chapter to ascertain whether the intent of this chapter is being met and the food service establishment is complying with all requirements.

(a)     Inspection of Premises. The food service establishment shall allow the public works director or his or her designee access to the premises, during normal business hours, for purposes of inspecting the food service establishment’s grease control devices or interceptor, reviewing the manifests, receipts and invoices relating to the cleaning, maintenance and inspection of the grease control devices or interceptor.

(b)     Metering and Sampling Devices. The public works director shall have the right to place or order the placement on the food service establishment’s property or other locations as determined by the public works director such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. Where any food service establishment has security measures in force, the food service establishment shall make necessary arrangements so that representatives of the city shall be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities.

(c)     Access to Food Service Establishment. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the public works director reasonable access to all parts of the wastewater generating and disposal facilities for the purposes of inspection and sampling during all times the food service establishment is open, operating, or any other reasonable time.

(d)     Access to Documents for Inspection. In order for the public works director to determine the wastewater characteristics of the discharger for purposes of determining the annual use charge, the food service establishment shall make available for inspection and copying by the city all notices, monitoring reports, waste manifests, and records including, but not limited to, those related to wastewater generation, and wastewater disposal. All such records shall be kept for a minimum of four years.

(e)     Sampling and Inspection Frequency. Sampling and inspection of any food service establishments, including food service establishments, that generate FOG shall be conducted in the time, place, manner, and frequency determined at the sole discretion of the public works director or his or her designee. Any sample taken from a sample point is considered to be representative of the discharge to the public sewer.

(f)      Right of Entry. No person shall interfere with, delay, resist or refuse entrance to city representatives attempting to inspect any facility involved directly or indirectly with a discharge of wastewater to the city’s sewer system. (Ord. 1918 § 1, 2009)

 

15.30.100 Notices of violation—Administrative orders.
The director of public works, or the director’s designees, may issue notices of violation and administrative orders to achieve compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of such a notice of violation or an administrative order shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor except as otherwise provided herein. (Ord. 1918 § 1, 2009)

 

15.30.110 Sewer system overflows and cleanup costs.
Food service establishments found to have contributed to a sewer blockage, sewer system overflow (“SSO”), or any sewer system interferences resulting from the discharge of wastewater or waste containing FOG, may be ordered to install and maintain a grease interceptor, and may be subject to a plan to abate the nuisance and prevent any future health hazards created by sewer line failures and blockages, SSOs or any other sewer system interferences. If the city must act to contain and/or clean up an SSO caused by blockage of a private or public sewer lateral or system, or at the request of the property owner or operator of the food service establishment, or because of the failure of the property owner or food service establishment to abate the condition causing a threat to the health, safety, welfare, or property of the public, or because of an unauthorized discharge of FOG, the city’s costs for such abatement will be entirely borne by the property owner or operator of the food service establishment, and said cost will constitute a debt to the city and become due and payable upon the city’s request for reimbursement of such costs. (Ord. 1918 § 1, 2009)

 

15.30.120 Notification of spill.
In the event an food service establishment is unable to comply with any permit condition or provision of this chapter due to a breakdown of equipment, accidents, or human error or the food service establishment has reasonable opportunity to know that his, her or its discharge will exceed the discharge provisions of this chapter, the discharger shall immediately notify the public works director by telephone. If the material discharged to the sewer has the potential to cause or result in sewer blockages or SSOs, the discharger shall immediately notify the local health department, Los Angeles County public works department, and the city of Glendora.

(a)     Agency Notification. Confirmation of this notification shall be made in writing to the public works director no later than five working days from the date of the incident. The written notification shall state the date of the incident, the reasons for the discharge or spill, what steps were taken to immediately correct the problem, and what steps are being taken to prevent the problem from recurring.

(b)     Non-relief from Expense, Loss, Damage, or Liability. Such notification shall not relieve the food service establishment of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage or loss to the city or any other damage or loss to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the food service establishment of any fees or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law. (Ord. 1918 § 1, 2009)

 

15.30.130 Penalty imposed on city by regulatory agency(ies).
Any person who discharges a waste which causes or contributes to the city violating its discharge requirements established by any regulatory agency with jurisdiction over the city incurring additional expenses or suffering losses or damage to the facilities, shall be liable for any costs or expenses incurred by the city, including regulatory fines, penalties, attorneys’ fees, costs and assessments made or imposed by other agencies or a court. (Ord. 1918 § 1, 2009)

 

15.30.140 Nuisance.
The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and may be abated by the city in accordance with its authority to abate nuisances. (Ord. 1918 § 1, 2009)

 

15.30.150 Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available to the city under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the city to seek cumulative remedies. (Ord. 1918 § 1, 2009)

 

15.30.160 Fees.
The city council may establish fees for the services provided under this chapter and such fees shall be fixed and established from time to time by the city council by resolution. (Ord. 1918 § 1, 2009)

Title 16 TREES
Chapter 16.01 PURPOSE
Chapter 16.04 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 16.06 APPLICATION OF TITLE
Chapter 16.08 CITY FORESTER
Chapter 16.12 REGULATIONS
Chapter 16.14 TREE REMOVAL
Chapter 16.22 APPEALS

Chapter 16.01 PURPOSE
16.01.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this title is to ensure and enhance public health, safety, and welfare through proper care, maintenance and preservation of trees on city-owned properties, parkways and public street right-of-way and easements. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

Chapter 16.04 DEFINITIONS
16.04.010 Definitions generally.
For the purposes of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this chapter. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.04.020 Cambium layer.
“Cambium layer” means a layer of actively dividing cells responsible for the production of a tree’s vascular tissue, critical to the translocation of water, nutrients, and photosynthates to all living tissues within the tree. The cambium layer is located just underneath the outer bark of woody trees. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.04.030 Certified arborist.
“Certified arborist” means a tree care professional meeting International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) standards of tree care and certified as such. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.04.040 Certified tree worker.
“Certified tree worker” means a tree care professional who works trimming trees, meets ISA standards of tree trimming, and is certified as such. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.04.050 City-owned property.
“City owned property” means property owned by the city, including parkland, street median islands, and open space areas. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.04.060 Diameter at breast height.
“Diameter at breast height,” also referred to herein utilizing the initials “DBH”, means a measurement of the diameter of a tree trunk approximately four and one-half feet above the root crown. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.04.070 Easement/right-of-way.
“Easement/right-of-way” means land owned by another over which the city has an easement or right-of-way for street maintenance, utilities and other related purposes. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.04.080 Drip line.
“Drip line” means the ground area at the outside edge of a tree’s branches or canopy. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.04.090 Heritage tree.
“Heritage tree” means any tree that has historical or cultural importance or significance to the Glendora area, as determined by the city forester. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.04.110 Inventory of parkway trees.
“Inventory of parkway trees” means a city document that contains data regarding parkway trees, including type of tree, size of tree, address and location of trees, nature of the surrounding ground cover and hardscape and condition thereof, and health of the tree. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.04.120 List of approved street trees.
“List of approved street trees” means a list of trees approved by the community services commission that are suitable for planting in city parkways. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.04.130 List of undesirable trees.
“List of undesirable trees” means a list of trees approved by the community services commission which are not suitable for planting in city parkways or on other city-owned property. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.04.140 Mechanical damage.
Any type of cutting, scraping, scarring of the outer bark or root crown of any tree caused by wire, rope, or machinery such as lawnmowers, weed eaters, edgers, etc., that cuts into or removes the outer bark of a tree. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.04.150 Parkway.
“Parkway” means that portion of a public street, alley or avenue, located within the city, which lies between the curb lines or edge of pavement and also the line which would be the outside line of any sidewalk. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.04.160 Post and beam construction.
“Post and beam construction” means a wood framework method of building a structure with columns or posts supporting the structure. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.04.170 Root crown/root collar.
“Root crown/root collar” means the junction between the roots of a tree and its trunk(s) often indicated by a trunk flare. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.04.180 Root pruning.
“Root pruning” means a technique for the proper removal of unwanted roots. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.04.190 Sight distance visibility.
“Sight distance visibility” means the visible clearance required from the perspective of the driver of a motor vehicle in the direction of all on-coming traffic at street intersections. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.04.210 Street tree.
“Street tree” means a tree maintained by the city located in the city right-of-way or city easement. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.04.220 Topping.
“Topping” means a severe type of pruning which produces less desirable results than more moderate pruning with respect to a tree’s natural form, and which is generally hazardous to the overall health and stability of the tree. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.04.230 Tree crown.
“Tree crown” means that portion of the tree encompassed by the lowest branches on the trunk extending to the top of the tree. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.04.240 Tree protection zones.
“Tree protection zones” means areas designated for special care of trees during development. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.04.250 Tree root zones.
“Tree root zones” mean those areas beneath the canopy of a tree consisting of the mass of roots growing from the trunk of a tree along with the surrounding soil extending to and including the drip line of the tree. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.04.260 Unsafe trees.
“Unsafe tree” means a tree that presents a threat to the public health, safety and welfare. An unsafe tree may include a tree that is in the latter stages of disease, is structurally unstable, has suffered damage due to storms, accidents, etc., or other reasons considered by the tree forester. (Ord. 1932 § 1, 2010)

 

16.04.270 Undesirable tree.
“Undesirable tree” means a species of tree that is unsuitable for planting or use in city parkways or on other city-owned property. (Ord. 1932 § 2, 2010)

Chapter 16.06 APPLICATION OF TITLE
16.06.010 Application of title.
The provisions of this title shall apply to all city-owned property, city right-of-way, city easements, and street parkways within the city of Glendora. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.06.020 Exceptions.
The provisions of this ordinance do not govern the following:

(a)     The removal or pruning of any tree which poses an imminent threat to public property or public health, safety and welfare, as determined by any member of a law enforcement agency, the Los Angeles County fire department, the city forester, the director of public works or a utility company.

(b)     The removal of any tree on city-owned property as directed by any county, state, or federal agency or insurance provider.

(c)     The removal of a diseased or dead tree on city-owned property as determined by the city forester. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

Chapter 16.08 CITY FORESTER
16.08.010 Office created.
The office of city forester is hereby created. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.08.020 Appointment.
The office of city forester shall be filled by appointment of the city manager. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.08.030 Compensation.
The city forester shall receive such compensation as may be established by resolution of the council. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.08.040 Administrative responsibilities.
The city forester shall have the following duties and responsibilities:

(a)     To make or cause to be made inspections of all trees and shrubs growing in parkways of the city and to determine whether or not any section of this title has been, or is being violated.

(b)     Regulate all tree planting in city parkways.

(c)     Oversee the planting, the removal, and the replacement of parkway trees.

(d)     To maintain a current inventory of all parkway trees. Such inventory will be audited a minimum of every five years.

(e)     Evaluate the health and safety of parkway trees and implement appropriate remedial actions.

(f)      Direct the trimming of parkway trees.

(g)     Follow procedures and policies regarding appeals as outlined in Chapter 16.22 of this title.

(h)     Oversee sidewalk, curb and gutter repair operations undertaken or contracted by the public works department to prevent unnecessary damage to parkway tree roots.

(i)      Review and provide recommendations for tree preservation, tree mitigation, and tree removal for new subdivisions. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

Chapter 16.12 REGULATIONS
16.12.010 Harming parkway trees.
It is unlawful for any person or entity to destroy, deface or injure any parkway tree through willful intent. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.12.020 Physical damage.
(a)     No person shall construct or cause to be constructed any private hardscape improvement which prevents the free access of water to the root zone of any parkway tree without prior approval of the city forester.

(b)     The construction, installation or placement of any object or barrier which infringes upon the root crown of a parkway tree is prohibited without prior approval of the city forester.

(c)     Any mechanical damage to the root crown on any parkway tree which results in girdling of the cambium layer is prohibited. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.12.030 Weakening.
Ivy or climbing vines growing adjacent to a parkway tree shall be maintained away from the trunk and canopy of the tree by the property owner. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.12.040 Tree protection.
Parkway trees shall be sufficiently shielded to prevent injury during any repair, alteration or removal of a house or structure. Protection shall include but not be limited to chain-link fencing, staking, etc. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.12.050 Root protection when trenching.
During construction where trenching around parkway trees is necessary, the pathway of the trench shall be dug making every reasonable effort to avoid the tree’s drip line. In those cases where an alternative trenching route is not possible, tunneling under woody roots rather than cutting such roots shall be preferable to preserve roots two inches or greater in diameter. When roots must be cut, sharp saws shall be used to make clean, non-frayed cuts, under the supervision of the city forester. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.12.060 Pruning and maintenance.
The pruning of all trees covered in this title shall conform to the industry standards as deemed necessary by the city forester. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.12.070 Topping prohibited.
Topping is prohibited, except as deemed necessary by the city forester. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.12.080 Clearance requirement of trees.
All parkway trees shall be kept trimmed, to a minimum vertical clearance of fourteen feet over the street. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.12.090 Trees on private property.
Trees growing on private property which overhang the street or sidewalk shall be trimmed so that they vertically clear the sidewalk by not less than nine feet and so that they vertically clear the street by not less than fourteen feet. It is the responsibility of the property owner on whose property trees are standing to conduct this trimming. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.12.100 Trimming by contiguous property owner.
A property owner who wishes to trim trees in the parkway abutting his or her property must first obtain the permission of the city forester, and then perform such trimming in accordance with the city forester’s instructions. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.12.110 Plants in parkway.
The property owner whose property abuts the sidewalk or parkway in which plants or shrubs are growing shall keep such plants or shrubs trimmed three inches back of the curb or sidewalk line, and to a height of not to exceed thirty inches. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.12.120 Plants along property line.
The property owner on whose property hedges or shrubs are growing shall keep such hedges or shrubs trimmed so that no part of them will project over the sidewalk. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.12.130 City trimming on private property.
The city may not trim trees that overhang from one private property to another. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.12.140 Qualifications of tree care companies.
All tree-care companies contracted by the city shall employ at least one ISA (International Society of Arboriculture) certified arborist to supervise all work performed on behalf of the city. All tree-care companies contracted by the city shall employ ISA certified tree workers. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.12.150 Cost of parkway tree replacement.
In those cases where parkway tree removal and replacement is necessary because of conditions and events caused by the property owner, the property owner shall be charged for replacement. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.12.160 Street tree planting.
All street tree plantings shall be approved by the city forester as to species, location and method of planting. The tree must be inspected by the city forester prior to planting. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.12.170 Proximity to intersections.
No person shall plant or maintain any tree or shrub that impedes sight distance visibility at street intersections. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.12.180 Thorn bearing plants in parkways.
No person shall plant in any parkway ivy or any shrub or plant upon which grow thorns or spiny extensions. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.12.190 Method of planting.
No person other than the property owner or designee shall plant any tree in the parkways adjacent to the property of such owner. The property owner may plant trees in the parkway abutting his or her own property, provided that such trees are contained on the city’s list of approved street trees; or provided that such planting shall be first approved by the city forester and that such planting be done under the direction of, and in accordance with, the instructions of the city forester. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

Chapter 16.14 TREE REMOVAL
16.14.010 Removal of parkway trees.
(a)     The city forester shall authorize the removal of all parkway trees as well as those trees on city-owned property.

(b)     The city forester shall review all applications for parkway tree removal and determine whether the tree in question shall be removed.

(c)     If an unsafe or undesirable tree is to be removed, the planting of a new tree from the approved list of parkway trees may be required, as determined by the city forester.

(d)     Any oak tree removed from city-owned property or within a parkway shall be replaced with an oak or other tree as deemed appropriate by the city forester, at a location within the city of Glendora.

(e)     Tree Removal Criteria. The city forester may grant an application for tree removal after consideration of the following criteria:

(1)     The tree is dead or is determined to be in a state of severe decline such that it presents a high risk of failure, and is likely to cause damage to property and/or injury to persons;

(2)     The tree has acquired an infectious disease or is infested with an insect that is declared to be a serious pest threat to other nearby trees, after consideration of alternative infectious disease and pest control remediation measures;

(3)     The tree is healthy but presents an immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and tree removal is determined to be the only option available. An example would be to gain access to property due to an emergency situation created by an earthquake or to allow repair of a broken water main or sewer line located directly underneath the tree’s trunk, or to remove a tree split by a storm, or struck by a vehicle and the tree cannot be feasibly restored to a safe condition;

(4)     The tree is a threat to the public health, safety and welfare because it impairs visibility for pedestrian or vehicle traffic. Removal shall be considered only if tree pruning would severely disfigure the tree as applied to applicable tree industry standards;

(5)     The tree needs to be removed to facilitate hardscape repairs that cannot be completed without severe root pruning which would jeopardize the health and stability of the tree;

(6)     The tree repeatedly damages surrounding hardscape within two years after repairs, and root pruning and/or other remedial repair methods cannot feasibly be utilized without severely jeopardizing the health and stability of the tree;

(7)     The tree is causing structural damage to a building, and the condition cannot be corrected without removing the tree;

(8)     Where the cost of maintaining certain species of trees cannot be justified with respect to the environmental and community benefits such trees provide;

(9)     Any other criteria that protects the public health, safety and welfare and is consistent with promoting the city’s policy to protect and preserve a healthy urban tree forest that provides valuable benefits to our environment and to the quality of life in Glendora.

(Ord. 1932 § 3, 2010; Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.14.020 Removal from sidewalk area by property owner.
All trees growing in that portion of highway set apart for sidewalk use by the ordinances of the city shall be removed by the property owner upon the order of the city forester. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.14.030 Removal from parkway area by property owner.
Any property owner, upon securing permission of the city forester, may remove any tree in the parkway upon or abutting upon the property of such owner. The city forester may require the planting of another tree. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.14.040 Violations.
(a)     It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit any tree or shrub to be planted, maintained or removed in violation of the provisions of this chapter.

(b)     Every person who violates any section of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b).

(c)     If the city forester finds any violation of any section of this title, he or she shall, in writing, notify the violator of the existing condition and the violation and direct the violator as to the manner in which the violation is to be corrected. If, after fifteen business days, the cause for the violation has not been corrected as directed, the city forester may cause the violation to be abated in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 9.36. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

Chapter 16.22 APPEALS
16.22.010 Final disposition.
Any property owner may appeal a decision of the city forester to the community services commission for final disposition. The appeal should be made in writing and filed with the city clerk within fifteen days following notice of decision of the city forester. Said appeal shall state the grounds for the appeal. The city clerk shall, upon receipt of the appeal set the matter for hearing before the community services commission not less than fifteen days but no more than sixty days following the filing of the appeal. The city clerk shall give not less than ten days written notice to the appellant and the owner of the affected property of the time and place of the public hearing by United States mail or by personal delivery as such owner is shown on the latest assessment roll of Los Angeles County. The failure of any person to receive said notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings under this chapter. (Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

 

16.22.020 Objections—Notice—Hearing.
Should the request of a property owner to remove a parkway tree be denied, and such property owner wishes to appeal this decision, the appellant shall deposit, with the written appeal, a sum of money sufficient to cover the cost of the city clerk’s having published twice in the local newspaper a notice of the intention to “kill, cut down or remove” the city tree, which notice shall state the name of the applicant, the location of the tree, statement by the owner as to why the tree removal meets one of the stated criteria under Section 16.14.010(e) along with language to the effect that person(s) objecting to such removal may either in writing or in person state their objections to the community services commission. When the money and written appeal is received by the city clerk from the property owner, the city clerk shall cause notice to be published twice in the weekly newspaper of general circulation, printed, published and circulated in the city. At the time and place of the hearing, the community services commission shall hear and consider all relevant evidence and testimony including, but not limited to the report of the city forester and testimony, written or oral, relevant to the tree removal. The hearing may be continued if the commission wishes to receive additional information relevant to the appeal. However, in no case shall the hearing on the appeal be continued more than one hundred twenty days. Upon the conclusion of the public hearing, the community services commission shall, on the basis of the evidence and testimony presented at the hearing, determine whether one or more of the conditions listed in Section 16.14.010(e) exist, and, if so, whether the tree should be removed. If the community services commission finds that the tree should be removed, it shall, by resolution, order the same tree removal in a reasonable time to set forth in the resolution. The determination of the community services commission shall be final. (Ord. 1932 § 4, 2010; Ord. 1768 § 2, 2003)

Title 17 (RESERVED)

Title 18 FIRE
Chapter 18.04 CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE

Chapter 18.04 CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE
18.04.010 Adopted by reference.
The city adopts by reference the California Fire Code, 2019 Edition, which contains substantial copyrighted material from the 2018 International Fire Code, which is copyrighted work owned by the International Code Council, Inc.; and said code, including the Appendix Chapters B, C, D, E, F, H, I, J and K is adopted in total as the law of the city. One copy of the code has been, and is now, filed in the office of the building official, and the code is adopted by reference as if incorporated and set out in full in this chapter. (Ord. 2044 § 1, 2019)

 

18.04.020 Seizure of fireworks.
There shall be added to the fire code the following provision:

 

Section 103.4.7. The Fire Chief and/or Chief of Police are authorized to and shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner, all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored or held in violation of this code.

 

(Ord. 1650 § 1, 1996; Ord. 1580 § 1, 1991)

 

18.04.030 Violations and penalties.
(a)     Unlawful Acts. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by this chapter, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of the provisions of this chapter.

(b)     Notice of Violation. The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of any building or structure in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation.

(c)     Prosecution of Violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the building official is authorized to request the city attorney to institute the appropriate proceeding law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.

(d)     Violation Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.

(e)     Other Penalties. In addition to the penalties and procedures stated in this section, the city may enforce the provisions of this chapter by any other administrative, criminal or civil remedies available to the city under this code. (Ord. 2044 § 2, 2019)

Title 19 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 19.02 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE
Chapter 19.03 CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Chapter 19.04 CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE
Chapter 19.05 CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE
Chapter 19.06 FIRE HAZARD SEVERITY ZONE
Chapter 19.08 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE
Chapter 19.12 CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE
Chapter 19.13 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE
Chapter 19.15 CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
Chapter 19.16 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING SYSTEMS
Chapter 19.17 CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE
Chapter 19.18 BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES—MAPPED HIGHWAY AREA
Chapter 19.20 TRAILERS AND MOBILEHOME PARKS
Chapter 19.21 SMALL RESIDENTIAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM PERMITS
Chapter 19.24 SIGN CODE
Chapter 19.28 NUMBERING BUILDINGS
Chapter 19.32 MOVING BUILDINGS
Chapter 19.36 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Chapter 19.40 UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
Chapter 19.42 PARK DEVELOPMENT FEE ON NEW DEVELOPMENT

Chapter 19.02 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ords. 1494, 1506, 1559, 1566, 1569, 1600.

 

19.02.010 Adopted by reference.
The city adopts by reference the California Building Code, Volumes 1 and 2, 2019 Edition, which contains substantial copyrighted material from the 2018 International Building Code which is a copyrighted work owned by the International Code Council, Inc.; and said code, including the Appendix Chapters B, C, H, I, J, and L is adopted in total as the law of the city. One copy of the code has been, and is now, filed in the office of the building official, and the code is adopted by reference as if incorporated and set out in full in this chapter. (Ord. 2044 § 3, 2019)

 

19.02.030 Fee schedule.
Fees for the issuance of building permits, grading permits, building and grading plan reviews and investigation fees for work done without a permit shall be established by resolution of the city council.

(a)     Grading Plan Checking Fees. When the amount of grading exceeds fifty cubic yards, a plan checking fee for grading, as established by resolution of the city council, shall be paid at the time of submitting plans to the city engineer who is the “building official” designated for such purposes.

(b)     Grading Permit Fees. When the amount of grading exceeds fifty cubic yards, a fee for such grading permit, as established by resolution of the city council, shall be paid to the city engineer, who is the “building official” designated for such purposes. A bond equal to one hundred percent of the valuation of the grading work shall be posted with the city prior to issuance of the grading permit to assure that the work is completed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. (Ord. 1887 § 5, 2007)

 

19.02.040 Violations and penalties.
(a)     Unlawful Acts. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by this chapter, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of the provisions of this chapter.

(b)     Notice of Violation. The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of any building or structure in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation.

(c)     Prosecution of Violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the building official is authorized to request the city attorney to institute the appropriate proceeding law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.

(d)     Violation Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.

(e)     Other Penalties. In addition to the penalties and procedures stated in this section, the city may enforce the provisions of this chapter by any other administrative, criminal or civil remedies available to the city under this code. (Ord. 2044 § 4, 2019)

 

19.02.050 Flood hazard area.
Volume 1 of the Uniform Building Code, 1997 Edition, is amended by adding subsection 106.4.6 to Section 106.4 as follows:

 

106.4.6 Flood hazard area. Except as hereinafter provided, no building permit shall be issued for any structure in any area determined by the city engineer to be subject to flood hazard by reason of inundation, overflow or erosion. This provision shall not apply when provision is made to eliminate such hazard to the satisfaction of the city engineer by providing adequate drainage facilities, by protective walls or devices, or suitable fill, by raising the floor level of the structure, by a combination of these methods, or by other means satisfactory to the city engineer. The following structures are exempt from the foregoing provisions:

(a)     Group M structure;

(b)     Minor accessory structures used solely for storage or sun-shade purposes.

(Ord. 1694 § 3, 1999; Ord. 1646 § 2, 1996)

Chapter 19.03 CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE
19.03.010 Adopted by reference.
The city adopts by reference the California Existing Building Code, 2019 Edition, which contains substantial copyrighted material from the 2018 International Existing Building Code, which is a copyrighted work owned by the International Code Council, Inc.; and said code including the Appendix Chapters A-1, A-3, and A-4 is adopted as the law of the city. One copy of the code has been, and is now, filed in the office of the building official, and the code is adopted by reference as if incorporated and set out in full in this chapter. (Ord. 2044 § 5, 2019)

 

19.03.020 Violations and penalties.
(a)     Unlawful Acts. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by this chapter, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of the provisions of this chapter.

(b)     Notice of Violation. The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of any building or structure in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation.

(c)     Prosecution of Violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the building official is authorized to request the city attorney to institute the appropriate proceeding law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.

(d)     Violation Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.

(e)     Other Penalties. In addition to the penalties and procedures stated in this section, the city may enforce the provisions of this chapter by any other administrative, criminal or civil remedies available to the city under this code. (Ord. 2044 § 6, 2019)

Chapter 19.04 CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE
19.04.010 Adopted by reference.
The city adopts by reference the California Mechanical Code and its Appendices B, C and D, 2019 Edition, Copyright to 2018 UMC held by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials; copyright to all California State Provisions held by California Building Standards Commission; and said code is adopted in total as the law of the city. One copy of the code has been, and is now, filed in the office of the building official, and the code is adopted by reference as if incorporated and set out in full in this chapter. (Ord. 2044 § 7, 2019)

 

19.04.020 Fee schedule.
Fees for the issuance of mechanical permits, plan reviews and investigation fees for work done without a permit shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1887 § 12, 2007)

 

19.04.030 Violations and penalties.
(a)     Unlawful Acts. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by this chapter, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of the provisions of this chapter.

(b)     Notice of Violation. The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of any building or structure in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation.

(c)     Prosecution of Violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the building official is authorized to request the city attorney to institute the appropriate proceeding law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.

(d)     Violation Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.

(e)     Other Penalties. In addition to the penalties and procedures stated in this section, the city may enforce the provisions of this chapter by any other administrative, criminal or civil remedies available to the city under this code. (Ord. 2044 § 8, 2019)

Chapter 19.05 CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE
19.05.010 Adopted by reference.
The city adopts by reference the California Historical Code, 2019 Edition, which was published by the International Code Council and is a copyrighted work owned by the California Building Standards Commission; and said code is adopted as the law of the city. One copy of the code has been, and is now, filed in the office of the building official, and the code is adopted by reference as if incorporated and set out in full in this chapter. (Ord. 2044 § 9, 2019)

 

19.05.020 Violations and penalties.
(a)     Unlawful Acts. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by this chapter, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of the provisions of this chapter.

(b)     Notice of Violation. The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of any building or structure in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation.

(c)     Prosecution of Violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the building official is authorized to request the city attorney to institute the appropriate proceeding law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.

(d)     Violation Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.

(e)     Other Penalties. In addition to the penalties and procedures stated in this section, the city may enforce the provisions of this chapter by any other administrative, criminal or civil remedies available to the city under this code. (Ord. 2044 § 10, 2019)

Chapter 19.06 FIRE HAZARD SEVERITY ZONE
19.06.010 Fire hazard severity zone designated.
Certain areas of the city are designated as a fire district due to geographical, topographical and climatic conditions and are subject to a much higher incident of fire hazards than any other areas of the city and, therefore, certain changes and modifications in the state mandated uniform construction regulations are necessary for the protection of life and property in these areas. These areas are classified as a fire hazard severity zone. The purpose of such classification is to require the application of the provisions of Section 19.02.060 of this title.

Within those designated areas of the fire hazard severity zone the following conditions exist: large, natural growths of chaparral and other volatile weeds and vegetation; exposure to hot, high-velocity winds during the “Santa Ana” conditions common to Southern California; steep terrain making access difficult for fire fighting personnel and equipment, and generally lower water pressure availability for fire suppression purposes. (Ord. 1887 § 16, 2007)

 

19.06.020 Fire district map adopted.
The map on file in the office of the building division and identified in the official records of the city as “Fire Hazard Severity Zone Map of the City of Glendora” is adopted as the fire district map of the city reflecting those areas designated as very high fire severity zone within the jurisdictional areas of the city. (Ord. 1887 § 17, 2007)

Chapter 19.08 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE
19.08.010 Adopted by reference.
The city adopts by reference the California Plumbing Code and its Appendices, 2019 Edition, Copyright to 2018 UPC held by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials; copyright to all California State Provisions held by California Building Standards Commission; and said code is adopted in total as the law of the city. One copy of the code has been, and is now, filed in the office of the building official, and the code is adopted by reference as if incorporated and set out in full in this chapter.

After due consideration, the city council finds that, as a result of existing local climatic, geological, or topographical conditions, amendments to the California Plumbing Code and its Appendices, 2019 Edition, are reasonably necessary to provide sufficient and effective levels of safety for the protection of life, health and property. Therefore, the California Plumbing Code and its appendices, 2019 Edition, is amended for purposes of this.

This chapter includes a mandatory requirement for installation of backflow devices for all new sewer connections and for remodels when sewers are modified. This local amendment continues the city’s position and commitment towards promoting safe and sanitary conditions to protect life, health and property for the citizens of Glendora. Due to the topography of the city, the public will benefit from this proactive measure by reducing and/or eliminating the risk of occurrence of sewer surcharges and backups from city-owned sewers which would minimize damage to personal property, costs to mitigate and rebuild, and potential legal cost from inverse condemnation, stigma and emotional trauma. (Ord. 2044 § 11, 2019)

 

19.08.020 Fee schedule.
Fees for the issuance of plumbing permits, plan reviews and investigation fees for work done without permits shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1887 § 21, 2007)

 

19.08.050 Violations and penalties.
(a)     Unlawful Acts. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by this chapter, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of the provisions of this chapter.

(b)     Notice of Violation. The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of any building or structure in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation.

(c)     Prosecution of Violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the building official is authorized to request the city attorney to institute the appropriate proceeding law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.

(d)     Violation Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.

(e)     Other Penalties. In addition to the penalties and procedures stated in this section, the city may enforce the provisions of this chapter by any other administrative, criminal or civil remedies available to the city under this code. (Ord. 2044 § 12, 2019)

Chapter 19.12 CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE
19.12.010 Adopted by reference.
The city adopts by reference the California Electrical Code and its Annex Chapters, 2019 Edition, copyright to 2017 NEC held by the National Fire Protection Association and the copyright to all unique California State provisions held by California Building Standards Commission; and said code is adopted in total as the law of the city. One copy of the code has been, and is now, filed in the office of the building official, and the code is adopted by reference as if incorporated and set out in full in this chapter. (Ord. 2044 § 13, 2019)

 

19.12.020 Underground electrical services.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, all electrical services shall be installed underground from the utility company pole to the service panel of the premises served.

Exception. When, because of unusual or unique circumstances, strict compliance with the requirements of this section would be impractical or would create a severe hardship, the city council, on receipt of a written request from the property owner or his or her agent, may waive this requirement. (Ord. 1821 § 7, 2005)

 

19.12.030 Violations and penalties.
(a)     Unlawful Acts. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by this chapter, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of the provisions of this chapter.

(b)     Notice of Violation. The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of any building or structure in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation.

(c)     Prosecution of Violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the building official is authorized to request the city attorney to institute the appropriate proceeding law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.

(d)     Violation Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.

(e)     Other Penalties. In addition to the penalties and procedures stated in this section, the city may enforce the provisions of this chapter by any other administrative, criminal or civil remedies available to the city under this code. (Ord. 2044 § 14, 2019)

 

19.12.040 Fee schedule.
Fees for the issuance of electrical permits, plan reviews and investigation fees for work done without permits shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1887 § 27, 2007)

Chapter 19.13 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE
19.13.010 Adopted by reference.
The city adopts by reference the California Residential Code, 2019 Edition, which contains substantial copyrighted material from the 2018 International Residential Code, which is a copyrighted work owned by the International Code Council, Inc.; and said code, including the Appendix Chapters H, J, and V, is adopted in total as the law of the city. One copy of the code has been, and is now, filed in the office of the building official, and the code is adopted by reference as if incorporated and set out in full in this chapter. (Ord. 2044 § 15, 2019)

 

19.13.020 Fee schedule.
Fees for the issuance of building permits, plan reviews and investigation fees for work done without a permit shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1942 § 20, 2010)

 

19.13.030 Violations and penalties.
(a)     Unlawful Acts. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by this chapter, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of the provisions of this chapter.

(b)     Notice of Violation. The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of any building or structure in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation.

(c)     Prosecution of Violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the building official is authorized to request the city attorney to institute the appropriate proceeding law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.

(d)     Violation Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.

(e)     Other Penalties. In addition to the penalties and procedures stated in this section, the city may enforce the provisions of this chapter by any other administrative, criminal or civil remedies available to the city under this code. (Ord. 2044 § 16, 2019)

Chapter 19.15 CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
19.15.010 Adopted by reference.
The city adopts by reference the California Green Building Standards Code, 2019 Edition, copyright held by the California Building Standards Commission, and said code is adopted in total as the law of the city. One copy of the code has been, and is now, filed in the office of the building official, and the code is adopted by reference as if incorporated and set out in full in this chapter. (Ord. 2044 § 17, 2019)

 

19.15.020 Violations and penalties.
(a)     Unlawful Acts. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by this chapter, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of the provisions of this chapter.

(b)     Notice of Violation. The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of any building or structure in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation.

(c)     Prosecution of Violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the building official is authorized to request the city attorney to institute the appropriate proceeding law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.

(d)     Violation Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.

(e)     Other Penalties. In addition to the penalties and procedures stated in this section, the city may enforce the provisions of this chapter by any other administrative, criminal or civil remedies available to the city under this code. (Ord. 2044 § 18, 2019)

Chapter 19.16 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING SYSTEMS
19.16.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined electric vehicle charging system permitting process that complies with AB 1236, Government Code Section 65850.7, to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of electric vehicle charging changing systems. This chapter encourages the use of EVC systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city of Glendora, and expanding the ability of property owners to install electric vehicle charging systems. This chapter allows the city of Glendora to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. (Ord. 2020 § 1, 2017)

 

19.16.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.

“Association” means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development.

“Common interest development” means any of the following: community apartment project, condominium project, planned development, or stock cooperative.

“Electrical vehicle charging station” (EVCS) or “charging station” means any level of electrical vehicle supply equipment station that is designated and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.

“Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following: email, Internet, or facsimile.

“Feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact” includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by a city or county on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for permit.

“Reasonable restrictions” on an electric vehicle charging system are those restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits.

“Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. (Ord. 2020 § 1, 2017)

 

19.16.030 Applicability.
This chapter applies to the permitting of all electric vehicle charging systems in the city of Glendora. Electric vehicle charging systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type or components of an electrical vehicle charging system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. (Ord. 2020 § 1, 2017)

 

19.16.040 Electric vehicle charging system requirements.
(a)     All electric vehicle charging systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards, and requirements imposed by the state of California, city of Glendora and Los Angeles County fire department.

(b)     Electric vehicle charging systems shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electrical Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 2020 § 1, 2017)

 

19.16.050 Duties of building division and building official.
(a)     All documents required for submission of an expedited EVC system application shall be made available on the publicly accessible city of Glendora website.

(b)     At such time as an electronic plan check submittal procedure is established by the city of Glendora, these submittals will be made available to all vehicle charging system permit applications.

(c)     At such time as an electronic signature procedure is established by the city of Glendora, an applicant’s electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature.

(d)     The city of Glendora shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review.

(e)     The electric vehicle charging station permit process, standard plan(s), and checklist(s) shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in the most current version of the “Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook” published by the office of Planning and Research.

(f)      All fees prescribed for the permitting of EVC system must comply with Government Code Section 65850.55, Government Code Section 66015, Government Code Section 66016, and State Health and Safety Code Section 17951. (Ord. 2020 § 1, 2017)

 

19.16.060 Permit review and inspection requirements.
(a)     The city of Glendora building department shall adopt an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of electric vehicle charging systems within thirty days of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(b)     The city of Glendora building department shall issue a building permit or other nondiscretionary permit within three business days upon receipt of a complete application that meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan requirements. The building official may require an applicant to apply for a conditional use permit if the building official determines, based on substantial evidence, that the EVC system may have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the planning commission and thereafter to the city council.

(c)     Review of the application shall be limited to the building official’s review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements.

(d)     If a conditional use permit is required, the building official may deny an application for the use permit if the building official makes written findings based upon substantial evidence that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the planning commission and thereafter to the city council.

(e)     Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost.

(f)      “A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact” includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city shall not condition approval of an application on the approval of an association, as defined in Section 4080 of the Civil Code.

(g)     If an application is deemed incomplete, a written plan check correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be given to the applicant for resubmission.

(h)     Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the building division for EVC systems eligible for expedited review. A separate fire inspection may be required and performed by the Los Angeles County fire department for compliance with safety requirements.

(i)      The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and shall include consolidated inspections. An inspection shall be scheduled within two business days of a written inspection request and provide a two-hour inspection window.

(j)      If an EVC system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this chapter. If additional inspections are required, a re-inspection fee may apply. (Ord. 2020 § 1, 2017)

Chapter 19.17 CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE
19.17.010 Adopted by reference.
The city adopts by reference the California Energy Code, 2019 Edition, published by the International Code Council, Inc. and copyright held by the California Building Standards Commission, and said code is adopted in total as the law of the city. One copy of the code has been, and is now, filed in the office of the building official, and the code is adopted by reference as if incorporated and set out in full in this chapter. (Ord. 2044 § 19, 2019)

 

19.17.020 Violations and penalties.
(a)     Unlawful Acts. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure or equipment regulated by this chapter, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of the provisions of this chapter.

(b)     Notice of Violation. The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removal, demolition or occupancy of any building or structure in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation.

(c)     Prosecution of Violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the building official is authorized to request the city attorney to institute the appropriate proceeding law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.

(d)     Violation Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.

(e)     Other Penalties. In addition to the penalties and procedures stated in this section, the city may enforce the provisions of this chapter by any other administrative, criminal or civil remedies available to the city under this code. (Ord. 2044 § 20, 2019)

Chapter 19.18 BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES—MAPPED HIGHWAY AREA
19.18.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the “Mapped Highways Ordinance.” (Ord. 922 § 10, 1964)

 

19.18.020 Definitions.
“Mapped highway” means an area, no portion of which has been dedicated or acquired by the public, which is indicated as a major highway, secondary highway, collector, or local street on the circulation element of the city master plan (also known as the master plan of streets and highways) and for which there is on file in the office of the city engineer a map of such size, scale and detail that the exact location on the ground which the highway or road is to occupy can be ascertained.

“Owner” means any person entitled to the use or possession of real property or any person applying for a building permit. (Ord. 922 § 1, 1964)

 

19.18.030 Permit required.
No person shall hereafter erect any building or structure other than a temporary structure, with a valuation of less than five hundred dollars as determined by the building director pursuant to Section 303(a) of the city building code, within the area of any mapped highway, without first having secured a building permit as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 922 § 2, 1964)

 

19.18.040 City engineer to examine circulation element.
Prior to the issuance of any building permit the building director shall refer the application to the city engineer, who shall examine the circulation element of the city master plan (known as the master plan of streets and highways) to determine if there is on file in the office of the city engineer a fully enacted, precise plan indicating the exact location of ground which the proposed street or highway is to occupy.

No building permit for any building or structure with a violation of more than five hundred dollars shall be issued until the city engineer certifies to the building department that the proposed building or structure is not within the area of a mapped highway, as defined in Section 19.18.020. If the proposed building or structure is within the area of a mapped highway, the city engineer shall not issue such certification but shall notify the owner or applicant of such denial. (Ord. 922 § 3, 1964)

 

19.18.050 Hearing.
The owner of the real property who is aggrieved by the refusal of a building permit under this chapter may request a hearing on the matter before the planning commission by filing a written appeal therefor with the city clerk. Before taking any action authorized by this chapter the planning commission shall hold a hearing at which the applicant and any other interested parties shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least ten days prior to the date fixed for the hearing the planning commission shall cause notice of the time and place thereof to be mailed by certified mail to the owner or applicant. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall also be given to the city engineer and other interested city departments. (Ord. 922 § 4, 1964)

 

19.18.060 Authorization by planning commission.
The planning commission shall authorize the granting of the permit if it finds that balancing the interest of the public is preserving the integrity of mapped highways against the interest of the owner of the land in using his or her property, that the granting of the permit is required by considerations of justice and equity. (Ord. 922 § 5, 1964)

 

19.18.070 Criteria for not authorizing permit.
The planning commission shall not authorize the granting of the permit if it finds any of the following to be true:

(1)     That the owner of the land will not be substantially damaged by locating the proposed structure on his or her land elsewhere than within the proposed mapped highway;

(2)     That balancing the interest of the public and preserving the integrity of mapped highways against the interest of the land owner in using his or her property, it is found that the resulting disadvantages to the city would be unreasonable and disproportionate to the advantages the owner may accrue from using the property. (Ord. 922 § 6, 1964)

 

19.18.080 Notice of appeal.
The owner dissatisfied with the decision of the planning commission may appeal the decision to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk. The city council may request a summary of the proceedings and the evidence submitted before the planning commission and may make such decision as in its option is justified thereby, or may set the matter for hearing before itself. If the city council sets the matter for hearing before itself, it shall, at least ten days prior to the date fixed for hearing, cause notice of the time and place thereof to be mailed, by certified mail, to the applicant at the address shown upon his or her notice of appeal. (Ord. 922 § 7, 1964)

 

19.18.090 Denial of application.
Upon the denial of an application for a permit the city engineer shall give written notice of his or her action to the planning commission and the city planner and mail a copy thereof, by certified mail, to the owner or his or her agent at the address shown on his or her application. Upon the denial of an application for permit by the planning commission or the city council, written notice of the denial shall be sent, by certified mail, to the applicant or owner at the address shown on his or her application. At the expiration of a period one year or more, calculated from the date of mailing of such notice, the permit shall be issued upon request of the owner or applicant, if the city has not acquired said property or has not instituted legal proceedings to acquire such property. (Ord. 922 § 8, 1964)

 

19.18.100 Interpretation of chapter.
This chapter does not permit the construction, erection, placing, or maintenance of any building or structure at any place where such construction, erection, placing, or maintenance is prohibited by this chapter or by any other ordinance or law. (Ord. 922 § 9, 1964)

Chapter 19.20 TRAILERS AND MOBILEHOME PARKS
19.20.010 Compliance with electrical, fire, health, etc., provisions.
All mobilehome and trailer parks within the city shall conform to the electrical, fire, health, building, plumbing and land use ordinances of the city, as amended, except as hereinafter specified. (Prior code § 20.1)

 

19.20.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows, unless it shall be apparent from the content that they have a different meaning:

Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future;

“Approved” when used in connection with any material, appliance or construction, means meeting the requirements and approval of the building department of the city;

“Mobilehome park” and “trailer park” means any lot or parcel of land designed for, used or intended to be used for the parking of two or more trailers, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. Wherever the term “mobilehome park” is used in this title, it shall also mean “trailer park;”

“Awning” means any shade structure of approved material installed, erected or used adjoining or adjacent to a trailer coach;

“Building,” as used in this chapter, means public toilets, public baths, laundry rooms or other structures and includes a compartment containing a toilet or bath, or both, constructed for the exclusive use of an occupant of a trailer site;

“Cabana” means any portable, demountable or permanent cabin, small house, room, enclosure or other building erected, constructed or placed on any trailer site within six feet of any mobilehome or trailer coach on the same site in a mobilehome park or trailer park. “Cabana” does not include awning;

“Cabana—permanent” means any cabana which is designed so as to be not readily disassembled, moved and reassembled;

“Cabana—portable or demountable” means any prefabricated cabana which is designed to be readily assembled and disassembled and adapted to ready transportation from place to place;

“Carport” means an awning or shade structure for an automobile located within six feet of a mobilehome or trailer coach;

“Dependent mobilehome or trailer coach,” as used in this chapter, means one not equipped with a toilet for sewage disposal;

“Independent mobilehome or trailer coach,” as used in this chapter, means one equipped with a toilet for sewage disposal;

“Liquefied petroleum gas” means petroleum hydrocarbons or mixtures thereof, in liquid or gaseous state, having a vapor pressure in excess of twenty-six pounds per square inch at a temperature of one hundred degrees Fahrenheit. Whenever the symbol “LPG” is used, it shall mean liquefied petroleum gas;

“Mobilehome,” as used in this title, means any camp car, trailer or other vehicle, with or without motive power, designed and constructed to travel on the public thoroughfares at the maximum allowable speed limit and licensed in accordance with the provisions of the California motor vehicle code, and designed or used for human habitation. “Mobilehome” also means “trailer coach;”

“Mobilehome site,” as used in this chapter, means that portion of a mobilehome park designated and designed for the occupancy of a mobilehome or trailer coach and includes any area that is set aside or used for automobile parking, storage, awning, cabana or other structure;

 “Occupied area” means the total area of a trailer site that is occupied by any building, cabana, mobilehome, trailer coach, awning, storage cabinet or structure;

“Ramada” means any roof, or shade structure installed, erected or used above a mobilehome or a trailer coach and site, or any portion thereof;

 “Windbreak” means any protective fence, wall, structure or shelter from the wind and which exceeds forty-two inches in height, but not to exceed six feet in height;

“Window awning” means any awning which does project more than thirty inches from the body of the mobilehome or trailer coach and which does not extend more than six inches on either side of the window it is designed to serve;

In a mobilehome park or trailer park, “nuisance” includes any of the following:

(1)     Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence;

(2)     Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detriment to health, or which creates a fire hazard;

(3)     Overcrowding of any room with occupants;

(4)     Insufficient ventilation or illumination of any room;

(5)     Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities or

(6)     Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings. (Prior code § 20.2)

 

19.20.030 Enforcement of title.
It shall be the duty of the building department to enforce all of the provisions of this title; the fire department to enforce those provisions which relate to fire safety; the health department to enforce those provisions which relate to health and sanitation, and for the purpose of securing enforcement thereof, the building official, chief of the fire department and the health officer, or any of their respective duly authorized representatives, are hereby empowered to enter private property to determine if a mobilehome park exists and are further empowered to enter upon the premises of any mobilehome park or trailer park now operating or which may hereafter be operated within the city to inspect the same and all accommodations connected therewith. (Prior code § 20.3)

 

19.20.040 Compliance with Title 21.
Mobilehome parks or trailer parks may be located, established and maintained within the city only in accordance with the provisions of Title 21. (Prior code § 20.4)

 

19.20.050 Expiration of construction permits.
All permits as required in this title for construction or reconstruction of a mobilehome park or trailer park shall automatically expire within three months from the date of the issuance thereof unless the construction or reconstruction has been started within such period. (Prior code § 20.5)

 

19.20.060 Operating permit.
Upon the completion of any mobilehome park or trailer park, and prior to the use thereof, the owner or operator of such mobilehome park or trailer park shall make application to the city clerk for a permit to occupy or use the mobilehome park or trailer park.

The building department shall thereupon make a final inspection of the mobilehome park or trailer park referred to in such application, and if it is found to be in conformity with the requirements of this title and all other ordinances in the city, and the laws of the state, the department shall forward to the applicant a written permit to operate. (Prior code § 20.6)

 

19.20.070 Renewal of permits or licenses.
Before issuing a renewal of any permit or license, the building department shall make a reinspection of the buildings, structures, electrical equipment and plumbing of any mobilehome park and no such renewal shall be issued by the license collector unless and until any defect or violation of law found therein shall have been corrected. (Prior code § 20.7)

 

19.20.080 Compliance with building code and State Housing Act.
In every mobilehome park, all buildings and structures other than trailer coaches shall comply with the building code and the State Housing Act, where its requirements are applicable. (Prior code § 20.8)

 

19.20.090 Compliance with Trailer Park Act.
Every mobilehome park shall comply with the Trailer Park Act where its requirements are applicable. (Prior code § 20.9)

 

19.20.100 Compliance with plumbing code.
In every mobilehome park all plumbing work shall comply with the requirements of the plumbing code. (Prior code § 20.10)

 

19.20.110 Compliance with electrical code.
In every mobilehome park all electrical work shall comply with the requirements of the electrical code. (Prior code § 20.11)

 

19.20.120 Prohibited occupancy.
It is unlawful for any person in a mobilehome park or trailer park to use or cause or permit to be used for occupancy:

(1)     Any mobilehome or trailer coach from which any tire or wheel has been removed, except for the purpose of making temporary repairs or placing it in dead storage;

(2)     Any mobilehome or trailer coach to which is attached any rigid water, gas or sewer pipes; provided, however, that the metal tubing not to exceed three quarters inch in diameter may be used for water or gas;

(3)     Any mobilehome or trailer coach which is permanently attached with underpinning or foundation to the ground;

(4)     Any mobilehome or trailer coach which does not conform to the requirements of the California state motor vehicle code governing the use of mobilehomes or trailer coaches on public highways;

(5)     Any mobilehome or trailer coach in an unsanitary condition;

(6)     Any mobilehome or trailer coach which is structurally unsound and does not protect its inhabitants against the elements; or

(7)     Any mobilehome or trailer coach to which there is attached or to which there is established less than six feet adjacent thereto any room or lean-tos; provided, however, that an approved cabana, ramada, carport or an awning entirely open on one side may be allowed and except as otherwise provided herein. (Prior code § 20.12)

 

19.20.130 Renting prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to rent or hold out for rent any mobilehome or trailer coach in a mobilehome park or trailer park which is owned by or in the possession or control of the owner or operator of the mobilehome park or trailer park or his or her agent. The rental paid for any such mobilehome or trailer coach shall also be deemed to be rental for the space it occupies. (Prior code § 20.13)

 

19.20.140 Parking homes or trailer coaches.
It is unlawful to park or use a mobilehome or trailer coach for living or sleeping purposes, or to connect the same to any utility, except when parked in a mobilehome site or trailer site within a legally operated mobilehome park or trailer park, unless a specific permit is granted by the city council. (Prior code § 20.14)

 

19.20.150 Parking on streets.
It is unlawful to camp overnight or to park a mobilehome or trailer coach overnight upon any public street or alley, including the right-of-way. This provision shall not apply where a mobilehome or trailer coach is parked for the purpose of making emergency repairs; however, it is unlawful to park or store a mobilehome or trailer coach in driveways and within front yard setback areas. (Prior code § 20.15)

 

19.20.160 Marking park area.
The following provisions shall apply to all new mobilehome parks and trailer parks and additions to existing mobilehome parks or trailer parks:

(1)     No mobilehome or trailer coach shall be located closer than six feet from any building or another mobilehome or trailer coach; provided, however, that this does not apply to a compartment containing solely a private toilet or bath, or both, constructed for the exclusive use of an occupant of a mobilehome site or trailer site designed for the occupancy of one mobilehome or trailer coach. Site lines or corners must be marked or easily identified;

(2)     Each mobilehome or trailer coach and each building shall not be located closer than three feet from a site line;

(3)     Each mobilehome or trailer site shall have a driveway entrance of not less than twenty feet in width fronting the parks’ internal roadway systems. All driveways shall have clear and unobstructed access to a public thoroughfare. Each mobilehome or trailer shall be parked on each site with the hitch fronting toward this driveway;

(4)     A mobilehome park or trailer park shall not accommodate any mobilehome or trailer coach when there are no viable mobilehome sites or trailer sites within the park. (Prior code § 20.16)

 

19.20.170 Fire protection.
(a)     The mobilehome park or trailer park operator shall be responsible for the instruction of his or her staff in the use of the mobilehome park or trailer park fire protection equipment and in their specific duties in the event of fire.

(b)     It shall be the responsibility of the mobilehome park or trailer park operator to inform all tenants about means for summoning the fire department, police department and mobilehome park or trailer park employees.

(c)     Approved first aid fire appliances shall be provided for fighting incipient fires in ordinary combustible materials (Class A) readily accessible to all trailer occupants, in readily visible locations. Such first aid fire appliances may consist of two and one-half gallon Class A extinguishers so located that it will not be necessary to travel more than one hundred feet from any trailer to reach the nearest extinguisher, or may consist of garden hose of a type usable in all weather, permanently attached, in cabinets immediately adjacent to the hose connection, so located that any part of any trailer can be reached with a hose stream.

(d)     One or more approved five pound extinguishers of a type suitable for flammable liquids or electrical fires shall be provided and shall be so located that it will not be necessary to travel more than one hundred feet from any trailer to reach the nearest extinguisher.

(e)     Water supply facilities for fire department operations shall consist of a private hydrant system connected to domestic water supply with each hydrant in the system capable of supplying a minimum of two one and one-half inch hose streams, at seventy-five gallons per minute and thirty pounds flowing pressure each, on any fire in a trailer or elsewhere in mobilehome park or trailer park. These hydrants shall be located no more than two hundred feet from any trailer site.

(f)      All fire extinguisher locations and hydrant locations shall be plainly marked, protected from weather or accidental damage and shall be used for no purpose other than fire fighting.

(g)     Every owner, operator, lessee or other person in charge of any mobilehome park or trailer park, who becomes aware of any fire which is a hazard to the mobilehome park or trailer park, shall report the matter without delay to the fire department. (Prior code § 20.17)

 

19.20.180 Maintenance and sanitation.
(a)     The area or plot of land upon which a mobilehome or trailer park is situated and each mobilehome site or trailer site shall be:

(1)     Well drained and graded, having due regard for the elevation of any abutting streets or drainage easements;

(2)     All walkways and driveways shall be paved with one and one-half asphaltic concrete surfacing and approved by the city engineer;

(3)     Kept free from dust; and

(4)     Kept clean and free from the accumulation of refuse, garbage, rubbish or debris.

(b)     The mobilehome site or trailer site and the space directly beneath each mobilehome or trailer coach shall be kept clean and free from refuse, rubbish or other impediments.

(c)     All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in good repair and in operating condition at all times.

(d)     Every structure shall be maintained in an approved, safe and sanitary condition.

(e)     All devices, installations and safeguards required by this title shall be maintained in approved working order.

(f)      No obstruction shall be so erected, placed or maintained as to prevent inspection of electrical and sanitary facilities or mobilehome or trailer equipment. Approved storage cabinets may be used on a mobilehome or trailer site.

(g)     Flammable liquids shall not be stored or used in quantities in excess of one gallon, and all such flammable liquids shall be kept in unbreakable and tight containers when not in actual use. (Prior code § 20.18)

 

19.20.190 Liquefied petroleum gas.
The location, installation, marking, filling, maintenance and use of liquefied petroleum gas tanks and associated equipment shall be in accordance with the liquefied petroleum gases safety orders of the state of California, division of industrial safety, as effects LPG.

No liquefied petroleum gas cylinder shall be charged within ten feet of any structure or mobilehome or trailer coach. (Prior code § 20.19)

 

19.20.200 Lighting.
Lighting equipment shall be such that there shall be not less than two-tenths average foot candle for protective lighting per square foot the full length of all driveways during the hours from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise of each succeeding day. (Prior code § 20.20)

 

19.20.210 Distance between lamps.
Individual lamps for such lighting shall be so located that the maximum distance between them does not exceed one hundred feet. (Prior code § 20.21)

 

19.20.220 Utility buildings.
(a)     A minimum of five foot candles of light shall be maintained at entrances to utility buildings.

(b)     A minimum of twenty-five foot candles of light shall maintained at floor level within utility buildings.

(c)     All electrical equipment in a shower compartment shall be vapor tight.

(d)     All lights in utility buildings must be wall switched. No pull chains shall be allowed. (Prior code § 20.22)

 

19.20.230 Guest registration.
Every person who owns or operates a mobilehome park or trailer park shall keep a record in which shall be entered:

(1)     The name and address of each guest who is the owner or operator of an automobile, and the name and address of each member of his or her party for which accommodations are afforded or for which space is rented and the identification space of the mobilehome site or trailer site the guest occupied.

(2)     The make, type and license number of the automobile and mobilehome or trailer coach, and the state in which such vehicle is registered and the year of registration. (Prior code § 20.23)

 

19.20.240 Animals at large.
(a)     Dogs and animals shall not be permitted to run at large in any mobilehome park or trailer park.

(b)     Poultry and other barnyard animals shall not be permitted in any mobilehome park or trailer park. (Prior code § 20.24)

Chapter 19.21 SMALL RESIDENTIAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM PERMITS
19.21.010 Definitions.
(a)     A “solar energy system” means either of the following:

(1)     Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating.

(2)     Any structure design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating.

(b)     A “small residential rooftop solar energy system” means all of the following:

(1)     A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating of thirty kilowatts thermal.

(2)     A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state, fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city of Glendora and all state and Los Angeles County health and safety standards.

(3)     A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling.

(4)     A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the city of Glendora.

(c)     “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

(1)     Email.

(2)     The Internet.

(3)     Facsimile.

(d)     An “association” means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development.

(e)     A “common interest development” means any of the following:

(1)     A community apartment project.

(2)     A condominium project.

(3)     A planned development.

(4)     A stock cooperative.

(f)      “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete.

(g)     “Reasonable restrictions” in a solar energy system are those restrictions that do no significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits.

 

(h)     “Restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance” means:

(1)     For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating systems: an amount exceeding ten percent of the cost of the system, but in no case more than one thousand dollars, or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding ten percent, as originally specified and proposed.

(2)     For photovoltaic systems: an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars over the cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding ten percent as originally specified and proposed. (Ord. 1998 § 1, 2015)

 

19.21.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. The chapter encourages the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city of Glendora, and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. The chapter allows the city of Glendora to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. (Ord. 1998 § 1, 2015)

 

19.21.030 Applicability.
This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city of Glendora. Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. (Ord. 1998 § 1, 2015)

 

19.21.040 Solar energy system requirements.
(a)     All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards, and requirements imposed by the state of California and the city of Glendora and Los Angeles County fire department.

(b)     Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Codes.

(c)     Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 1998 § 1, 2015)

 

19.21.050 Duties of building division and building official.
(a)     All documents required for submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available on the publicly accessible city of Glendora website. The permit application form may also be downloaded at energycenter.org/PermittingToolkit.

(b)     At such time as an electronic plan check submittal procedure is established by the city of Glendora, these submittals will be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applications.

(c)     At such time as an electronic signature procedure is established by the city of Glendora, an applicant’s electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature.

(d)     The building official shall implement the use of plan check submittal requirements, an eligibility checklist, a solar standard plan and an inspection guide checklist, including all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review.

 

(e)     The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plan(s), and checklist(s) shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research.

(f)      All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy system must comply with Government Code Section 65850.555, Government Code Section 66015, Government Code Section 66016, and State Health and Safety Code Section 17951. (Ord. 1998 § 1, 2015)

 

19.21.060 Permit review and inspection requirements.
(a)     The building division shall issue a building permit or other nondiscretionary permit within three days of receipt of a complete application that meets the requirements of the expedited approved checklist and standard plan. The building official may require an applicant to apply for a conditional use permit if the official finds, based on submittal evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the city of Glendora planning commission.

(b)     Review of the application shall be limited to the building official’s review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements.

(c)     If a conditional use permit is required, a building official may deny an application for the use permit if the official makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the city of Glendora planning commission.

(d)     Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost.

(e)     “A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact” includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city of Glendora on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of Section 714 of the Civil Code defining restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance.

(f)      The city shall not condition approval of an application on the approval of an association, as defined in Section 4080 of the Civil Code.

(g)     If an application is deemed incomplete, a written plan check correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be given to the applicant for resubmission.

(h)     Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the building division for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. On some submittals a separate fire inspection may be required and performed by the Los Angeles County fire department for their safety requirements.

(i)      The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections. An inspection will be scheduled within two business days of a request and provide a two-hour inspection window.

(j)      If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this chapter. If additional inspections are required a re-inspection fee may apply. (Ord. 1998 § 1, 2015)

Chapter 19.24 SIGN CODE
19.24.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.

“Abandoned sign” means a sign related to a former business located on property which remains unoccupied for a period of one hundred twenty days or more, or any sign which was erected for an occupant or business unrelated to the present occupant or business, and any sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer exists.

“Aggregate sign area” means the total surface area of a sign within a continuous perimeter containing words, letters, figures, and symbols, together with any frame, material or color forming an integral part of the display.

“Attached sign” means a sign permanently affixed to a wall, parapet, fascia or mansard of a building in such a manner that its face is parallel to the wall, parapet, fascia or mansard.

“Billboard” means a detached sign promoting an interest other than that of a business, individual or product available on the premises upon which such sign is located.

“Building frontage” means the length of that side of a building which is most nearly parallel and closest to the adjacent street of highest classification as portrayed on the current master plan. If all adjacent streets are of the same classification, the side of the building with the smallest lineal dimension containing a main entrance shall be considered the building frontage.

“Detached sign or freestanding sign” means a sign standing upon the ground which is without any form of support other than its own structural members.

“Directional, auxiliary, public service sign” means an on-premises sign designed to guide traffic, i.e., “Exit,” “Entrance,” “One-way,” “Handicapped,” etc.

“Directional real estate sign” means a sign erected for the purpose of informing the viewer of the approximate route, direction or location of a given tract of real property in the city, including other promotional matter.

“Display surface” means the area made available by the sign structure for the purpose of displaying the identifying message.

 

“Double-faced sign” means a sign with two faces only, with each face oriented approximately one hundred eighty degrees from the other.

“Height” means the vertical distance between the highest point of the sign structure and the top of the street curb nearest the sign structure or, if there is no curb along the street frontage of the property where the sign is located, the paved portion of the street nearest the sign structure.

“Identifying sign” means a sign that portrays through the use of words, letters, or symbols the type or name of any business conducted on the premises, or the name of the premises, or any products or service obtainable on the premises, or all of any combination of the foregoing.

“Individual letters sign” means a sign affixed to the wall of a building and comprised of individual letters, symbols and figures. Such signs may be lighted or unlighted.

“Interior sign” means any sign located on the inside of any fully enclosed building which may be seen from the outside of the building only through windows or the glass portion of doors.

“Name plate” means a sign permanently attached to a building wall in such a manner that its face is parallel with, and does not project from, the surface of the wall more than two inches.

“Portable sign” means any sign not permanently attached or affixed to any building or structure and which is capable of being moved.

“Public right-of-way” means all those areas which have been dedicated for the public use and accepted according to law, or which have been in common and undisputed use by the public for a period of not less than five years last preceding, including avenues, highways, lanes, alleys, crossings or intersections, parkways and sidewalks.

“Public service sign” means a sign which identifies community or civic events or projects or other special activities on a temporary basis.

“Shopping center” means a group of five or more commercial uses planned and designated to function as an integral unit of a single or contiguous parcels and which utilize common off-street parking and access.

“Sign” means any device made of any materials, or of any character, for visual communication, capable of being viewed from public areas, for the purpose of identifying or promoting, by one or more messages, the interest of any person, business, group or enterprise, whether or not actually used for such purpose. A sign shall constitute a structure within the provisions of Chapter 19.02 of this code.

“Sign face” means the surface of the sign upon, against, or through which the message is displayed or illustrated.

“Sign structure” is any structure which supports or is capable of supporting any sign as defined in this chapter. A sign structure may be a single pole and may or may not be an integral part of the building.

“Structure” is that which is built or constructed, including an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts jointed together in some definite manner.

“Temporary sign” means a sign which is intended to be used for a limited period.

“Wall sign” means a sign which is mounted flush and affixed securely to the wall of a building, projecting no more than three inches from the face of the wall, and not extending horizontally or vertically beyond the face of the wall.

“Window sign” is a sign painted, posted or affixed on a window or glass portion of a door or within a building for display through a window or glass portion of a door or other building opening.

“Site location sign” means an off-premises sign designed to direct persons to property presently occupied by any nonprofit organization formed primarily or exclusively for any public, charitable, religious or fraternal purpose. (Ord. 1481 §§ 1, 2, 1986; Ord. 1415 § 1, 1983; Ord. 1342 § 3, 1980)

 

19.24.020 General provisions.
(a)     Except as expressly permitted by this chapter, or by the requirements of law or federal or state regulations, all signs are prohibited on private property.

 

(b)     Except as expressly permitted by this chapter, or by the requirements of law or federal or state regulations, all signs are prohibited on public property.

(c)     All signs and their supporting structures, except interior signs, shall be constructed of metal, wood or comparable weatherproof material, shall be so enclosed as to provide against their infestation by birds and vermin, shall be structurally safe, and shall be maintained in good condition, and in a manner so as not to constitute a hazard to public safety or to property.

(d)     Signs attached to a building shall not extend above the top of the wall, parapet, fascia or mansard to which they are attached. No sign structure or part thereof shall project from the wall or façade to which it is attached more than three inches.

(e)     Signs painted directly on buildings pertaining to other than the identification of the building or business contained therein are prohibited.

(f)      No sign, nor any part thereof, shall be constructed or maintained to flash, move, or in any way simulate motion, except those signs which thereby advise the viewing public of time, temperature, or both.

(g)     No illumination permitted herein shall be distracting to traffic on public rights-of-way, interfere with illuminated traffic signals, or shine directly onto residential zones. Intensity shall be determined from specifications as covered in the current county sign code.

(h)     Abandoned signs are prohibited. Upon application and hearing by the planning commission any sign which would be presumed abandoned may be found by the planning commission not to have been abandoned where:

(1)     All identification of the premises, the services or goods available thereon, and the name or names of any and all persons have been removed;

(2)     The sign is in conformity with all other provisions of this chapter; and

(3)     There is a substantial probability that the sign will be utilized without substantial changes in, or additions to, the structure thereof by a business subsequently operating on the premises.

(i)      Portable signs are prohibited. (Ord. 1481 § 3, 1986; Ord. 1415 § 2, 1983; Ord. 1370 § 1, 1981; Ord. 1342 § 3, 1980)

 

19.24.025 Signs permitted on public property.
The following signs may be posted on public property:

(1)     Site location signs, provided such signs are posted in accordance with the following standards:

(A)    The content of such signs shall be limited to the name of the organization and directions to the property site;

(B)    No sign shall be larger than three square feet;

(C)    No more than two signs shall be posted within the city limits for any property site;

(D)    No sign shall be posted farther than one thousand feet from the boundary of the property site;

(E)     The signs shall be posted only on street light standards or street sign posts and no higher than eight feet above the ground. (Ord. 1415 § 3, 1983)

 

19.24.030 Variance procedure.
The owner of any property upon which a proposed sign is to be located and to which the provisions of this chapter apply may file with the city clerk a petition in writing for a permit to have such property excepted from any of the provisions of this chapter. The sign variance permit petition shall be accompanied by a filing fee, as established by resolution of the city council, for the purpose of defraying costs incidental to the proceedings. The petition shall be sworn to before any person authorized to administer oaths under the laws of the state.

(1)     Petition. Every petition shall fully state the facts upon which petitioner relies for such relief, and such other facts or information as the planning commission or city council may require. Such petition shall include a legal description of the property and a list of names and addresses of all owners of property located within a distance of three hundred feet from the outer boundaries of the property sought to be relieved of the provisions of this chapter, as shown by the last assessment roll of the county. In addition, the petition shall be accompanied by a map drawn to scale showing dimensions of the property, improvements located thereon and their specific location, and the location and dimensions of proposed improvements, if any. The specific location of the proposed sign shall be identified on such plan. In addition, each petition shall be accompanied by a sketch of the proposed sign and its supporting structure, if any, drawn to scale and identifying its dimensions.

(2)     Hearing Procedure. The petition shall be delivered to the planning director who, upon receipt, shall examine the petition for conformance with the requirements of this section, and in the event that such petition conforms with the requirements of this section, shall set a time and place for a public hearing thereon before the planning commission, which hearing shall be set within forty-five days from the date of filing said petition.

At least ten days prior to the hearing, the planning director shall cause a notice of such hearing to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city and a notice thereof to be mailed to the owners of all property within a distance of three hundred feet from the exterior boundaries of the property sought to be relieved of the provisions of this chapter, as shown by the last assessment roll of the county. The planning commission shall make specific written findings as to whether the following facts have been established:

(A)    That there are special circumstances or conditions applying to the proposed sign, land, buildings, or use of the land involved in such petition which do not apply generally to signs, land, buildings, or uses in the same zone;

(B)    That relief from the provisions of this chapter is necessary for the enjoyment of substantial property rights; and

(C)    That relief from the provisions of this chapter would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, morals, or welfare.

If the planning commission finds all of the above conditions to exist, it may, by resolution, grant petitioner relief from the provisions of this chapter. After the commission has acted, pursuant to this section, to approve or deny a permit for a sign variance, notice of such action shall be given forthwith by the secretary of the planning commission to the city clerk; provided, that in no event shall a failure to give such notice affect the validity of the action taken by the commission. The action of the planning commission in denying or approving said sign variance shall be final unless appealed to the city council.

(3)     Appeal Procedure. The petitioner, or any other person living or owning land within three hundred feet of the land affected by a decision of the planning commission to deny or approve the sign variance, may appeal such decision. Any such appeal shall be taken by filing a letter of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days of the planning commission decision. Said letter of appeal shall indicate wherein the planning commission erred, or such other grounds upon which the appeal is based, and shall be accompanied by a filing fee, as established by resolution of the city council.

Any two members of the city council, either jointly or separately, may appeal a decision of the planning commission to deny or approve a sign variance by notifying the city clerk, by any means, that such commission action is to be so appealed. There shall be no requirements for such an appeal by members of the city council other than notifying the city clerk of such an appeal within the fifteen day appeal period.

(4)     Action by City Council. Upon receipt of an appeal, the city council shall hold a public hearing thereon after giving ten days notice thereof in the manner provided for hearing of the sign variance petition by the planning commission and shall take action either to affirm or to reverse or to modify the decision of the planning commission. The action of the city council shall be final in all respects. Before the city council may take action, pursuant to this subsection, to grant a permit for a sign variance, the city council must find that the three facts set forth in subsection (2) of this section have been established.

(5)     Withdrawal of Petition. A sign variance petition may be withdrawn at any time before the hearing before the planning commission, and an appeal from the decision of the planning commission may be withdrawn at any time before the hearing before the city council by filing a request in writing with the city clerk. The request for withdrawal shall be signed by all persons who signed the original petition or who signed the request for the appeal. If such request is made prior to publication of the notice of the hearing or the occurrence of any expense and the person requesting withdrawal of the petition or appeal files a proper claim, the city shall refund the filing fee.

(6)     Permit Conditions. The petitioner shall have six months from the date of the planning commission or city council approval of the sign variance to construct the sign proposed in the petition. If such sign is not constructed within said six month period, the authority granted hereunder shall be automatically withdrawn.

In the event the relief granted by the planning commission or city council to petitioner is conditional, the petitioner shall enter into an agreement with the city, which shall set forth the conditions upon which such relief has been granted and the petitioner shall agree that all such conditions shall be satisfied within the six-month construction period unless a shorter period is specified in the approval of the petition. (Ord. 1576 § 2, 1990; Ord. 1342 § 3, 1980)

 

19.24.040 Single-family residential zones.
The following signs are permitted in single-family residential zones:

(1)     One unlighted detached sign located a minimum of five feet within the property line, not exceeding six square feet in area and five feet in height, pertaining only to the sale, lease or rental of the particular building, property or premises upon which displayed;

(2)     A nameplate, not exceeding two square feet in area, containing the name, or the address, or both of the occupant of the premises;

(3)     No more than two unlighted, detached directional real estate signs, identifying a tract of real property in the city which has been divided into five or more lots, parcels or units which are to be offered for rent, sale or lease, provided:

(A)    That such signs shall not exceed thirty-two square feet in area and twelve feet in height, shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from any property line, and shall be a minimum of fifty feet from any residence not in the tract,

(B)    That each sign shall be located within the confines of the subdivision or tract of real property to which it refers,

(C)    That the fees set forth in Section 5.08.060 shall be applicable to such signs, and

(D)    That such signs shall be permitted for a period of not more than one year. Extensions may be granted by the planning commission upon written request received by the city clerk prior to the end of the one-year period;

(4)     No more than two unlighted signs, each not exceeding six square feet in area, may be located on the same lot as a model home, so long as said home is used to promote the original sale of houses in the tract in which said model home is located. (Ord. 1342 § 3, 1980)

 

19.24.050 Multiple-family residential zones.
The following signs are permitted in multiple-family residential zones:

(1)     One nameplate designated “Manager” or “Manager’s Office” per street frontage, not to exceed two square feet in area;

(2)     One identifying sign attached to the front of the building, not to exceed five square feet per dwelling unit, up to a maximum of forty square feet in area;

(3)     One temporary unlighted sign attached to the front of the building, not to exceed ten square feet in area, pertaining only to the sale, lease or rental of only the particular building, property or premises upon which displayed;

(4)     One temporary unlighted double faced or two unlighted single-faced detached signs, not to exceed fifty square feet per face and six feet in height, pertaining only to the sale of five or more new dwelling units on the premises upon which displayed. Such signs may remain for a period not to exceed six months after final building inspection. (Ord. 1342 § 3, 1980)

 

19.24.060 C-1 zones.
The following signs are permitted in C-1 zones:

(1)     One wall sign or one individual letters sign attached to the front wall of the building, not to exceed an aggregate sign area of one square foot for every lineal foot of building frontage, or the same aggregate sign area encompassed within one detached sign of the same architectural style as all other signs on the building, not to exceed ten feet in height and placed within a maintained lawn or totally landscaped area of not less than twice the aggregate sign area of the detached sign;

(2)     One wall sign or one individual letters sign attached to the rear or side wall of the building when such a wall faces an open space, not to exceed an aggregate sign area of one square foot for every lineal foot of the wall on which the sign is attached, or, in the case of a side wall on a corner lot, the same aggregate sign area encompassed within one detached sign of the same architectural style as all other signs on the building, not to exceed ten feet in height and placed within a maintained lawn or totally landscaped area of not less than twice the aggregate sign area of the detached sign;

(3)     One directory nameplate at every building entrance, not to exceed two and one-half square feet in area for every six occupants or fraction thereof, containing the name, the address, or both of occupants of the building;

(4)     One temporary unlighted sign, attached to the main building, not to exceed twenty-four square feet in area, pertaining only to the sale, lease or rental of the particular building, property or premises upon which displayed, for a period not to exceed six months, or until such earlier time as the sale, lease or rental of said building is accomplished. (Ord. 1481 § 3, 1986; Ord. 1342 § 3, 1980)

 

19.24.070 Other commercial zones.
The following signs are permitted in commercial zones other than C-1:

(1)     One wall sign or individual letters sign attached to the front wall of the building, not to exceed two square feet in aggregate sign area for every lineal foot of building frontage. No such sign need be less than forty square feet in aggregate sign area, regardless of the building frontage.

(2)     One wall sign or one individual letters sign attached to a side or rear wall of the building when such a wall faces an open space, not to exceed an aggregate sign area of two square feet for every lineal foot of the wall on which the sign is attached.

(3)     Buildings located at the intersection of public streets may have one wall sign or one individual letters sign attached to the wall of each side of the building facing the public street. Such signs shall have an aggregate sign area not to exceed two square feet for every lineal foot of building frontage of the wall on which the sign is attached. No such sign need be less than forty square feet in area, regardless of the building frontage.

(4)     If a window is used for permanent identifying signs, the sign area shall not exceed more than fifty percent of the window and the combination of all window signs shall not exceed the total sign area allowed by this section.

(5)     One directory nameplate at every building entrance, not to exceed two and one-half square feet in area for each six occupants or fraction thereof, containing the name, the address, or both of occupants of the building.

(6)     One temporary sign attached to the main building, not to exceed forty square feet, pertaining only to the sale, lease or rental of the particular building, property or premises upon which displayed, for a period not to exceed twelve months, or until such earlier time as the sale, lease or rental of said building is accomplished.

(7)     Any number of temporary signs may be attached to the inner surface of windows, provided that not more than twenty-five percent of the window is obscured.

(8)     Banners. Banners erected for the purpose of announcing the opening of a new business, a special event, sale or seasonal activity (i.e., grand opening, holiday sale) may be permitted by the planning department based on the following:

(A)    Application for a temporary banner shall be made on forms provided by the planning department.

 

(B)    The amount of display days for temporary banner permits shall be limited as follows:

(i)      A permit to display a banner for up to ninety, but not less than thirty consecutive days, may be approved for any single business location. The cumulative total of banner display days pursuant to a single or multiple banner permits shall not exceed ninety days in a twelve-month period.

(ii)     For new businesses, the cumulative total of banner display days pursuant to a single or multiple banner permits shall not exceed one hundred fifty days in a twelve-month period; a permit, however, will not be issued for less than thirty or more than ninety consecutive days; i.e., a permit to display a banner may be issued for thirty to ninety consecutive days for any single business location, at the termination of any ninety-day period, there must be a thirty-day break before an additional banner permit will be issued for the remaining sixty permissible days in a twelve-month period.

For the purposes of this section, a new business shall be defined as a business which is not yet opened, is under new ownership, or has relocated to a new location and will extend for a period of twelve months from the date the business first obtained a business license; or for new locations, twelve months from the date the business updated the finance department with a change in address. A business name change while under the same ownership, shall not qualify as a new business.

(C)    No more than one banner at a time shall be permitted for any single business location.

(D)    Banners shall be attached to the face of the building where the business is located. Banners may not be installed on the roof and may not extend above the parapet line.

(E)     Banners shall be no larger than forty-five square feet.

(F)     Banners shall be made of non-reflective, non-metallic material.

(G)    Banners shall only be used to announce the opening of a new business, grand opening event, a seasonal activity, or a special sale.

(H)    This section does not apply to banners hung inside a building.

(9)     Freestanding Signs.

(A)    Shopping centers shall be permitted one or more freestanding signs per center which identify the shopping center under the following criteria:

(i)      A shopping center occupying ten or more commercial acres:

a.       With a single street frontage shall be allowed one sign not to exceed two hundred forty square feet in area and thirty feet in height,

b.       With two street frontages shall be allowed two signs, one on each street frontage as indicated in subsection (a).

(ii)     A shopping center occupying six or more but less than ten commercial acres:

a.       With a single street frontage shall be allowed one sign not to exceed two hundred square feet in area and twenty-five feet in height,

b.       With two street frontages shall be allowed two signs, one on each street as indicated in subsection (a) above.

(iii)   A shopping center occupying three or more but less than six commercial acres:

a.       With single street frontage shall be allowed one sign not to exceed one hundred fifty square feet in area and twenty feet in height,

b.       With two street frontages shall be allowed two signs, each of which shall be as indicated in subsection (a) above.

(iv)    A shopping center occupying one or more but less than three commercial acres:

a.       With a single or double street frontage shall be allowed a single sign not to exceed seventy-five square feet in area and fifteen feet in height.

(v)     A shopping center occupying more than one-half but less than one commercial acre:

a.       With a single or double street frontage shall be allowed a single sign not to exceed sixty square feet in area and fifteen feet in height.

(vi)    In lieu of identifying the shopping center, a freestanding sign may be used to identify one major tenant in centers of less than six acres in area or two tenants in centers of six or more acres in area. No other freestanding signs are allowed within a shopping center to identify occupants of the center.

(vii)  In all cases, the square footage of the faces of each freestanding sign shall be deducted proportionately from each of the tenants for any other business identification signs allowed by this chapter on a one foot for one foot basis. Example: A double-faced freestanding sign of two hundred square feet per face or four hundred square feet total must reduce other allowable signs by four hundred square feet.

(viii) A permanently landscaped area equal to the total sign area shall be placed around the sign base and enclosed by a masonry or concrete curb of not less than eight inches in height.

(ix)    No architecturally untreated poles shall be allowed. Bases, poles and other components shall be architecturally treated in a way that is compatible with the architecture of the building(s).

(B)    Service stations shall be permitted one freestanding double-faced sign identifying the business, provided that:

(i)      The sign shall not exceed thirty-five square feet per face and fifteen feet in height.

(ii)     A permanently landscaped area equal to the total sign area shall be placed around the sign base and enclosed by a masonry or concrete curb of no less than eight inches in height.

(iii)   No architecturally untreated poles shall be allowed. Bases, poles and other components shall be architecturally treated in a way that is compatible with the architecture of the building(s).

(C)    Non-shopping center, non-service station single commercial establishments having a minimum street frontage of two hundred feet shall be permitted one or more freestanding signs identifying the business, provided that:

(i)      A business occupying ten or more commercial acres:

a.       With a single street frontage shall be allowed one sign not to exceed two hundred forty square feet in area and thirty feet in height,

b.       With two street frontages shall be allowed two signs, as indicated in subsection (a) above.

(ii)     A business occupying six or more but less than ten commercial acres:

a.       With a single street frontage shall be allowed one sign not to exceed two hundred square feet in area and twenty-five feet in height,

b.       With two street frontages shall be allowed two signs, as indicated in subsection (a) above.

(iii)   A business occupying three of more but less than six commercial acres:

a.       With a single street frontage shall be allowed one sign not to exceed one hundred fifty square feet in area and twenty feet in height,

b.       With two street frontages shall be allowed two signs, as indicated in subsection (a) above.

(iv)    A business occupying one or more but less than three commercial acres:

a.       With a single or double street frontage shall be allowed single sign not to exceed seventy-five square feet in area and fifteen feet in height.

(v)     A business occupying more than one-half but less than one commercial acre:

a.       With a single or double street frontage shall be allowed a single sign not to exceed sixty square feet in area and fifteen feet in height.

(vi)    In all cases, the square footage of the faces of each freestanding sign shall be deducted proportionately from the other business identification signs allowed by this chapter on a one foot for one foot basis. Example: A double-faced freestanding sign of two hundred square feet per face or four hundred square feet total must reduce other allowable signs by four hundred square feet.

(vii)  A permanently landscaped area equal to the total sign area shall be placed around the sign base and enclosed by a masonry or concrete curb of not less than eight inches in height.

(viii) No architecturally untreated poles shall be allowed. Bases, poles and other components shall be architecturally treated in a way that is compatible with the architecture of the building(s).

(D)    Non-shopping center, non-service station, single commercial establishments having a street frontage of less than two hundred feet shall be permitted one freestanding sign, provided that:

(i)      The sign shall not exceed twenty-four square feet per face and ten feet in height.

(ii)     In all cases, the square footage of the faces of the freestanding sign shall be deducted proportionately from the other business identification signs allowed by this chapter on a one foot for one foot basis, but in no case shall other allowable signs be reduced more than fifty percent. Example: A double-faced freestanding sign of fifteen square feet per face or thirty square feet total must reduce other allowable signs by thirty square feet.

(iii)   A permanently landscaped area equal to the total sign area shall be placed around the sign base and enclosed by a masonry or concrete curb of no less than eight inches in height.

(iv)    No architecturally untreated poles shall be allowed. Bases, poles and other components shall be architecturally treated in a way that is compatible with the architecture of the building(s).

(v)     The sign shall not be located within thirty-five feet of any other freestanding sign on the same side of the primary street from which the sign is viewed.

(vi)    Adjacent commercial establishments on the same property may select the option of sharing the use of one sign.

(E)     Business(es) on property which is served by a driveway only to a public thoroughfare and has otherwise no frontage may be identified by a freestanding common directory, not to exceed one and one-half square feet per occupant, containing only the name, the address or both of the occupants, provided that:

(i)      No architecturally untreated poles shall be allowed. Bases, poles and other components shall be architecturally treated in a way that is compatible with the architecture of the building(s).

(ii)     The same color for sign background and sign graphics shall be used by all occupants, however, each occupant shall be allowed to select an individual graphic style and may include a symbol or logo.

(10)   Any number of temporary signs related to the business, each not to exceed ten square feet in area, may be permitted for no longer than thirty days during special promotional events in connection with the outdoor display and sale of merchandise. All signs must be placed on the private property of the business(es) conducting the outdoor display and sale.

(11)   Gasoline service stations shall be permitted the following signs in lieu of any other permanent identification signs allowed by this section:

(A)    Freestanding signs as provided for in subsection (9) of this section;

(B)    Two single-faced wall signs, the total sign area not to exceed fifty square feet;

(C)    Four double-faced signs, each sign face not to exceed between and one-half square feet in area, subject to the following restrictions:

(i)      Such signs shall not be portable and shall be permanent in nature (freestanding, wall mounted),

(ii)     Two such signs may identify prices and two such signs may identify state inspection services, credit cards honored, trading stamps or similar services available on the premises;

(D)    Two signs per pump island, each sign not to exceed three square feet in area, to identify self-service, mini-service, or full-service areas;

 

(E)     One portable double-faced sign, not to exceed twelve square feet per face, to identify goods or services incidental to the service station use, such as oil, gas and lubrication.

(12)   Drive-through businesses, in addition to other signs permitted by this chapter, shall be permitted:

(A)    Two menu or product/price identification signs per drive-in lane, each sign not to exceed nine square feet in area, provided that sign frames shall not be portable and shall be permanent in nature (freestanding, wall mounted);

(B)    Unlimited product/price signs within the actual merchandise display/sales area, provided that sign frames and backing shall not be portable and shall be permanent in nature.

(13)   Glendora Auto Centre Signage. Permanent and temporary signage and displays for the Glendora Auto Centre shall comply with the architectural and landscape design standards as adopted by the city council. (Ord. 1972 § 2, 2013; Ord. 1957 § 2, 2012; Ord. 1892 § 1, 2008; Ord. 1481 § 3, 1986; Ord. 1342 § 3, 1980)

 

19.24.075 CCAP zone sign standards.
 



 

(a)     Purpose. These regulations are intended to balance the need to protect the public safety and welfare, the need for a well maintained and attractive community, and the need for adequate identification of businesses. The sign standards are based on the following goals:

(1)     To enhance community character;

(2)     To support local businesses by requiring high quality signage that encourages people to shop;

(3)     To provide visibility from vehicles;

(4)     To provide visibility for pedestrians;

(5)     To encourage high quality design, creativity and diversity that enhances the architectural design of the buildings and the surrounding community.

(b)     Where These Regulations Apply. These regulations include specific provisions for the T-5, Village Core, and T-5A, Village Transition, CCAP subdistricts. The T-4, Village Edge, is a residential district and follows Section 19.24.050, Multiple-family residential zones, of this chapter.

(c)     General Sign Standards.

 

(1)     Maximum allowable sign area shall be two square feet of sign area for every linear foot of store frontage. Frontage refers to the building or tenant unit with ground floor entrance(s) facing a street or parking lot area.

 

Example: Maximum allowable sign area for single tenant building (not to scale):

 



 

Example: Maximum allowable sign area for multi-tenant building (not to scale):



(2)     Sign Location. Signs shall be located over entries to businesses with frontage. If there is no entry along a frontage, only one wall sign is permitted. Projection signs shall be located adjacent to building/unit entries with frontage.

 

Sign location example:



(3)     For buildings with angled frontage, frontage shall be measured along the longest street frontage. Secondary frontage shall not include the same angled area. Maximum allowable sign area for each frontage shall be measured following the example.



(4)     A maximum of two permanent signs including one sign of each sign type, such as one wall sign and one projection sign or one awning sign and one window sign, following the standards of this chapter may be provided per given store/unit frontage that provides an entry to a business. This does not include store street address number and one small “open/closed” window sign located in a window in the vicinity of the shop entry. If a building or unit has a frontage without an entrance (usually a corner property), only one ground floor wall sign or permanent window sign is permitted.

(5)     Store address or unit number shall be located either over or adjacent to the main store entry or on the shop door and shall include the street and/or unit number only. Street address numbers shall not exceed five inches in height unless they are part of the store name, such as “138 Smart Girl’s Deli,” where “138” is the street number. Business hours in letters and numbers not to exceed two inches in height may be located on shop door.

(6)     All sign area square footage, with the exception of store address, business hours and one small open/closed sign or building name sign, shall be deducted from the maximum allowable sign area total.

(7)     Wall signs and permanent window signs shall not extend to the edges of the building or windows and shall not extend to more than eighty percent of the building frontage or window area for a single tenant building or eighty percent of the unit frontage or window area for a multi-tenant building.

(8)     Signs (including any sign type whether temporary or permanent) shall not project above the roof line of a building or be located on a mansard or roof of a building.

(9)     Entrances that do not lead directly to a business, but provide customer access to hallways, stairways or corridors that lead to suites or units inside of a building, may have a wall sign over the entrance indicating the point of entry. The wall sign may state “ENTRY” and shall not exceed four square feet in area. A directory of businesses located inside the building, not exceeding three square feet in area, may be located adjacent to the building entrance.

(10)   Wall and permanent window signs are allowed for ground floor businesses only. Second story wall or permanent window signs or second story temporary signs are not permitted unless second story exterior public entrances are visible from the street or when a business located on an upper level occupies a minimum of fifty percent of the leasable floor space and at minimum one thousand five hundred square feet of such level. Signage for upper level businesses will be limited to one per qualifying business; where a business occupies one hundred percent of such level over one thousand five hundred square feet, the business will be allowed a second sign on a different elevation of the building.



 

(11)   Ground floor businesses which do not have frontage may share either a projection sign not to exceed eight square feet in area, or directory plate sign not to exceed four square feet in area. The projection or directory plate sign shall be located adjacent to the entry to the interior business. The projection sign or directory plate sign shall be deducted from the maximum allowable sign area calculation for the entire building frontage. For example, if a building has a frontage of one hundred feet divided into two frontage units and two interior units that are accessed from a hallway, the maximum allowable sign area for the building frontage is two hundred square feet. If the interior units each have projection signs of eight square feet, the remaining one hundred eighty-four square feet of sign area is available for the two units with frontage, based on the percentage of unit frontage relative to the total building frontage.



Shared Projection Sign Example for Interior Ground Floor Businesses

(12)   Permanent wall, window signs or projection signs may include the name of the business, business logo and brief explanation of services. For example: Elegant Home – Fine Antiques or Kathy’s Soap and Candle Shop. Lists of products or services, hours of operation, or telephone numbers are not permitted.

(13)   Neon signs are prohibited with the exception of one small “open” sign not to exceed two square feet in area located inside a window in the vicinity of the shop entry.

(14)   Buildings with more than one tenant space shall provide a sign program for review and approval by the planning department or the reviewing body for the project as part of any zoning review process for the property.

(15)   Temporary banners are permitted with approval of a temporary banner permit pursuant to Section 19.24.070(8) of this chapter.

(d)     Wall Signs.

(1)     Maximum letter height for wall signs shall not exceed two feet.

(2)     Minimum letter height for wall signs shall not be less than six inches.

(3)     Maximum logo height for wall signs shall not exceed 2.5 feet.

(4)     Wall signs shall not project more than ten inches from the wall surface to which it is attached. (This does not apply to projection signs.)

(5)     Wall signs including logos shall be centered over entryways or centered to the extent possible on the main building or unit frontage.

(e)     Building Name Signs.

(1)     Building name signs are permitted for historic landmark buildings as shown on the city’s latest list of landmark properties.

(2)     Building name signs shall not count as one of the two maximum signs per business or tenant unit or be counted as part of the maximum allowable sign area calculation.

(3)     Building name signs may only include the name of the building, as in “The Raymond Building.” No other text or language is permitted for the building name sign.

(4)     The building name sign is limited to a non-illuminated incised, bas relief or other architecturally integrated individual letter sign. Externally attached building name signs are not allowed. Maximum height of letters shall not exceed two feet. Maximum width shall not exceed thirty percent of building frontage.

(5)     Design approval for the building name sign is required from the planning department.

(f)      Awning/Canopy Signs.

(1)     Awning signs may be painted onto cloth awnings or attached or integrated into metal or structural canopies. Awning signs shall be located on the valance unless otherwise approved by the planning department.

(2)     The lowest portion of awnings or canopies shall be a minimum of nine feet above a sidewalk or walkway surface if the sign encroaches less than two-thirds of the width of a public right-of-way.

(3)     The lowest portion of awnings or canopies that encroach more than two-thirds of the width of a public right-of-way shall be a minimum of fifteen feet above the public right-of-way.

(4)     Design approval is required for all awnings, canopies and awning/canopy signs.



(g)     Permanent and Temporary Window Signs.

(1)     Permanent window signs shall be professionally designed signs such as individual cut-out letters or stencils or etchings or hand painted calligraphy. Permanent window signs shall not cover more than twenty-five percent of any window area. The permanent window sign shall provide only the business name and services. No advertising or seasonal murals are permitted with the exception of a maximum of two posters or flyers at any one time. Such temporary posters or flyers must be included in the twenty-five percent maximum window area coverage calculation. Temporary posters are allowed to be displayed a maximum of thirty days at any one time.

(2)     Permanent window signs shall be counted toward the maximum number of signs per business identified in subsection (c) of this section.

(3)     The area of the permanent window sign shall be deducted from the maximum allowable sign area calculation discussed in subsection (c) of this section.

(4)     Maximum letter height for permanent window signs shall not exceed twelve inches.

(5)     Maximum logo height for permanent window signs shall not exceed two feet.

(h)     Projection Signs.

(1)     Projection signs shall not be lower than nine feet above the ground plane and shall not be higher than twelve feet above the ground plane but in no case shall projection signs be allowed to be located on building roofs.

(2)     Projection signs shall not extend further than three feet from the wall to which the sign is attached.



(i)      Restaurant Menu Signs.

(1)     Restaurant menu signs shall be attached permanently to the wall of the building and shall be designed to complement the building architecture.

(2)     Restaurant menu signs shall not be counted toward the maximum number of signs allowed per unit but the area of the menu shall be deducted from the maximum allowable sign area per unit described in subsection (c) of this section.

(3)     The maximum size for restaurant menu signs shall not exceed six square feet in area for the menu display case.

(j)      Movable Signs.

(1)     Movable signs not exceeding six square feet in area are permitted to be located outside of the public right-of-way on private property in designated subdistricts with approval of a design review by the planning department.

(2)     Movable sign content shall be limited to the name of the business, hours of operation and seasonal sale information but not individual items for sale.

(3)     Movable signs shall not be counted toward the total number of allowable signs but shall be included in the maximum allowable sign area calculation.

(4)     Movable signs shall be professionally designed and constructed.

(5)     Movable signs shall not be left outside after a business closes operations for the day.

(6)     Only one movable sign is allowed per tenant space.

(k)     Murals.

(1)     Murals are permitted in designated subdistricts with a two-step approval process by the historic preservation committee and planning commission.

(2)     Murals shall only be permitted on side walls of buildings. No murals shall be allowed on building frontage along Glendora Avenue.

(3)     Murals shall not exceed eighty percent of the length or height of a wall and shall not extend to the edges of the wall or architectural features on the wall. Murals shall not be counted toward the number of allowable signs per business tenant or as part of the maximum allowable sign area.

(4)     Murals shall have a Glendora historic or community theme (e.g., hillside scene, notable buildings or locations) or express the city’s “Pride of the Foothills” motto. Murals shall not include any signage, language or imagery pertaining to a specific business, commercial product or service.

(l)      Approval Required.

(1)     Except as provided in this chapter, no permanent sign may be constructed, installed, posted, displayed or modified without first obtaining design approval from the planning department approving the proposed sign’s size, design, location, and display as provided for in this chapter.

(2)     Any sign proposed to be attached to a wall, building façade, awning or other structural element shall obtain approved building permits and any other required approvals prior to installation.

(3)     Temporary banners shall obtain a permit for a temporary banner as provided in Section 19.24.070(8) of this chapter.

(m)    Sign Types Allowed.

Sign Types Allowed (Shaded Areas) in Each Subdistrict

 

Sign Type

Subdistricts

T-4

T-5

T-5A

Wall Signs-Individual Channel Letter Internally Illuminated

 

 

 

Wall Signs-Individual Channel Letter Externally Illuminated

 

 

 

Wall Signs-Non-illuminated Channel Letter

 

 

 

Wall Signs-Painted

 

 

 

Awning Signs

 

 

 

Permanent Window Signs

 

 

 

Projection Signs

 

 

 

Restaurant Menu Signs

 

 

 

Building Name Signs

 

 

 

Movable Signs

 

 

 

Murals

 

 

 

Historic Landmark Plaques

 

 

 

Temporary Real Estate Signs

*

**

**

Directory Nameplate Signs

*

**

**

*       See Section 19.24.040 of this chapter for specific requirements.

**    See Section 19.24.050 of this chapter for specific requirements.

 

(n)     Unpermitted Signs. The following types of signs are not permitted in the CCAP zone.

(1)     Monument signs and cabinet signs are not permitted. Cabinet signs are signs printed on translucent material, usually plastic which is mounted on a box that includes some form of lighting to illuminate the plastic sign from behind. The entire apparatus is mounted to a wall.

(2)     Pennants, streamers, spinners, festoons, windsocks or similar displays are not permitted with the exception of temporary banners which have received approval for a temporary banner permit as provided by Section 19.24.070(8) of this chapter.

(3)     Painted window signs displaying non-permanent seasonal or temporary advertising are not permitted.

(4)     Temporary flyers or posters attached to the walls of any building shall not be permitted. See subsection (c) of this section for regulations covering temporary signs attached to windows.

(5)     Signs with blinking or moving lights or moving parts shall not be permitted.

(6)     Signs in the public right-of-way with the exception of traffic safety signs are prohibited.

(o)     Nonconforming Signs. Signs that were legally permitted prior to the adoption of this code but do not conform to the current section may continue but may not be expanded or altered except as provided by this section.

(p)     Sign Type Descriptions.



 

This section provides descriptions of each sign type along with examples to further illustrate the sign types. The sign types described in this chapter are the only sign types allowed. However, the examples provided are not intended to limit creative design efforts but should be used as tools for design. Design guidelines in subsection (q) of this section provide additional information to assist the designer to create attractive, high quality signage that complements the community and provides high quality visibility for the business. Regulations for sign area, height and number of signs are found in subsection (c) of this section.

(1)     Wall Signs.

(A)    Individual Channel Letter Internally Illuminated Wall Signs. These are signs where the letters and graphics are individually constructed and illuminated electrically so that light either shines through the individual letters or creates a halo effect around the letters. They may be mounted on an external raceway, which houses the electrical apparatus for the sign, or mounted directly to the wall with electrical connections from the letters through the wall. If an external raceway is used, it must be either a decorative element of the sign itself or camouflaged or painted to match the color and/or material of the wall it is mounted onto.

 

Examples of individual channel letter internally illuminated wall signs:

 



External painted raceway



No raceway



Halo effect



Decorative raceway

 

(B)    Individual Channel Letter Externally Illuminated Wall Signs. These are wall signs with individually articulated letters but lighting is provided externally using decorative lights designed to shine onto the sign. Lighting can either be from above the sign shining down, from the sides or from the bottom shining up onto the sign. The lighting must be designed to avoid any glare onto pedestrians or windows of adjacent buildings or tenant spaces within the same building.

Examples of individual channel letter externally illuminated wall signs:

 





 





 

(C)    Non-Illuminated Channel Letter Wall Signs. Non-illuminated channel letter signs are simply individual letter signs attached to a wall and designed to have no electrical component, either internal or external. Building permits are required for non-illuminated channel letter signs.

Examples of non-illuminated channel letter signs:

 









 

(D)    Painted Wall Signs. As the name implies, painted wall signs are signs painted directly on the wall of the building. Building permits are not required for painted wall signs but design approval by the planning department is required. All other standards apply to painted signs. A painted wall sign is not the same as a mural which has its own standards and limitations. Painted signs may be externally illuminated. If externally illuminated, an electrical permit is required for the lighting.

 

Examples of painted wall signs:

 





 

(2)     Awning Signs. Awnings are shade structures that project out over doorways and windows as either decorative features or to provide some protection from the elements. There are two general awning types: cloth or soft awnings and hard metal or structural awnings. In the case of soft awnings, the signage is usually added to the valance of the awning but, depending on the awning style, might be painted directly onto the body of the awning. In the case of metal or structural awnings, signs may project up from the awning, be incorporated into the awning design itself or hang below the awning. Awnings that encroach into public rights-of-way require an encroachment permit from the city and must follow the minimum standards identified in subsection (f) of this section.

Examples of soft awning signs:

 









Examples of hard metal and structural awning signs:

 









 

(3)     Permanent Window Signs. Permanent window signs are signs that are professionally designed and painted onto windows, normally in lieu of permanent wall signs due to lack of wall space. As the name implies, permanent window signs are intended to have the same permanency as a wall sign. Permanent window signs are not to be confused with painted seasonal and sale advertising window signage, which is not permitted in the CCAP zone. Permanent window signs must meet all sign criteria outlined in subsection (g) of this section.

Examples of permanent window signs:

 





 

(4)     Projection Signs. The most common types of projection signs project out at a right angle from the wall of a building or hang from an awning structure at a level and scale that is easy for pedestrians to see.

Examples of projection signs:

 









(5)     Restaurant Menu Signs. Restaurant menu signs are cases that are attached to the exterior wall of the restaurant in an area where they can easily be reviewed by pedestrians on the sidewalk or in the foyer of the restaurant. The menu is enclosed inside the case and is changed as needed by the restaurant operator. The menu display case should complement the building architecture.

Examples of restaurant menu signs:

 





 

(6)     Building Name Signs. Building names are normally given to historically or architecturally significant buildings. They may or may not relate to the actual businesses located in the building.

Examples of building name signs:



 

(7)     Movable Signs. Movable signs are signs that give specific information such as hours of operation or sale or service information to the public. They must be located outside of the public right-of-way on private property.

 

Examples of movable signs:

 





 

(8)     Murals. Murals are artistic enhancements to the ambiance of the village area and should be executed in a professional manner. Materials should be durable and be able to withstand age, vandalism, and weatherizing.

Examples of murals:

 





 

(q)     Sign Design Guidelines. Signs can either create a sense of high quality and character or, if poorly designed, can detract from the quality and character of a place. Taken together with other architectural features, signs play an important role in how people perceive the village image. The CCAP sign design guidelines are meant to provide additional direction to assist the applicant and city staff in finding the best sign solutions for a particular location or business.

(1)     Location. Signs should be located where their message is visible to street traffic and/or pedestrian traffic. The sign should be centered over a building entrance or building façade to help guide people to the entrance. Signs should be located where architectural features suggest a location for signage. Signage should not be located on top of architectural features like cornices or building decoration.

(2)     Scale, Balance and Harmony. The sign should be designed to relate to the architectural features of the building. The sign should be in proportion to the building and should complement, not “overpower” the architecture. Consideration should be given to consistency with other signs so that signs do not compete with each other but create a harmonious view of the village as a whole. This does not mean that signs need to look exactly alike but rather that signs should be in scale with each other, should not be located immediately adjacent to each other and should not use clashing color schemes. Cluttered designs either as part of an individual sign design or when taken in view with other signs in the area should be avoided.

(3)     Creative Design. Creativity is encouraged to develop beautiful sign designs that enhance the character of the village area as a unique, high quality place to visit, shop and live. Signs must be professionally manufactured of high quality materials that can withstand time and the elements. Sign materials should be consistent and in harmony with the architecture of the building. The goal should be for the sign to enhance the architectural character of the building.

(4)     Color. Sign colors will have an important impact on the perceived character of the village. Therefore, signs should avoid clashing colors that create a noisy visually cluttered appearance to the village. Bright colors should be used sparingly as accents only, not for the whole sign. (Ord. 1993 § 2, 2014; Ord. 1958 § 6, 2012)

 

19.24.080 Limited industrial, R-4 and light manufacturing zones.
The following signs are permitted in M-1, R-4 and M-1A zones:

(1)     One identifying sign attached to the front of the building, not to exceed one square foot in area for every lineal foot of building frontage, up to a maximum of one hundred square feet in area;

(2)     One identifying sign attached to the rear or side wall of the building, when such wall faces an open area of thirty feet or more on a public right-of-way, not to exceed one square foot in area for every lineal foot of the wall on which the sign is attached, up to a maximum of fifty square feet in area;

(3)     One directory nameplate at every building entrance, not to exceed two and one-half square feet in area for each six occupants or fraction thereof, containing the name, the address or both of occupants of the building;

(4)     One sign attached to the main building, not to exceed forty square feet in area, pertaining only to the sale, lease or rental of the particular building, property or premises upon which displayed. (Ord. 1342 § 3, 1980)

 

19.24.090 Special uses.
The following uses shall be permitted signs only as provided for in this section:

(1)     An occupancy devoted wholly to theater purposes signs as provided by Section 19.24.070, except that:

(A)    Temporary window signs are prohibited;

(B)    One message board sign per viewing room, each not to exceed forty square feet in area;

(C)    Two coming attractions wall mounted enclosed signs per viewing room, each not to exceed twelve square feet in area;

(D)    One identifying sign not to exceed one hundred twenty square feet.

(2)     Church and private school uses, two attached identifying signs or one detached identifying sign, no face of which shall exceed thirty-two square feet in area.

(3)     Cemeteries, two square feet of sign area for each lineal foot of cemetery frontage, subject to a maximum of three hundred sixty square feet of sign area for the combined cemetery frontages and a maximum area of one hundred twenty square feet per sign. No sign shall exceed eighteen feet in height. Other uses authorized within a cemetery zone shall be permitted signage appropriate to those uses, and such signage shall be in addition to the total signage permitted for the cemetery use.

(4)     Medical service uses shall be permitted those signs permitted by Section 19.24.080. (Ord. 1342 § 3, 1980)

 

19.24.100 Special signs.
The following signs shall be permitted:

(1)     In all commercial and industrial zones, for a period not to exceed six months prior to construction, one double-faced or two single-faced signs, not to exceed seventy-five square feet per face and ten feet in height, describing proposed future construction on the premises on which the sign(s) is located. Such signs may indicate the particulars of the proposed construction, the company, firm, individual, architect, engineer, contractor, and rental, sale or lease information, relative thereto. If construction commences within said six-month period, such signs will be allowed until seven days after final building inspection. A cash deposit per sign, as established by resolution of the city council, shall be made to the city to insure removal of the sign after expiration of such period.

(2)     In all zones, temporary real estate development signs located on the premises identified by the signs, provided that the property is unimproved. No sign shall exceed sixty-four square feet in area. Each sign shall require site plan approval and a building permit. Such building permit shall be issued for not more than six months or until such time as the property is sold or leased, whichever occurs first. A cash deposit per sign as established by resolution of the city council, shall be made to the city to insure removal of the sign after expiration of the building permit.

(3)     In all zones, not more than four temporary, off-premises directional real estate signs identifying a tract of real property which has been divided into five or more lots, parcels or units which are offered for sale, lease or rental, provided that:

(A)    A certificate of deposit or cash deposit per sign, as established by resolution of the city council, shall be made to the city to insure compliance with this chapter.

(B)    No sign shall be placed until the tract map is recorded and construction has commenced.

(C)    No sign shall exceed twelve square feet in area.

(D)    No sign shall be illuminated in any residential zone.

(E)     Each sign shall be located a minimum of five feet inside the property line and shall be located only on private property with the written permission of the property owner.

(F)     The applicant shall provide a copy of the written permission and approved plot plan from the owner of the property on which the sign is to be located and from the owner of any residence with fifty feet of the proposed location of the sign.

(G)    The permit shall be issued for a period not to exceed six months or until such earlier time as all of the units are sold, leased or rented. The applicant shall have the option of renewing the permit prior to the expiration of the six-month period. (Ord. 1481 § 1, 1986; Ord. 1342 § 3, 1980)

 

19.24.110 Maintenance of signs.
All signs and sign structures, including supporting members and required landscaped areas, shall be continuously maintained so as to be structurally sound, free of chipped or peeled paint, rust or corrosion, torn or broken facing materials, missing or damaged parts, missing letters, malfunctioning lamps, weeds or dying plants, lack of plant material in required planters, damaged planters or broken or inoperative sprinkler systems. (Ord. 1398 § 1, 1982; Ord. 1342 § 3, 1980)

 

19.24.120 Billboards.
All billboards are prohibited. (Ord. 1342 § 3, 1980)

 

19.24.125 Mobile billboards.
The purpose of this section is to eliminate mobile billboard advertising within the city in order to promote the safe movement of vehicular traffic, to reduce air pollution, and to improve the aesthetic appearance of the city. It is unlawful for any person to conduct, or cause to be conducted, any mobile billboard advertising upon any street, or other public place within the city in which the public has the right of travel.

(a)     Mobile billboard advertising includes any vehicle, or wheeled conveyance which carries, conveys, pulls, or transports any sign or billboard for the primary purpose of advertising.

(b)     Exemptions. This section shall not apply to:

(1)     Any vehicle which displays an advertisement or business identification of its owner, so long as such vehicle is engaged in the usual business or regular work of the owner, and not used merely, mainly or primarily to display advertisements;

(2)     Buses; or

(3)     Taxicabs.

(c)     Every person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, unless the violation is otherwise made a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.01.110(b). (Ord. 1928 § 1, 2009)

 

19.24.130 Nonconforming signs.
(a)     Any sign which is nonconforming by reason of adoption of this chapter or any amendment thereto or by annexation to the city of territory upon which the sign is located shall be abated, that is, removed or made to comply with the provisions of this chapter, within the following time periods:

(1)     Attached signs having a construction cost of one hundred dollars or less, within ninety days;

(2)     Signs painted on buildings, walls or fences, within one hundred eighty days;

(3)     Abandoned signs, within thirty days;

(4)     Billboards, within five years;

(5)     All other signs, within one year.

The period within which nonconforming signs shall be abated shall commence to run upon the effective date of this chapter, or amendment thereto, or upon the effective date of the annexation, whichever is applicable.

(b)     Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, any sign that was in existence at the time of the enactment of this chapter and that was installed or erected pursuant to a valid permit granted by the city shall not be required to be abated.

(c)     Nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt nonconforming signs from the maintenance requirements of Section 19.24.110.

(d)     Abatement of nonconforming signs shall be accomplished in the following manner:

(1)     Signs painted on buildings, walls or fences by removal of the paint constituting the sign or by permanently painting over the sign in such a way that it will not thereafter be visible;

(2)     All other signs, including attached signs, by removal of the sign, including its structures and supports, or by alteration and modification in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.

(e)     Any property owner required to abate a nonconforming sign shall have the right to appeal such requirement to the planning commission as set forth by the procedures established in Section 19.24.030. (Ord. 1576 § 8, 1990; Ord. 1398 § 2, 1982; Ord. 1344 § 1, 1980; Ord. 1342 § 3, 1980)

 

19.24.140 Enforcement—Signs on private property.
(a)     Signs remaining on private property after the period provided for their amortization, signs erected or maintained on private property in violation of this chapter, abandoned signs on private property, and the maintenance of signs and/or sign structures relating to uses no longer conducted or products no longer sold on vacant commercial, industrial or institutional buildings more than forty-five days after the building becomes vacant are declared a public nuisance and injurious to neighboring property and to the health and welfare of residents of the city. The nuisance shall be abated by removal of the sign, or part thereof, as provided in this chapter.

(b)     The city shall give notice of the violation to such person(s) as are in real or apparent charge and control of the premises and to any known owners of the sign.  Such notice of violation shall be served by personal service or by first class mail and shall be posted upon the sign or supporting structure or on the side of the building to which the sign is attached. The notice shall state the condition(s) causing the sign to be in violation of this chapter and shall state that the violation shall be corrected within a specified correction period.  At the request of any persons having right, title or interest in the sign, the correction period may be extended by the director of planning or the director’s designee when in his or her opinion additional time is warranted to correct the condition.

(c)     Any person having any right, title or interest in a sign shall have the right to contest a notice of amortization or abandonment, by requesting a hearing before the planning commission. The request shall be made in writing to the city clerk within thirty days of the correction notice identified in subsection (b) being served.  If no such request is received within the thirty-day period, that person shall have waived his or her right to contest the correction notice and shall be subject to enforcement pursuant to Section 19.24.160.

(d)     The planning department shall set the request for a public hearing before the planning commission within thirty days of the city clerk’s receipt of a timely request for hearing as identified in subsection (c). At the time the planning department sets the matter for hearing, the city clerk shall serve, either personally or by first class mail, a copy of the notice of hearing upon the person(s) that filed the request for hearing.  Such notice shall state the street address and the legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the sign is located, the conditions causing the sign to be in violation of the amortization period and the date, hour and place of the hearing.

(e)     All persons who desire to be heard may appear before the planning commission to show that the sign is or is not in violation of the amortization period or this chapter. The planning commission shall consider all competent evidence offered by any person at such hearing, shall make written findings of fact as to whether or not the sign is in violation, and shall make its order based thereon. (Ord. 1910 § 2, 2008)

 

19.24.150 Enforcement—Signs on public property.
(a)     Signs erected or maintained in, on or over public property in violation of this chapter are declared a public nuisance and injurious to the public health, safety and welfare. The nuisance shall be abated by removal of the sign, or part thereof, as provided in this section.

(b)     Any sign which creates an immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare may be summarily impounded by the department of public works.

(c)     Any sign may be impounded by the department of public works after notice is given of the violation to such persons as are in real or apparent charge and control of the sign. Such notice of removal may be given verbally or in writing. The notice shall state that the sign is located on public property in violation of the Glendora sign code, shall require that such violation be corrected within a designated time period, which period shall not be less than four hours from the time of receipt of the notice, and shall state that the sign shall be impounded if the violation is not corrected within the designated time period. When the notice of removal is given verbally that fact shall be documented in writing.

(d)     Any sign which has been summarily impounded or impounded after notice shall be stored in a convenient place. The department of public works shall give notice of the impoundment to such persons as are in real or apparent charge and control of the sign. Such notice of impoundment shall be served by personal service or by first-class mail, postage prepaid. The notice shall state the date the sign was impounded, the reasons therefor, where the sign is being stored, the procedure for claiming the sign, and the procedure for requesting a post-impoundment hearing before the planning commission.

(e)     Within thirty days after the notice of impoundment is personally served or mailed, or if a hearing is held before the planning commission, within thirty days after the decision of the commission is rendered, any person who provides sufficient proof of ownership of the impounded sign may, obtain the return of the sign upon paying an impound fee, as established by resolution of the city council, plus reasonable costs, if any, of impounding the sign in excess of the impound fee.

(f)      A planning commission hearing regarding the violation may be requested by any person who provides sufficient proof of ownership of the sign. The request shall be made in writing to the planning department within ten days after the notice of impoundment is served or mailed. The planning department shall forward a copy of the request to the department of public works for review and shall set matter for hearing before the planning commission within thirty days of the receipt of a timely request for hearing, unless within the thirty day time period, the department of public works determines that the impounded sign was not in violation of this chapter. In the event the planning commission hears the matter, it shall consider all competent evidence offered by any person at the hearing, shall make written findings of fact as to whether or not the sign was in violation of this chapter at the time it was impounded and shall make its decision based thereon within ten days after the close of the hearing.

(g)     The department of public works, upon review, or the planning commission, after a hearing, shall order the impounded sign returned without payment of any impound fee, including additional costs, and shall order the return of any impound fee, including additional costs, that has previously been paid, if the impounded sign was found not to have been in violation of this chapter. The impounded sign and any previously paid impound fee, including additional costs, shall be returned within one working day after the department of public works or the planning commission renders its decision.

(h)     Upon failure of any sign to be claimed within the time limitation set forth in subsection (e), the impounded sign shall be deemed to be unclaimed property in possession of the city. The sign may be sold or otherwise disposed of and the proceeds of such sale or other disposition shall be deposited in the city treasury. (Ord. 1370 § 3, 1981)

 

19.24.160 Violation.
It is unlawful for any person to cause or permit any sign to be erected or maintained in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1910 § 3, 2008; Ord. 1416 § 2, 1983)

Chapter 19.28 NUMBERING BUILDINGS
19.28.010 Block defined.
A “block”, within the meaning of this chapter, shall be that portion of any highway between cross highways, or between a cross highway and an abutting highway, or between two abutting highways. (Prior code § 17.32)

 

19.28.020 Numbering required—Map.
All entrances to buildings fronting on any of the public highways in the city shall be numbered as set forth on Map Number 1 of the city, which map sets forth the number allotted to each twenty-foot frontage on the public highways in the city. Such map is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter. (Prior code § 17.33)

 

19.28.030 Location of numbers.
The numbers required by Section 19.28.020 may be placed upon the buildings in a conspicuous place or upon the curbs in front of the entrance to the buildings. (Prior code § 17.34)

 

19.28.040 Specifications.
The numbers required by this chapter shall be of sufficient length, breadth and color as to be readily discernible from the highway upon which such building faces. (Prior code § 17.35)

 

19.28.050 Assignment.
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to designate and furnish to the owners of the property the respective numbers for buildings now situated or hereafter erected upon the public highways of the city. (Prior code § 17.36)

 

19.28.060 Numbering system.
(a)     The respective starting points or dividing lines for numbers of buildings fronting on public highways in the city shall be:

(1)     From the east to the west city limits, Foothill Boulevard, formerly Minnehaha Avenue, shall be the starting point or dividing line for public highways extending in a northerly and southerly direction;

(2)     Glendora Avenue from the northerly city limit to the south city limit shall be the starting point or dividing line for all public highways extending in a westerly and easterly direction.

(b)     Numbers shall begin at the above named starting points or dividing lines and shall continue to the termini of the streets.

(c)     A twenty-foot frontage shall be allowed for each number on all highways.

(d)     The numbering shall be done as if the highway extended to the dividing line or starting points of the city as defined herein.

(e)     Number one hundred shall be the first number used as a respective beginning point on the sides of the highways which are to contain even numbers; and number one hundred one shall be the first number as the respective beginning point on the sides of the streets which are to contain odd numbers.

(f)      At the beginning of the second block from the starting point the first number shall be two hundred and two hundred one respectively, and so continued throughout the system. (Ord. 1080 § 1, 1968; prior code § 17.37)

 

19.28.070 Odd and even numbers.
The numbers on the north and west sides shall be odd numbers and the numbers on the east and south sides shall be even numbers. (Prior code § 17.38)

 

19.28.080 Prolongation of abutting highway.
In case of an abutting highway, a prolonged center line of the highway shall be the dividing line of a block. (Prior code § 17.39)

 

19.28.090 Blocks over one thousand feet long.
All blocks exceeding one thousand feet in length shall be considered as two blocks. (Prior code § 17.39)

 

19.28.100 Divisions.
One hundred numbers, or as many thereof as shall be necessary, shall be allotted to each block. (Prior code § 17.39)

Chapter 19.32 MOVING BUILDINGS
19.32.010 Compliance with chapter.
No person shall move any building in, on, upon, across or along or into any public street or highway in the city, except upon complying with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 17.9)

 

19.32.020 Permit required.
No person shall move or cause to be moved any building in, on, upon or across or along or into any public street or highway in the city without first obtaining from the superintendent of streets a permit in writing to do so. (Prior code § 17.10)

 

19.32.030 Application.
Any person desiring to remove or to have removed a building shall file an application with the superintendent of streets, which application shall specify the character of the building to be removed, the place from which and place to which the building is to be moved, and the streets on, over or through which it is desired to make such removal and the name of the person who will have charge of such removal. (Prior code § 17.11)

 

19.32.040 Fee and deposit.
The permit required by this chapter shall not be issued until the person applying therefor shall have paid the superintendent of streets a fee, established pursuant to resolution of the city council, for such permit and a deposit, established pursuant to resolution of the city council, as a guarantee that the party will pay any and all damages which may result by reason of the removal of the house or building by the party, his or her agents, employees or workmen to any fence, tree, pavement, street, sidewalk or to any pole or wire or to any other property belonging to the city. The deposit shall be returned to the applicant after the building has been moved, less such sum as shall be necessary to pay for all damages which may have resulted to any fence, tree, pavement, street, sidewalk, pole, wire or any other property belonging to the city. (Ord. 1536 § 14, 1989; prior code § 17.12)

 

19.32.050 Supervision of work.
All removals made under permits as provided by this chapter shall be done in a careful manner, shall be prosecuted with diligence and shall be under the superintendence and control and performed to the satisfaction and approval of the superintendent of streets. (Prior code § 17.13)

 

19.32.060 Standing in streets—Time limitation.
No person owning or having charge of the removal of any building through the public streets shall permit the building to or stand on any street, lane, alley or public grounds within the limits of one block for a longer period than fifteen hours, unless such time is extended by the superintendent of streets. (Prior code § 17.14)

 

19.32.070 Lights on buildings standing at night.
When a building being moved under the provisions of this chapter is left standing in, on, upon, across or along any public street, highway or place after sunset of any day the person having charge thereof shall place lighted lanterns upon four sides thereof and shall so maintain such lighted lanterns thereon until sunrise the next day. (Prior code § 17.15)

 

19.32.080 Injury to streets, trees and curbs.
No person owning or having charge of the removal of any building through the public streets shall allow or cause the injury of any street, sidewalk, curb, tree, fence or private or public property by reason of such removal. (Prior code § 17.16)

 

19.32.090 Obstructing railroads.
No person owning or having charge of the removal of any building shall permit the same to obstruct the operation of any street railroad or railroad except between the hours of one-thirty a.m. and five a.m. (Prior code § 17.17)

 

19.32.100 Cutting poles and wires.
When the cutting or temporary removal of any pole or any wire of any public or private telegraph, telephone, electric light, street railroad, or railroad or any other wire passing along or over any street, lane or alley becomes necessary for the removal of any building, the person in charge of such removal, at least twenty-four hours in advance of reaching the same, shall notify the person having charge of and control over such pole or wire, and the person so notified shall cause such wires to be promptly cut or removed and replaced upon receiving from the party moving such house or other structure the cost of cutting or removing and replacing such wire or pole. (Prior code § 17.18)

 

19.32.110 City wires.
In every case in which the cutting of the wires of the city may be necessary, the superintendent of streets shall be notified and he or she shall have the wires cut and replaced. The person having charge of the removal of the building shall pay the entire cost and expense of cutting, removing and replacing the same, including the poles to which the wires of the city may be attached. (Prior code § 17.19)

 

19.32.120 Cost of damage to city property.
In the event of damage being done by reason of the removal of any building as provided for by this chapter, to any fence, tree, pavement, street, sidewalk or to any pole or wire or other property belonging to the city, the person removing the building and causing the damage, shall immediately repair or replace the damage so done and in the event that repair or replacement cannot be made, then the superintendent of streets shall estimate the amount of damage in money actually done and the person causing the damage shall pay the damage so done by the person and in the event that upon three days’ notice to the person to repair or replace or pay the damage so made as aforesaid, the repair or replacement or payment of the damage has not been made, the repair or replacement or payment for damage may be made by the city out of the money deposited with the superintendent of streets as provided by Section 19.36.040. (Prior code § 17.20)

Chapter 19.36 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Note
*       For regulations governing excavations, construction and repair, see Ch. 13.12 of this code.

 

19.36.010 Absence deemed prejudicial.
The absence of curbs, gutters, paving, sidewalks and adequate drainage facilities within the city, is hereby found and declared to be prejudicial to the public health, safety and general welfare of the habitants of the city. (Ord. 942 § 1, 1964; prior code § 6A.1)

 

19.36.020 Places where required—Standards.
Any person constructing or causing to be constructed, any structure, building, dwelling, public or semipublic parking lot, or developing any areas in the city, shall also construct and install, at his or her own cost, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, paving, drainage facilities and appurtenances in accordance with the standards and specifications of the city and in accordance with the master plan of streets and highways of the city. Such improvements shall be constructed or installed along all public street frontage adjoining the land upon which the structure, building, dwelling, public or semipublic parking lot is to be constructed, unless adequate curbs, gutters, paving, sidewalk and drainage facilities already exist along the street frontage. Where additional right-of-way or easements for public purposes are required, the right-of-way or easements shall be dedicated without cost to the city. (Ord. 942 § 1, 1964; prior code § 6A.2)

 

19.36.030 Street frontage in unsubdivided areas.
In areas not subdivided into parcels or lots, the improvements required by this chapter need not extend a greater distance along the street frontage than:

(1)     The required side yards of said building or parking lot; or

(2)     Such areas as may be used as an accessory to the principal use of the buildings thereon. (Ord. 942 § 1, 1964; prior code § 6A.3)

 

19.36.040 Application for permit—Estimate of cost—Prerequisites.
Upon application for a building permit or permit required under Section 13.12.020, the city engineer shall provide the applicant with a notice of improvements required to comply with the provisions of this chapter. The applicant shall provide engineering plans, quantity estimates and construction staking to the engineer. Upon the filing of the engineering plans and quantity estimates, the city engineer shall estimate the cost of such improvements, the cost to be calculated using standard unit prices on file in the office of the city engineer.

Such required permits shall not be issued for any dwelling, building, structure, public or semipublic parking lot or for the development of any area until the city engineer certifies that the improvements required by this chapter exist or that money in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the construction of the improvements has been deposited or that a performance bond has been posted with the city to guarantee the construction of the improvements. The total estimated cost of the improvements shall include a sum equal to five percent of the estimated construction or installation cost of the improvements, the sum to be for engineering inspection and plan checking charges. (Ord. 942 § 1, 1964; prior code § 6A.4)

 

19.36.050 Money deposited in lieu of improvements.
Where money is deposited in lieu of installation of the required improvements, the city shall within two years of the date of deposit of the money cause to be constructed or installed the improvement for which the money has been deposited. Any unused portion of the money so deposited shall be refunded to the depositor. If the city does not within two years from the date of deposit of the money cause to be constructed or installed the improvements for which the money was deposited, the money shall be refunded to the depositor. (Ord. 942 § 1, 1964; prior code § 6A.5)

 

19.36.060 Posting performance bond.
When a performance bond is posted in lieu of the deposit of cash or the construction or installation of the required improvements, the bond shall be posted with the city in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the construction or installation of the improvements. (Ord. 942 § 1, 1964; prior code § 6A.6)

 

19.36.070 Exceptions to provisions of chapter.
(a)     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to land being divided or improved under the provisions of Title 20.

(b)     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply in cases of additions to or reconstruction or alterations of existing residential buildings or structures where such additions, reconstruction or alterations of existing residential buildings or structures increase the gross floor area of the existing buildings or structures by less than fifty percent or five hundred square feet, whichever is less.

(c)     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply in cases of additions to or reconstruction or alterations of existing commercial or industrial buildings or structures where such additions, reconstruction or alterations increase the gross floor area of the existing buildings or structures by less than twenty-five percent or five hundred square feet, whichever is less.

(d)     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to those specific improvements to be installed or constructed by special assessment district or by any approved alternate method of financing. (Ord. 1940 § 2, 2010)

 

19.36.080 Modifications of requirements.
In unusual conditions or when compliance with the provisions of this chapter would constitute an extreme hardship or would be impractical, the city engineer may, upon written request of the property owner, modify the requirements contained in this chapter as it may deem fit. The city engineer’s finding may not be appealed. (Ord. 1940 § 4, 2010)

 

19.36.090 Deferred improvement agreement authorized.
The improvement requirements of this chapter may be deferred in part or in total upon a finding by the city engineer that the installation of such improvements would not be feasible or practical at the time of building permit issuance. In such case, the city engineer may require the owner to enter into an agreement providing for the installation of such improvements at a future date. When improvements are deferred, the property owner shall enter into an agreement with the city for the installation of all improvements at such time in the future as required by the city. The agreement shall provide:

(a)     Construction of said improvements shall commence within ninety days of the receipt of the notice to proceed from the city;

(b)     That in event of default by the owner, successors or assigns, the city is authorized to cause said construction to be done and charge the entire cost and expense to the owner, successors or assigns, including interest from the date of notice of said cost and expense to the owner, successors or assigns, until paid;

(c)     That the agreement shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder at the expense of the owner and shall constitute notice to all successors and assigns of the title to the real property of the obligation set forth, and also a lien in an amount to fully reimburse the city, including interest as above, subject to foreclosure in event of default in payment;

(d)     That in event of litigation occasioned by any default of the owner, successors or assigns, the owner, successors or assigns agree to pay all costs involved, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, and that the same shall become a part of the lien against the real property;

(e)     That the term “owner” shall include not only the present owner but also heirs, successors, executors, administrators and assigns, it being the intent of the parties that the obligations undertaken shall run with the real property and constitute a lien against it. The agreement shall not relieve the owner from any other specific requirements. The construction of deferred improvements shall conform to the provisions of this chapter and all applicable provisions of this code in effect at the time of construction. (Ord. 1856 § 3, 2006)

Chapter 19.40 UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
19.40.010 Definitions.
Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions:

(1)     “Commission” means the Public Utilities Commission of the state;

(2)     “Underground utility district” or “district” means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 19.40.040;

(3)     “Person” means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their agents and employees;

(4)     “Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures” mean poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above ground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service;

(5)     “Utility” includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Ord. 1070 § 1, 1968)

 

19.40.020 Public hearing by council.
The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 1070 § 2, 1968)

 

19.40.030 Report by city engineer.
Prior to holding such public hearing, the city engineer shall consult all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such hearing containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities participation and estimates of the total costs to the city and affected property owners. Such report shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead facilities. (Ord. 1070 § 3, 1968)

 

19.40.040 Designation of underground utility districts by resolution.
If, after any such public hearing, the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Ord. 1070 § 4, 1968)

 

19.40.050 Unlawful acts.
Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 19.40.040, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as the overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 19.40.100, and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in the chapter. (Ord. 1070 § 5, 1968)

 

19.40.060 Exception, emergency or unusual circumstances.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed thirty days, without authority of the director of public works in order to provide emergency service. The director of public works may grant special permission on such terms as the director of public works may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (Ord. 1070 § 6, 1968)

 

19.40.070 Other exceptions.
This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 19.40.040, shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities:

(1)     Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer;

(2)     Poles, or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;

(3)     Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited;

(4)     Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty four thousand five hundred volts;

(5)     Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street;

(6)     Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services;

(7)     Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts;

(8)     Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (Ord. 1070 § 7, 1968)

 

19.40.080 Notice to property owners and utility companies.
Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 19.40.040, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by the resolution of the adopting thereof. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission.

Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 19.40.040, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and the affected utilities. (Ord. 1070 § 8, 1968)

 

19.40.090 Responsibility of utility companies.
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 19.40.040, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. (Ord. 1070 § 9, 1968)

 

19.40.100 Responsibility of property owners—Notice—City doing work—Assessment.
(a)     Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his or her property between the facilities referred to in Section 19.40.090 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 19.40.040, the city engineer shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten days after the receipt of such notice.

(b)     The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner’s name appears, and must be addressed to such owner’s last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of Glendora. If notice is given by mail such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail, either the owner or occupant of such premises, the city engineer shall, within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.

(c)     The notice given by the city engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if the work is not completed within thirty days after receipt of such notice, the city engineer will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon the property.

(d)     If upon the expiration of the thirty-day period, the said required underground facilities have not been provided, the city engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the city engineer shall in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. Upon completion of the work by the city engineer, he or she shall file a written report with the city council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which time shall not be less than ten days thereafter.

(e)     The city engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment.

(f)      Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the council shall hear and consider and report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.

(g)     If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the city engineer, and the city engineer is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of the properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which the assessment was not paid. The assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as the property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the of six percent per year. (Ord. 1070 § 10, 1968)

 

19.40.110 Responsibility of city.
The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 19.40.040. (Ord. 1070 § 11, 1968)

 

19.40.120 Extension of time.
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 19.40.040 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Ord. 1070 § 12, 1968)

 

19.40.130 Penalty for violation.
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished according to Section 1.01.110. (Ord. 1070 § 13, 1968)

Chapter 19.42 PARK DEVELOPMENT FEE ON NEW DEVELOPMENT
19.42.010 Intent and purpose.
The city council declares that the intent and purpose of this chapter is to provide a park development fee through which new development will pay its appropriate share of the cost of acquisition, development, rehabilitation and expansion of the park and recreational facilities in the community. The continued development in the city, with the attendant increase in the number of people living in the city, has created the need to acquire and develop new, and rehabilitate and expand existing, public parks, playgrounds and recreational facilities and to provide additional revenues with which to finance such works of improvement. (Ord. 1571 § 2, 1990)

 

19.42.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

“Dwelling unit” means each single-family, two-family or multiple-family residence as defined in Title 21 of this code.

“Mobilehome space” means each space, or area in a mobilehome park that is rented or leased for use and occupancy by a mobilehome as defined in Title 21 of this code. (Ord. 1571 § 2, 1990)

 

19.42.030 Park development fee required.
In addition to any other fee, license, or permit prescribed by this code, a park development fee, for parks and recreational facilities, shall be paid to the city pursuant to this chapter for each residential, commercial, manufacturing or industrial development project involving the issuance of a permit for construction. (Ord. 1963 § 2, 2012)

 

19.42.040 Exemption from fees.
No park development fee shall be charged on the construction of:

(1)     Any addition to, or alteration of, an existing dwelling unit or mobilehome space;

(2)     Any dwelling unit or mobilehome space, which constitutes the replacement of any existing dwelling unit or mobilehome space. However, if any previously existing dwelling unit or mobilehome space is replaced with a greater number of dwelling units or mobilehome spaces, then the park development fee shall be required on each dwelling unit or mobilehome space in excess of the number of previously existing dwelling units or mobilehome spaces;

(3)     Any dwelling unit or mobilehome space for which dedication of land or a fee in lieu of dedication has been previously received by the city under Chapter 20.38 this code. However, if any additional dwelling units or mobilehome spaces are constructed in excess of the number of dwelling units or mobilehome spaces for which the dedication or in lieu fee was previously received, then the park development fee shall be required for each excess dwelling unit or mobilehome space. (Ord. 1963 § 4, 2012)

 

19.42.050 Amount of fee and time of payment.
The park development fee shall be as established by a resolution of the city council. The fee shall be due and payable upon the final inspection of construction or upon the date the certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever date occurs first. If the development project involves the construction of more than one dwelling unit or mobilehome space, all fees required pursuant to this chapter shall be paid upon the date the first unit or space receives its final inspection or certificate of occupancy, whichever date occurs first. (Ord. 1571 § 2, 1990)

 

19.42.060 Restriction on use of fees.
All of the fees collected pursuant to this chapter and any interest earned thereon shall be deposited in a capital improvement fund for park and recreation purposes and shall be used solely for capital outlay expenditures such as, but not limited to, the following:

(1)     Acquisition and development of parks and recreation facilities;

(2)     Acquisition, development and preservation of open space for outdoor recreation, including areas of scenic, historic or cultural value;

(3)     Acquisition and development of bicycle trails, riding trails and other types of trails for recreational use; and

(4)     Rehabilitation or expansion of existing parks, recreational facilities, recreational open space and trails. (Ord. 1571 § 2, 1990)

 

19.42.070 Refund of fee.
(a)     The city shall make findings once each fiscal year with respect to any portion of a fee collected pursuant to this chapter that remains uncommitted in its account five or more years after collection to identify the purpose to which the fee is to be put and to demonstrate a reasonable relationship between the fee and the purpose for which it was charged. These findings shall apply only to moneys in the possession of the city and shall not be made with respect to letters of credit, bonds, or other instruments taken to secure payment of the fee at a future date.

(b)     The city shall refund to the then current record owner or owners of the development project, on a prorated basis, the uncommitted portion of the fees, and any interest accrued thereon, for which need cannot be demonstrated. The city shall refund the fees by direct payment or by providing a temporary suspension of fees. (Ord. 1571 § 2, 1990)

Title 20 SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 20.04 PURPOSE
Chapter 20.08 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 20.12 TENTATIVE MAP
Chapter 20.16 FINAL MAP
Chapter 20.20 BONDS AND DEPOSITS
Chapter 20.22 CONDOMINIUM PROJECTS
Chapter 20.24 SPLITTING LOTS
Chapter 20.28 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
Chapter 20.32 APPROVAL OF FINAL MAP
Chapter 20.34 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
Chapter 20.36 LOT MERGERS
Chapter 20.38 PARK AND RECREATION REQUIREMENT FOR NEW SUBDIVISIONS

Chapter 20.04 PURPOSE
20.04.010 Purpose of title.
The requirements of this title are hereby adopted for the government of the design, improvement and survey data of subdivisions and the form and content of tentative and final maps thereof, and record of survey maps, and the procedure to be followed in securing official approval thereof. All of the requirements of this title are in addition to those required by the state Subdivision Map Act. (Prior code § 18.1)

Chapter 20.08 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
20.08.010 Familiarization with laws.
The subdivider and his or her engineer or surveyor, if any, is expected to familiarize him or herself with all of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act of the state, and with the requirements of this title, and to follow the same before presenting any map for approval to either the planning commission or the council of the city. (Prior code § 18.2)

 

20.08.020 Errors.
No error or omission on the part of any official or employee of the city, in approving any map or in compelling or failure to compel compliance with any requirement of the state Subdivision Map Act or of this title or on failure to require payment of any sum as provided in this chapter, shall prevent or prejudice the city, and the city may require compliance therewith at any time thereafter. (Prior code § 18.2)

 

20.08.030 Option to purchase water stock.
The subdivider is required to give to the city the option to purchase all water rights and water stock used in connection with the lands being subdivided at the fair market price, or if there be no market price, at the fair value of such water rights or water stock. Such offer shall accompany the presentation to the city council for approval of the record of survey map or the final map of the subdivision. (Prior code § 18.2)

 

20.08.040 Adoption of certain portions of Subdivision Map Act.
All of the provisions of Chapter 2 entitled “Subdivision Map,” being Sections 11500 to 11658, both inclusive, of the Business and Professions Code of the state, so far as the same are applicable to the city, are hereby adopted as a part of this title. (Prior code § 18.2)

 

20.08.050 Separated parcels.
No land shall be subdivided on any single map when such land is separated or divided into two or more parcels or portions by any parcel of land other than a street, alley, railroad right-of-way, public utility right-of-way, or flood control right-of-way, and when such land is so separated each separate parcel or portion thereof, is subdivided, shall be subdivided as a separate parcel and shown on a separate subdivision map. (Prior code § 18.2)

 

20.08.060 Conformance with master plan.
(a)     Each major or secondary street shall conform in width and substantially in alignment with that shown or indicated in the master plan of streets now adopted or that may hereafter be adopted by the city council.

(b)     This section shall not apply to maps referred to in Section 11537 of the Subdivision Map Act or to maps made for the sole purpose of establishing existing land title boundaries. (Prior code § 18.2)

 

20.08.070 Part-width street.
Any part-width major or secondary street, or any reservation therefor lying along and adjacent to any boundary of a subdivision shall have such a width as will conform to the lines shown on the master plan of streets covering the same portion of such subdivision. (Prior code § 18.2)

 

20.08.080 Specifications for local streets and ways.
(a)     Curve Radius. On any street other than a major or secondary highway, no center line curve radius of less than one hundred feet shall be provided, unless sufficient evidence is offered to the council by the subdivider to show that the one hundred foot radius is not practicable.

(b)     Block Corner Cutoff. At each street intersection the property line at each block corner shall be rounded with a curve with a radius of fifteen feet.

(c)     Intersection Angle. Any highway or street intersecting any other highway or street shall intersect it at an angle as nearly a right angle as practicable.

(d)     Dead End Streets. Where a street is designed to remain a dead end street, an adequate turning area shall be provided at the dead end thereof, which if square or rectangular in shape shall be not less than eighty feet in width and eighty feet in length or if circular in shape it shall have a radius of not less than forty feet at the property line of lots fronting on the turning area. Provided that dead end streets are permitted, great care must be exercised that proper drainage is provided, and that cost of public utilities will not be greatly increased.

(e)     Alleys in Congested Districts. An alley twenty feet wide shall be provided at the rear of all lots where the property is to be used for multiple residential use (not including two family use) or commercial or other restrictive use. The city council may waive all or a portion of this alley requirement if it determines that such alley would be contrary to good planning, would adversely affect the master plan or would not be for the welfare of the general public.

(f)      Alleys Intersecting. Where two alleys intersect, a cut not less than ten feet along each alley shall be provided.

(g)     Alleys in Lieu of Service Roads. Where it is proposed to subdivide property abutting a major or secondary highway and the circumstances of such property or of adjoining property to render it inadvisable or undesirable to provide access to the lots along such highway by means of a service road or other local street, an alley twenty feet wide shall be provided at the rear of such lots. (Prior code § 18.2)

 

20.08.090 Future streets.
Whenever the council shall have determined that a street is necessary for the future subdivision of the property as shown on the subdivision map or for adjoining property, but that the present dedication and connection of such street is not warranted, the council may require that the location, width and extent of such street shall be shown on the final map or on an approved record of survey map as a future street. No improvement of such future street shall be required of the subdivider at the time a final map or record of survey map is submitted to the city council for its approval. (Prior code § 18.2)

 

20.08.100 Lot design.
(a)     Area and Width. Each lot in any subdivision shall have an area and width of not less than the required area and width as that term is defined in zoning, Title 21, or any amendment thereto, for the zone in which the lot or any portion thereof is located, except that when a lot fronts on a circular turning area of permanent dead end streets, the width of such frontage shall not be less than thirty feet and the area of each such lot shall be not less than the required area as that term is defined in zoning, Title 21.

(b)     Frontage. The alignment of streets shall be such as to provide frontage for each lot of the subdivision.

(c)     Additional parking area for commercial use. Wherever property in the subdivision is to be devoted to commercial use, special consideration shall be given to automobile parking space independent of highway curb side parking, as provided by zoning, Title 21 or any amendment thereof.

(d)     Lot side line angle. In all cases where practicable the side lines of lots shall be at an approximate right angle to the street upon which such lots front, except that when lots front on a circular turning area of permanent dead end streets the side lines of lots shall be radial lines drawn through the center of the curve of the turning area. (Ord. 1080 § 1, 1968; prior code § 18.2)

 

20.08.110 Record of survey maps.
In addition to the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act of the state relating to record of survey maps, the following are hereby adopted as additional requirements:

(1)     The record of survey map shall be approved first by the city engineer who shall file his or her written report thereon with the city clerk before such map is presented to the planning commission or the city council;

(2)     Before the council shall approve the map, the subdivider shall enter into an agreement with the city for the improvement of the public streets and alleys or any private streets and alleys laid out on such map in the same form, manner and extent and upon the same terms and conditions as agreements made relative to improvements on final maps. (Prior code § 18.7)

 

20.08.120 Filing instruments with county.
Whenever the Subdivision Map Act requires an act to be done or certificate or other instrument furnished and the office of the county surveyor or any other office of the county requires such act to be done or certificate or other instrument to be furnished before the map can be recorded, and this title is silent upon such subject, this title shall be construed as requiring such acts to be done and such certificates or other instruments to be furnished to the proper officers of the county in accordance with the provisions of such act and the rules and regulations of such offices, and the same shall be a part of this title as though fully set out herein. (Prior code § 18.9)

 

20.08.130 Conditions for approval.
(a)     The following conditions are applicable to all divisions of land reviewed pursuant the provisions of this title:

(1)     That the final tract map or parcel map be recorded thin twelve months of city council approval and prior to the issuance of any building permits;

(2)     That curbs, gutters, sidewalks, paving, drainage structures, sanitary sewers, water lines/appurtenances, street lights (with underground service), street landscaping, street signs, traffic safety devices, and underground utility lines (electric, telephone and CATV) be constructed and installed in accordance with city standards and specifications;

(3)     That payment be made for street signs, sanitary sewer charge, traffic signs, street trees, underground street lights, waterfront footage charge, water meters, and water acreage charge;

(4)     That the owner-developer provide the city engineer with a flood hazard report for his or her review prior to approval of the final map by the city council; further, that the city engineer must approve all drainage structures, controls and/or devices suggested in the flood hazard report and may require additional structures, controls and/or devices if upon investigation they are deemed advisable for the protection of the property;

(5)     That street dedications, street excavations and easements or public utilities (street walk, water, and drainage) shall be deeded as necessary to the city; provided, that for each deed required pursuant to this section the owner-developer shall pay the city a fee, established pursuant to resolution of city council, for the processing of such deed;

(6)     Preservation of Existing Trees. All existing living trees having a DBH of six inches or more shall be preserved and no grading shall be done to endanger them without providing tree wells or protective planters or other mitigation measures as recommended by a certified arborist. If said trees are destroyed applicant shall replace them with trees whose size, number, and planting location shall be determined by the planning department before final occupancy is granted to any new resident. If trees having a DBH of six inches or more were removed prior to the applicant filing the subdivision application, the applicant shall undertake reasonable efforts to replace said trees to mitigate the effects of the removal of said trees. Tree well details and plans shall be submitted at the direction of the city forester and the planning department for locations where cuts or fills adjacent to trees exceed one foot in height.

Trees that have a six-inch or greater diameter at breast height (DBH) shall be shown on the site plan, and shall include the identification of species, diameter at breast height (DBH), and the condition of each tree.

Where required by the planning department, the applicant shall submit a tree preservation/relocation/replacement/removal plan, and shall include the following:

(A)    Methods of tree preservation.

1.       Trees to be retained on site shall be encircled by a protective fence. In all cases, fencing shall be installed prior to commencement of any grading and/or construction activity, and shall remain in place throughout all phases of development. Fences may not be removed without first obtaining written authorization from the city forester. The fence shall be placed outside of the tree root zones. General root zone estimates may be determined by one foot of radius per inch of trunk diameter at breast height (DBH).

2.       No structure or impervious paving should be located within the drip line or within a six-foot radius of the trunk perimeter, whichever is greater. A tree with a DBH of thirty inches or more shall require additional space as determined by the city forester. Decks located above the root zones of retained trees shall be of post and beam, construction to reduce the need for root pruning or removal.

3.       All areas within the tree protection zones shall remain in natural states and grades. The following activities shall be prohibited within tree protection zones; construction, stockpiling of materials, parking, soil compaction or other such detrimental activities.

4.       The applicant shall retain a certified arborist to monitor compliance with the tree preservation conditions approved by the planning commission.

(B)    Tree replacement recommendations; and

(C)    A report with recommendations from a certified arborist.

(7)     That satisfactory grading plans be submitted to the public works department for approval prior to the acceptance of the final tract map. The public works department shall collect the necessary bonds for the grading of the tract;

(8)     That a geologic soil and an engineering geologic report be submitted to, and subject to the approval of, the city. The said report shall include results of an investigation for evidence or potential active faulting in order to preclude the possibility of new building construction on top of any potentially active fault zones and building standard recommendations in areas (vicinity) of faulting;

(9)     That the final grading plan shall show a scheme whereby the proposed residences are adapted to existing topography and are compatible with surrounding areas, thus eliminating costly pads and grading;

(10)   That the owner-developer consent to annex the tract to the city landscaping and lighting maintenance district number 1;

(11)   That final street, water, sewer and drainage plans be submitted and approved prior to the recordation of the final map;

(12)   That all residences have the residence address clearly marked on the curbing in addition to the number attached to the residence in accordance with city standards.

(13)   That the design of the division of land shall provide one or more appropriate cable television systems an opportunity to construct, install and maintain, on land identified on the map as dedicated or to be dedicated to public utility use, any equipment necessary to extend cable television services to each residential parcel in the subdivision. For the purpose of this paragraph, “appropriate cable television systems” means those franchised to serve the geographical area in which the subdivision is located. This paragraph shall not apply to the conversion of existing dwelling units to condominiums, community apartments, or stock cooperatives.

(b)     In applying the provisions of subsection (a) to any proposed division of land, the planning commission and the city council may delete or alter one or more of the conditions if, in their judgment, such condition or conditions are not necessary to fulfill the intent of this title.

(c)     The planning commission and the city council may impose such additional conditions as they deem necessary or appropriate to fulfill the intent of this title. (Ord. 1768 § 4, 2003; Ord. 1598 § 2, 1992; Ord. 1536 § 15, 1989; Ord. 1364 § 1, 1981)

 

20.08.140 Reservation of land.
The city may require areas of real property within a proposed subdivision or parcel map, with specific rights of public access, to be reserved for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses provided that proposed reservations are consistent with the general plan, the limitations of the Subdivision Map Act, or other requirements of federal or state law. (Ord. 1869 § 1, 2007)

 

20.08.150 Parcel map waiver.
Pursuant to the provisions of California Government Code Section 66428 (the Subdivision Map Act), and subject to making the findings provided therein, the city council or planning commission may waive the requirements of a parcel map. (Ord. 1884 § 1, 2007)

Chapter 20.12 TENTATIVE MAP
20.12.010 Additional requirements to Subdivision Map Act.
In addition to the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act governing the filing of tentative maps, the following hereby are adopted as additional requirements:

(1)     Tract Number Or Name.

(a)     Before filing a tentative map the subdivider shall obtain from the county surveyor the assignment of a number for the tract to be subdivided, or shall submit to the county surveyor for his or her approval, a name, title or other designation to be given such tract;

(b)     If such name, title or designation includes the name or designation of any existing city, town or unincorporated community, other than the city, or if such name, title or designation is the same or so nearly the same as to cause confusion, or mislead the public as that of any other tract or subdivision, a map or plat of which shall have been previously recorded in Los Angeles County, such name, title or designation shall be disapproved by the county surveyor and the subdivider shall submit such other name, title or designation as shall meet such approval;

(c)     When a number shall have been assigned or a name, title or designation shall have been approved by the county surveyor for a subdivision, the subdivider shall place the same upon each tentative or final map of the subdivision and the number, name, title or designation shall not thereafter be changed nor altered in any manner upon any tentative or final map of the subdivision, unless and until a new number shall have been approved by the county surveyor as in this section provided. In the event that a subdivider elects to file an approved record of survey map in place of a final map, such number, title or designation shall not appear upon the approved record of survey map;

(2)     Size and scale: Each tentative map shall be eight inches by twelve inches or any multiple thereof, and shall be drawn to such scale as to clearly show the details of the plan thereon. Wherever practicable, such scale shall be a scale of one inch to one hundred feet;

(3)     Identity of subdivider. When a tentative map is submitted the commission may require the subdivider to show any of the following:

(a)     That he or she is the owner of the property shown on the map as proposed for subdivision;

(b)     That he or she has an option or contract to purchase the property or that portion of which he or she is not the owner; and

(c)     That he or she is the authorized agent of one who can comply with the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) above. (Prior code § 18.2)

 

20.12.020 Information required.
The tentative map shall show and contain the following matters as an aid to the commission in its consideration of the design of the subdivision:

(1)     The tract number, name or designation;

(2)     Sufficient legal description of the land as to define the boundaries of the proposed tract;

(3)     Name and address of subdivider and of registered civil engineer or licensed surveyor, if any;

(4)     The location, names and existing widths of all adjoining highways, streets or ways;

(5)     The width and approximate grades of all highways, streets and ways within such proposed subdivision;

(6)     The width and approximate locations of all existing proposed easements, whether public or private, for roads, drainage, sewers or public utility purposes;

(7)     Approximate radius of all curves;

(8)     The approximate lot layout and the approximate divisions of each lot;

(9)     Approximate locations of all areas subject to inundation or storm water overflow and the locations, widths and conditions of flow of all watercourses;

(10)   Source of water supply, if any;

(11)   Proposed method of sewage disposal, if any;

(12)   Use of property proposed;

(13)   Proposed public areas, if any;

(14)   Approximate contours where topography controls street layout;

(15)   Date, north point and scale;

(16)   Number of each lot;

(17)   Approximate location of each area covered by trees with a statement of the nature of the cover and the kind and approximate location of all trees standing within the boundaries of proposed public rights-of-way;

(18)   Approximate location and outline to scale of each building or structure which is not to be moved in the development of the subdivision;

Provided, however, that if it is impossible or impracticable to place upon the tentative map any matter hereinabove in this section required, such matter or information shall be furnished in a written statement which shall be submitted with such map;

(19)   Each street shown by its actual street name or by temporary name or letter for the purposes of identification until the proper name of such street is determined. (Prior § 18.2)

 

20.12.030 Rejection of prohibited use.
The planning commission and/or the council may reject a tentative map if the practical use which can be made of the property as proposed to be subdivided is a use prohibited by any ordinance, statute, law or other valid regulation. (Prior code § 18.2)

 

20.12.040 Filing copies.
All tentative maps filed hereunder shall be filed with the city clerk. Not less than the original and four copies of each map offered shall be so filed, being one copy for the city clerk, one for the commission, one for the city engineer and one copy for the subdivider, to be returned to the subdivider with the required changes, corrections and additions, if any, noted thereon. The original map shall also be returned to the subdivider if corrections, etc, are required, and when such corrections, etc., have been made, such map shall be returned to the city clerk, together with two copies thereof, being one copy for the commission and one copy for the city engineer.

The city clerk shall immediately mark each map and each copy with the word “FILED,” insert date of filing and sign his or her name and official title thereunder.

The city clerk shall immediately refer such map to the engineer for his or her examination, checking and report, and shall not present the same to the planning commission until such report has been received. The fees required by Section 20.16.060 must accompany the filing of the map. (Prior code § 18.2)

 

20.12.050 Vesting tentative maps.
A vesting tentative map confers a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the time the application for the vesting tentative map is determined to be complete or the vesting tentative map is approved, as provided in Government Code Section 66498.1. A vesting tentative map shall be processed in a manner pursuant to requirements of the subdivision map act and to the requirements for tentative maps as prescribed in this chapter. Additionally, the following requirements shall apply to a vesting tentative map:

(1)     The words “Vesting Tentative Map” shall be printed conspicuously on the face of the proposed map;

(2)     The rights conferred by a vesting tentative map shall last for a period of one year beyond recordation of the final map. (Ord. 1482 § 1, 1986)

Chapter 20.16 FINAL MAP
20.16.010 Requirements generally.
In addition to the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act governing the filing of final maps, the following sections are hereby adopted as additional requirements. (Prior code § 18.4)

 

20.16.020 Filing maps.
All final maps filed hereunder shall be filed with the city clerk. Not less than the original and five copies of each map offered shall be so filed. Such map shall consist of the title sheet and as many additional sheets as shall be required to show the land to be subdivided with all requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and of this title. One copy shall be delivered to the city engineer, one to the city attorney, one to the city clerk, one to the planning commission and one copy to be returned to the subdivider with the required changes, corrections and additions, if any, noted thereon. The original map shall also be returned to him or her for corrections if required.

In addition to the above, the information required under Section 20.12.020, regarding tentative maps, shall also be furnished with final maps.

After the final map or record of survey map has been approved by the commission, city engineer and council, and checked and approved by the county surveyor and recorded, three black or blue line prints or sets of prints of such record map, including the title sheet, shall be immediately furnished to the city clerk, one of each such prints or sets of prints for the city clerk, commission and city engineer. (Prior code § 18.4)

 

20.16.030 Survey procedure and practice.
The procedure and practice of all survey work done on any subdivision, whether for preparation of a final map or approved record of survey map shall conform to the accepted standards of the engineering profession. The allowable error of closure on any portion of a final map or approved record of survey map shall be one ten thousandth.

In the event that the city engineer, the county surveyor, county road commissioner or the state highway engineer shall have established the center line of any street or alley in or adjoining a subdivision the final map or approved record of survey map shall show such center line, together with reference to a field book or map showing such center line and the monuments which determine its position. If determined by ties, that fact shall be stated upon the final map or approved record of survey map. (Prior code § 18.4)

 

20.16.040 Monuments.
(a)     Boundary. Each final map or approved record of survey map shall show durable monuments found or set at or near each boundary corner and at intermediate points, approximately one thousand feet apart, or at such lesser distances as may be made necessary by topography or culture to insure accuracy in the reestablishment of any point or line without unreasonable difficulty. The precise position and the character of each such monument shall be shown on such map. Such durable monument shall be not less substantial than iron pipe of a two inch outside diameter, not less than two and one-half feet in length, with plug and tack, and set at least two feet into the ground or of such other character and stability as may be approved by the county surveyor or the city engineer. For the purposes of this title a lead and tack set in permanent concrete or masonry shall be considered as a durable monument. The approximate elevation of the top of each such monument with respect to the surface of the ground shall be shown on the map.

(b)     Street Center Line. Whenever, in the opinion of the county surveyor or city engineer, a monument is necessary to mark the intersection of two streets, such monument shall be set at the intersection of the center lines of the streets, unless, in the opinion of the county surveyor or the city engineer, the conditions at such intersection point make preferable the setting of the monument at a different point. Each such monument shall be not less durable and substantial than:

(1)     In asphaltic concrete or concrete pavements a lead and tack;

(2)     In unsurfaced, graveled or soiled surfaces a two-inch pipe set not less than twelve inches below the surface, or such depth as may be approved by the county surveyor or city engineer;

(3)     In bituminous macadam pavements a spike not less than six inches long.

(c)     Notes to be Furnished. For each center line intersection monument set the engineer or surveyor under whose supervision the survey has been made shall furnish to the county surveyor and to the city engineer each a set of notes show clearly the ties between such monument and a sufficient number, normally four, of durable distinctive reference points or monuments. Such reference points or monuments may be leads and tacks in sidewalks, or two inch iron pipe set back of curb line and below the surface of the ground, or such substitute therefor as appears to be not more likely to be disturbed.

Such set of notes shall be of such quality, form and completeness and shall be on paper of such quality and size as may be necessary to conform to the standardized office records of the county surveyor. All such notes shall be indexed and filed by the county surveyor and the city engineer as a part of the permanent public records of their respective offices.

(d)     Identification Marks. All monuments set as required herein shall be permanently and visibly marked or tagged with the registration or license number of the engineer or surveyor under whose supervision the survey was made.

(e)     Deferment. In the event that any or all of the monuments required to be set are to be set subsequent to the recordation of the map, as provided in the subdivision map act of state, the map shall show clearly which monuments are to be set.

(f)      Inspection and Approval. All monuments shall be subject to inspection and approval by the city engineer in connection with his or her checking of the map. (Prior code § 18.4)

 

20.16.050 Recording fee deposits—Refunds.
Upon the submission of a final map, the subdivider shall deposit with the county surveyor a sum of money equal to the amount required by law for the recordation of a subdivision map, which money shall be deposited in a trust fund for that purpose, and upon the filing of such map for record in the office of the county recorder, such money shall be used by the surveyor in payment of the fee for recording of such map.

In the event that the subdivider abandons his or her intention to cause such map to be recorded, and so notifies the county surveyor of such fact in writing, such money shall be refunded to the subdivider who deposited the same.

All moneys paid out of such trust fund shall be paid by warrant of county auditor which shall be drawn upon the requisition of the county surveyor. (Prior code § 18.4)

 

20.16.060 Map checking fees.
In addition to all other fees and charges required by law, upon submitting a tentative map, a final map, or approved record of survey map under the provisions of the subdivision map act of the state, the subdivider shall pay to the city clerk at the time the tentative map is filed a fee, as established by city council resolution, for checking said map, by the city engineer, and a plan checking fee to the city engineer or county surveyor, whichever may perform the duties of checking the final map or approved record of survey map, a sum estimated by the city engineer or county surveyor to cover all his or her costs of checking such map. (Ord. 1327 § 1, 1979; Ord. 1040 § 5, 1967; prior code § 18.4)

 

20.16.070 Mapping specifications.
(a)     Block Designation. In the event that the subdivider elects to number or letter the blocks in any subdivision, all blocks therein shall be numbered or lettered in numerical or alphabetical order, respectively, commencing with the numeral “1” or the letter “A” and continuing without omission or duplication. Such numbers or letters shall be solid and of sufficient size and thickness as to be conspicuous on the map, and shall be so placed as not to obliterate any figure, dimension or course, and shall not be enclosed in any circle or other design. Except where necessitated by a scale sufficiently large to show all details clearly no block shall be divided between two or more sheets.

(b)     Lot Number. The lots in each block therein shall be numbered beginning with the numeral “1” and continuing without omission or duplication in any such block. No prefix or suffix nor combination of letter and number shall be used. Each lot shall be shown entirely on one sheet.

(c)     Subdivision Boundary (Blue Border). The boundary line of a subdivision shall be indicated by a border of light blue ink approximately one-eighth inch wide, applied on the reverse side of the tracing and inside such boundary line. Such ink shall be of such density as to be transferred to a blue line print of such map and not to obliterate any such line, figure or other data appearing on such map.

(d)     Title Sheet. The title sheet of each final map shall contain a title consisting of the number, name or designation of the subdivision, also the words “In the city of Glendora” or “Partly in the city of Glendora and partly in unincorporated territory,” as the case may be; also except as provided in subsection (e) hereof, a subtitle consisting of a description of all of the property being subdivided, by reference to such map of the property shown therein as shall have been previously recorded, or shall have been previously filed with the county clerk pursuant to a final judgment in any action in partition, or shall have been previously filed in the office of the county recorder under authority of Chapter 3, Part 2 of Division 4 of the Business and Professions Code of the state, or by reference to the plat of any United States survey. When necessary for greater clarity or definiteness supplemental reference may be made to any other map on file in the office of the county recorder.

Each reference in such description to any tract or subdivision shall be spelled out and worded identically with the original record thereof and must show a complete reference to the book and page of records of the county.

Upon such title sheet the certificate of the surveyor or engineer referred to in Section 11592 of the Subdivision Map Act shall appear. Also upon such title sheet, or upon least one map sheet shall appear the basis of bearings making reference to some recorded subdivision map, county surveyor’s map or other record acceptable to the count surveyor or to a solar or polaris observation.

All stamped or written matter, including signatures, shall be so made with opaque ink that legible the line prints may be obtained therefrom.

(e)     Reversion to Acreage. Upon the title sheet of each map filed for the purpose of reverting subdivided land to acreage, the subtitle shall consist of the words, “A Reversion to Acreage of __________.” (insert a general description of the land being reverted).

(f)      Evidence of Determining Boundary. On each final map or approved record of survey map shall be fully and clearly shown and identified such stakes, monuments or other evidence determining the boundaries of the subdivision as were found on the ground, together with sufficient corners of adjoining subdivision, by lot and block number, tract name and place of record, or by section, township and range, or other proper designation as may be necessary to locate precisely the limits of the subdivision.

(g)     Orientation. The map on each sheet and the lettering thereon shall be so oriented that, with the north point directed away from the reader, the map may be read most conveniently from the bottom or lower right corner of such sheet, the binding edge to be at the left and lengthwise of the sheet.

(h)     Title, Scale, North Point, Number and Cross Reference. Each sheet of a final map or approved record of survey map, excepting the title sheet or sheets thereof, shall bear the main title of the map, the scale of the map, north point and sheet number, together with a designation of the relation, if any, between each sheet and each other sheet thereof.

(i)      Bearings and Lengths of Lines. The bearing and length of each lot line, block line and boundary line shall be shown on the final map or approved record of survey map; provided, that when bearings or lengths of lot lines in any series of lots are the same, such bearings or length may be omitted from each interior parallel lot line of such series. Each required bearing and length shall be shown in full and no ditto marks or other designation or repetition shall be used.

(j)      Area Designation. Upon each lot containing an area three-fourths of an acre or more shall be designated the acreage of such lot shown, not less accurately than to the nearest one hundredth of an acre.

(k)     Curve Data. The length, radius and total central angle or bearings of terminal radii of each curve, and the bearing of each radial line to each lot corner on each curve, or the central angle of each segment within each lot, shall be shown thereon.

(l)      Street Names. Street names within the boundaries of a subdivision shown on a final map or approved record of survey map shall be submitted to the council for approval, and if duplicated elsewhere in the city, or so nearly the same in spelling or pronunciation as to cause confusion, some other name may be required.

(1)     Unless a name is so duplicated or confusing, it shall be the same as the name of any street of which it is on line of extension, or the name to which such street may be in the process of being changed;

(2)     The word “avenue,” “boulevard,” “place” or other designation of such street shall be spelled out in full;

(3)     The name of each newly dedicated portion of any highway shall be shown in or arrowed on such newly dedicated portion.

(m)    Street Widths and Center Line. There shall be shown on each final map or approved record of survey map the center line of each highway, street or way, the total width thereof, the width of that portion, if any, to be dedicated, and, in the case of any existing highways, streets or ways, the width thereof, and the width of each highway, street or way on each side of the center line thereof. On each such center line shall be shown the bearing and length of each tangent and radius, central angle and length of each curve.

The final map or approved record of survey map shall show the width of each railroad right-of-way, flood control or drainage easement, and each other easement appearing on such map, whether previously of record or offered for dedication on such map.

(n)     Easement Lines and Ties. Upon a final map shall be shown the center line or side lines of each easement to which the lots in the subdivision are subject. In the event that such easement is not definitely located of record, a statement showing the existence of such easement shall be placed on the map.

(o)     Easement Designation. Each easement shown for any storm drain or sewer shall be designated on the final map by fine dashed lines.

(p)     Easement Bearings on Lot Lines. Distances and bearings on the side lines of lots which are cut by easements shall be arrowed or so shown as to indicate clearly the actual length of each lot line.

(q)     Easement Widths and Ties. The widths of easements or the lengths and bearings of the lines thereof and sufficient ties thereto to definitely locate such easements with respect to a subdivision shall be shown on the final map.

(r)      Easement Identification. Each easement shall be clearly labeled and identified and, if of record, the record reference shall be shown thereon.

(s)     Easement Dedication. If an easement is being dedicated by a final map it shall be properly set out in the owner’s certificate of dedication on the map.

(t)      Easement Notes and Figures. All notes or figures pertaining to each easement shall be subordinated in form and appearance to those relating to the subdivision itself.

(u)     City Boundary Lines. Upon the final map shall be shown the city boundary line; provided, that the subdivision borders thereon and such line shall be clearly designated and tied in.

(v)     Land Subject To Flood Hazard. If any portion of the land within the boundaries shown on any final map or approved record of survey map is subject to inundation or flood hazard by storm waters, such fact and portion shall be clearly shown on such final map or approved record of survey map by a prominent note on each sheet of such map whereon any such portion shall be shown.

(w)    Land Subject to Overflow, Ponding or High Ground Water. If any portion of such land is subject to sheet overflow or ponding or local storm water, or should the depth to ground water be less than ten feet from the ground surfaces, the commission shall so inform the state real estate commission.

(x)     Natural Watercourse Designation. In the event that a subdivision or any part thereof is traversed by any major watercourse, channel, stream or creek, the subdivider shall indicate an adequate right-of-way for storm drainage purposes, if in the opinion of the commission such dedication is necessary. In the event that the natural watercourse does not run entirely within such dedication the subdivider may either construct an adequate channel with such dedication or delineate the course of such watercourse upon the final map, or approved record or survey map.

(y)     Sewer and Storm Drains. If, in the opinion of the council, either sewers or storm drains or both are necessary for the general use of lot owners in the subdivision, and such sewers or storm drains or both are not to be installed in the streets of such subdivision, the subdivider shall show upon the maps and dedicate necessary easements for such sewers, storm drains or both.

(z)     Dedication Exceptions. Dedication is not required on any map referred to in Section 11537 of the Subdivision Map Act of the state or on any map made for the sole purpose of establishing existing land title boundaries.

(aa)   Map Showing Structures Required. Any final map of a subdivision presented to the council for acceptance of easements and recordation shall be accompanied by an additional copy on which is delineated all structures existing within the easements, except publicly-owned storm drains, water lines, sewers and other sanitary facilities, whether such structures are on recorded easements or not.

(bb)   Easement Certificate. Any final map of a subdivision presented to the council for acceptance of easements and recordation shall have written thereon, in addition to or as a part of any other certificate required, a certificate signed by the owner and the subdivider, and by all persons claiming any interest other than right-of-way, easement or other interest, none of which can ripen into a fee, in the lands included within the subdivision shown on the map, in substantially the following form:

“We hereby certify that, except as shown on a copy of this map on file in the office of the city clerk or county surveyor, we know of no easement or structure existing within the easements hereby offered for dedication to the public, other than publicly-owned water lines, sewers or storm drains; that we will grant no right or interest within the boundaries of such easements offered to the public, except where such right or interest is expressly made subject to the easements.”

(cc)   Waiver of Signature. If the owner of an easement or right-of-way of any kind or nature in any right-of-way offered for dedication who has no other interest whatever in any part of the lands included within the subdivision, refuses to make his or her easement subject to any right-of-way offered to the public, but the final map in all other respects complies with this title, with the Subdivision Map Act and with every other applicable statute and ordinance, and the council finds that the subdivider has in good faith attempted to obtain the necessary signatures from such owner and has been unable to do so, and that a refusal to accept the final map for recordation would work an undue hardship on the subdivider, then by a majority vote of all its members the council may accept such map. (Prior code § 18.4).

 

20.16.080 Improvements.
At the time the city accepts the final map and all offers of dedication it may, as a condition precedent as “minimum requirements” to the acceptance of any streets or easements, require the subdivider, at his or her option, either to improve or agree to improve the streets or easements in accordance with the plans, profiles, cross sections, detail drawings approved by the city engineer and upon grades established by him or her. All of such work shall be performed in accordance with the specifications for the particular work heretofore adopted by the city. Such work shall consist of the following:

(1)     Grading and Paving of Streets. All streets within each subdivision shall be graded and paved to grade for the full width of the roadway thereof with hot plant mixed asphaltic pavement not less than two inches in thickness; provided, that upon primary streets such pavement shall not be less than four inches in thickness. Such grading and paving shall be done in accordance with plans, profiles, cross sections and detail drawings approved by the city engineer and shall be done in accordance with applicable specifications of the city. Such plans, profiles, cross sections and detailed drawings shall be approved by the city engineer before submission of the final map to the council;

(2)     Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters Generally. Concrete curbs and gutters, not less than one foot in width shall be constructed on and along each side of the roadway of all streets; and concrete sidewalks not less than five feet in width shall be constructed on and along each side of the roadway of all streets. The exact location of such sidewalks and the method of construction shall be determined by the planning commission or the city council. The city council may dispense with the requirement, for the installation of sidewalks if the terrain or other special conditions make it unsafe or undesirable to install sidewalks;

(3)     Specifications of Water Mains. Cast iron pipe water mains shall be laid in all such streets together with all necessary fittings where such pipe connects with any existing city water main or if approved by the city council, number ten gauge automatic electric welded plate steel pipe, double dipped and wrapped with welded field joints, may be laid instead of cast iron pipe. The minimum inside diameter of such water mains shall be not less than six inches; provided, however, that larger diameter pipes shall be laid if required to adequately supply the maximum requirements for domestic and commercial uses, and fire protection purposes;

(4)     Gate Valves on Water Pipes. The installation of gate valves of the same size of the pipe installed at all cross connections of water pipes within the subdivision, or where such pipe connects with any existing city water main;

(5)     Fire Hydrants. The installation of standard four-inch Corey or equivalent fire hydrants, with six-inch diameter bottom connections for a three-foot depth trench, connected to the water main with six-inch diameter pipe and six-inch diameter gate valve between fire hydrant and water main at the following locations:

(A)    At all street intersections, one fire hydrant with two two and one-half inch standard hose connections and one four and one-half inch standard streamer connection;

(B)    At intermediate points in long blocks, fire hydrants with two two and one-half inch standard hose connections; provided, that in no case shall the distance between fire hydrants exceed six hundred feet;

(6)     Paving Alleys. All alleys shall be graded and paved with hot plant mixed asphaltic pavement not less than one and one-half inches in thickness for the full width of the alley;

(7)     Sewers. Sanitary sewers must be installed whenever there is an existing sewer adjacent to the subdivision or within five hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision; provided, that the topography permits the use of such sewer;

(8)     When Sidewalks Required. Sidewalks may be required on primary streets, secondary streets or any local street where in the opinion of the city council the amount of pedestrian travel requires a sidewalk as a public necessity;

(9)     Drainage Facilities. Drainage structures may be required where in the opinion of the city engineer or the city council it is necessary to provide adequate drainage facilities;

(10)   Installation of Utilities, Prior to Paving Streets. Wherever water pipe, fire hydrants and appurtenances, including all service connections, sanitary and house connection sewers and appurtenances, gas mains and service connections, drainage structures or any other underground structures and facilities required, all of these shall be installed completely before any portion of the roadway of any street is paved;

(11)   Approval of Designs of Improvements, Grades and Drainage Facilities. All designs of improvements, grades and drainage facilities shall be subject to the satisfaction and approval of the city engineer;

(12)   Street Improvement Specifications. All street improvement work shall be constructed in accordance with specifications adopted by the city council; provided, however, that the work may be constructed in accordance with alternate specifications for a more substantial type of improvements; provided, that such alternate specifications have been approved by the city council;

(13)   Curb Returns. The radius of the curb return at the intersection of two streets shall be equal to the return of the property line return, plus the distance from the curb to the property line, as measured on the intersecting street, having the greater distance between the curb and property line.

In addition to improving the streets shown upon the map the subdivider shall improve or agree to improve any or all streets bordering upon the boundaries of the subdivision with curbs and gutters and at the option of the council with sidewalks and paving of the unpaved portion of any of such between the exterior gutter line and the closest line of pavement. If there is no pavement, then up to but not beyond the center line of such street;

(14)   Street Planting and Plant Strips. In any subdivision where the subdivider proposes or is ordered by the council to plant trees or shrubs in and along the streets, the subdivider shall first secure from the city council approval of the type and number and location of such trees or shrubs and the council shall advise the subdividers and their successors in interest in the selection and care of trees or shrubs to be planted in any required planting strip, reservation or private property.

Where a subdivider is required by the city council to plant or provide for the planting of street trees, the planting thereof or provision therefor shall be in accordance with the following regulations:

(A)    No street trees will be required in front of any property zoned for business or manufacturing use.

(B)    In any residential zones, no more than one street tree shall be required for each lot up to and including eighty feet in frontage, but the council may require one tree to be planted in each fifty feet of frontage or fraction thereof, in excess of eighty feet frontage. provided, however, that in no event will trees be required to be planted closer than fifty feet apart.

(C)    In any subdivision in which the subdivider proposes to, or is ordered by the council to, plant street trees, the subdivider shall make such plantings under the supervision and direction of the tree warden.

(D)    In the event that the subdivider proposes to plant street trees, the city council may at the time of application for approval of subdivision require the deposit of a cash bond or other bond acceptable to the city council in a sum sufficient to assure the purchase and planting of street trees. The bond shall be exonerated or the cash bond refunded at such time as the subdivider shall have purchased and planted street trees to the satisfaction of the city council; provided, however, that the subdivider shall have planted the trees within two years after the deposit of the cash bond or other bond unless such two year period shall be extended by the city council:

(15)   Street Signs. For each new street constructed as part of a subdivision, the subdivider shall deposit with the city the cost of such signs as are necessary for the control of traffic along the street. Such signs are to include those which are marked: “Stop,” “Slow,” “No Exit Street” and any other sign deemed necessary;

(16)   Ornamental Street Lights. All streets within any subdivision shall be improved with ornamental street lights. (Ord. 1536 § 16, 1989; prior code § 18.4)

 

20.16.090 Agreement in lieu of completing improvement.
If any improvements are not completed to the satisfaction of the council before the final tract map or approved record of survey map is submitted to the council for approval, the subdivider shall, prior to the approval by the council of the final map or approved record of survey map, enter as contractor into an agreement with the city whereby in consideration of acceptance by the council of the dedications offered on final map and the approval of the final map or approved record of survey map, the subdivider, as such contractor, agrees to furnish all necessary equipment and material and to complete such work within the time specified in such agreement. (Prior code § 18.5)

 

20.16.100 Preliminary soil report.
(a)     Purpose. The city council declares that this section is enacted pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 1001 of the statutes of 1965.

(b)     Preliminary Soil Report. Prior to the submission of the final subdivision map, the subdivider shall file with the building department and the city engineer, a preliminary soil report, prepared by a civil engineer who is registered by the state of California, based upon adequate test borings or excavations of every subdivision, as defined in Sections 11535 and 11535.1 of the business and professions code. The preliminary report may be waived if the building department and the engineer shall determine that, due to the knowledge of such department as to the soil qualities of the subdivision, no preliminary analysis is necessary.

(c)     Soil Investigation. If the preliminary soil report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soil problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, a soil investigation of each lot in the subdivision shall be prepared by a civil engineer who is registered by the state. The soil investigation shall recommend corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage to each dwelling proposed to be constructed on the expansive soil. The report shall be filed with the building department and the city engineer.

(d)     Approval of Soil Investigation. The building department and the city engineer shall approve the soil investigation if it determines that the recommended corrective action is likely to prevent structural damage to each dwelling to be constructed on each lot in the subdivision. Appeal from such determination shall be to the city council. The building permit shall be conditioned upon the incorporation of the approved recommended corrective action in the construction of each dwelling. (Ord. 992 §§ 1—4, 1966)

Chapter 20.20 BONDS AND DEPOSITS
20.20.010 Special engineering and inspection deposits.
Before commencing any improvements the subdivider shall deposit with the city clerk the sum estimated by the city engineer to cover the actual cost of the engineering or inspection charges rendered in connection with the improvements, as follows:

(1)     For checking of plans, profiles, details and specifications;

(2)     For preparation of plans, profiles, details and specifications;

(3)     For setting construction line and grade stakes, supervision and inspection of construction; and

(4)     For inspection and supervision of construction; provided, however, that if approved by the city engineer, the subdivider may engage the services of an engineer who is a registered civil engineer of the state to prepare plans, profiles, details and specifications, or for setting construction line and grade stakes, however, in such an event all checking of plans, profiles, details and specifications, and all inspection and supervision of the improvements shall be performed by the city engineer. (Prior code § 18.6)

 

20.20.020 Refunds.
The city shall refund unused deposits all cases if the actual cost of engineering or inspection is less than the amount deposited. The city shall refund to the applicant any amount still remaining in the same manner as provided by law for the payment of trust moneys. (Prior code § 18.6)

 

20.20.030 General engineering and inspection deposits.
In lieu of making the special deposit required for the cost of engineering or inspection of improvements by the city engineer, the subdivider may make and maintain with the city engineer a general deposit not to exceed the sum of one thousand dollars. The general deposit shall be held and used for the same purposes as the special deposit for the cost of engineering or an inspection of improvements by the city engineer. (Prior code 18.6)

 

20.20.040 Insufficient deposits.
If any deposit made pursuant to the engineering and inspection deposits, special, or the engineering and inspection deposits, general, is less than sufficient to pay all of the costs of engineering or inspection, the subdivider, upon demand of the city engineer, shall pay to the officer making the demand an amount equal to the deficiency. If the subdivider fails or refuses to pay such deficiency upon demand, the city may recover the same by action in any court of competent jurisdiction. Until such deficiency is paid in full the improvement shall be considered uncompleted. (Prior code § 18.6)

 

20.20.050 Faithful performance bond.
The agreement referred to in Section 20.16.080 shall be accompanied by a faithful performance bond guaranteeing the faithful performance of all work, the engineering or inspection of which is the duty of the city engineer, in a penal sum which in the opinion of the city engineer equals the cost thereof. (Prior code § 18.6)

 

20.20.060 Bond requirements.
All faithful performance bonds referred to in this chapter shall be:

(1)     Furnished by a surety company authorized to write the same in the state; and

(2)     Subject to the approval and acceptance of the city council. (Prior code § 18.6)

 

20.20.070 Money in lieu of bond.
In lieu of a faithful performance bond required by this chapter, the subdivider may deposit with the city council a sum of money equal to the required amount of such bond as security for the faithful performance thereof, or, in the alternative, an instrument of credit from a financial institution which is subject to regulation by the state or federal government pledging that the moneys necessary to meet the performance are on deposit and guaranteed for payment. (Prior code § 18.6)

 

20.20.080 Reduction—Deposit on portion completed.
When any portion of an improvement has actually been fully completed, the officer whose duty it is to inspect such improvement may, in his or her discretion, authorize from time to time a reduction in the bond or a partial withdrawal of the funds, which bond or funds were deposited in lieu of a faithful performance bond required by this title, equal to the estimated cost of such completed portion.

This section does not authorize a reduction or withdrawal or partial completion of any or all of any such improvement. (Prior code § 18.6)

 

20.20.090 Forfeiture.
Upon the failure of a subdivider to complete any improvement within the time specified in an agreement, the council may, upon notice in writing of not less than ten days served upon the person signing such contract, or upon notice in writing of not less than twenty days served by registered mail addressed to the last-known address of the person signing such contract, determine that such improvement work or any part thereof is uncompleted, and may cause to be forfeited to the city such portion of such sum of money or bonds given for the faithful performance of such work as may be necessary to complete such improvement work. (Prior code § 18.6)

Chapter 20.22 CONDOMINIUM PROJECTS
20.22.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following items are ascribed the following meaning:

(1)     “Condominium project” means a condominium project, as defined in Section 783 of the Civil Code, a community department project, as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code, or a stock cooperative project, as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code. The project is the entire parcel of real property, including any buildings thereon, to be subdivided for the purpose of constructing, or of converting existing structures to, condominiums or community apartments or for the purpose of converting existing dwelling units to stock cooperatives.

(2)     “Subdivision” has the meaning ascribed to it by the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, commencing with Section 66410 of the Government Code. (Ord. 1403 § 2, 1983)

 

20.22.020 General requirements.
Any subdivision creating five or more condominiums or a community apartment containing five or more parcels, or converting a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing five or more dwelling units shall comply with the Subdivision Map Act and the provisions of Chapters 20.04, 20.08, 20.12, 20.16 and 20.20 of this title. Any subdivision creating two or more condominiums, but less than five, or a community apartment containing two or more parcels, but less than five, or converting of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing two or more dwelling units, but less than five, shall comply with the Subdivision Map Act and the provisions of Chapter 20.24 of this title. (Ord. 1403 § 2, 1983)

 

20.22.030 Conversion of existing buildings.
The requirements of this chapter shall be followed whether the project is to be newly constructed or involves the conversion of existing buildings. (Ord. 1403 § 2, 1983)

Chapter 20.24 SPLITTING LOTS
20.24.010 City approval required.
Any real property located in the city and shown on the latest adopted county tax roll as a unit shall not be divided by any person (1) into less than five parcels, or (2) into any number of parcels if such division of land does not constitute a “subdivision” pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act of the state, as set forth in California Business and Professions Code, commencing with Section 11500, without first obtaining the approval of the city as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1207 § 1, 1974; Ord. 1120 § 1, 1970; prior code § 18.10)

 

20.24.020 Filing application.
Anyone proposing to divide property as provided for in this chapter shall make his or her application therefor to the city planning commission by submitting to such commission a map showing boundaries and building locations in accordance with the proposed division of land accompanied by an application which is in form and content provided for in this chapter. (Prior code § 18.10)

 

20.24.030 Planning commission authority.
The city planning commission shall be vested with the authority to approve the application for the division of land as provided for in this section subject to review and reversal and final determination by the city council in accordance with the procedures provided for in this chapter. (Prior code § 18.10)

 

20.24.040 Authority to impose conditions.
The approval of the application form for the division of land as provided for in this chapter by the city may be subject to conditions imposed upon the applicant by the city planning commission or by the city council to make or guarantee necessary improvements and dedication of land which will serve the best interests of the public health, safety and welfare and promote the orderly development and planning of the city. (Prior code § 18.10)

 

20.24.050 Improvements which may be required.
Among the improvements which may be required as a condition by the planning commission or the city council for the approval of a division of land as provided for in this chapter are the following:

(1)     Curbs, gutters, sidewalks and street pavements;

(2)     Sanitary sewer facilities and connections;

(3)     Rights-of-way and easements for the installation of drains, sewers, roads and alleys;

(4)     Drainage facilities; and

(5)     Water lines and appurtenances. (Prior code § 18.10)

 

20.24.060 Compliance cost.
If the installation of curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street pavements or dedication of easements and rights-of-way or other improvements or dedications are imposed as a condition to the approval of the division of land as provided for in this chapter, the cost of construction and compliance shall be secured in the same manner as provided for subdivision improvements as set forth in this title. (Prior code § 18.10)

 

20.24.070 Appeal to city council.
The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council for review and determination upon the request of the applicant or upon the motion of the city council. An appeal made by the applicant to the city council shall be made in writing to the city clerk within fifteen days of the time when the planning commission takes formal action by resolution on the application. If the applicant makes a timely request for appeal, the city clerk shall place the matter on the agenda for the meeting of the city council next following the receipt of the applicant’s request for appeal.

The city council may review the decision of the planning commission with respect to the application for the division of and as provided for in this chapter on its own motion made within fifteen days of the time when the planning commission takes formal action by resolution on the application. When the city council reviews the determination of the planning commission, it shall give the applicant not less than five days written notice thereof prior to taking final action thereon. (Prior code § 18.10)

 

20.24.080 Contents of application—Fee.
The application for a division of land as provided for in this chapter and which is to be first submitted to the office of the planning commission of the city shall consist of the following information and items:

(1)     Name and address of the applicant;

(2)     Name and address of the owner of the property which is proposed to be divided;

(3)     The street address and legal description of the property which is proposed to be divided;

(4)     The total square footage of the area to be divided; and

(5)     An original and three prints of maps showing that the proposed division of the lot into two or more parcels, the exact dimension and bearing of each line, the boundaries, the monument set, the building location and all other applicable natters and shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or a licensed surveyor.

A filing fee, as established by city council resolution, is to be paid with the application. If the lot split is not completed within one year from its approval, an extension may be granted upon a written application therefor and the payment of an additional fee, as established by city council resolution, for the filing of such application. (Ord. 1327 § 3, 1979; Ord. 1040 § 4, 1967; prior code § 18.10)

 

20.24.090 Division without compliance.
Any conveyance of property resulting in the division of land without compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be voidable by the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, his or her heirs and assigns, within one year from the execution of the instrument conveying title or interest in title or the contract of sale. Furthermore, if land shall be divided without complying with the provisions of this chapter, no building permit shall be issued for the improvement of any part of such land until the requirements of this chapter shall have been complied with. These sanctions are in addition to any other penalties provided by law. (Prior code § 18.10)

 

20.24.100 Approval and recording by county.
If the division of land is approved, the applicant shall cause the approved map to be approved by the county engineer and to be recorded with the county recorder. (Prior code § 18.10)

 

20.24.110 Application of Chapter 20.08.
Nothing to the contrary herein withstanding, the terms and provisions of Chapter 20.08, shall not apply to the divisions of land made for the purpose of adjusting boundaries and not resulting in the creation of a new and separate building site. (Ord. 983 § 1, 1965; prior code § 18.10)

Chapter 20.28 UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
20.28.010 Underground wiring in future subdivisions required.
The city council does hereby find and determine that the public interest requires that all facilities and wires for applying and distributing electrical energy and service, including telephone, telegraph, and cable television service, to be constructed in the city upon property which is yet undeveloped and which will be subdivided for residential purposes in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act, shall be placed underground for the following reasons:

(1)     In areas adjacent to existing or committed underground development, there are hazards to the safety of children by the flying of kites for they have no knowledge of overhead utility wires nearby;

(2)     That in event of wind, rain or electrical storm overhead wires increase the danger of fires;

(3)     Overhead wires create additional hazards to the general public, fire fighters, tree maintenance men and construction personnel using cranes, booms and other construction equipment.

Therefore, the construction of underground utilities promote and preserve the health, safety and general welfare of the public and assure the orderly development of the city. (Ord. 955 § 1, 1964; prior code § 18.11)

 

20.28.020 Exceptions—Special permission.
All facilities and wires for the supply and distribution of electrical energy, telephone, telegraph and cable television service to be constructed in the city on all undeveloped property which is subdivided in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act for residential purposes shall be placed underground unless special permission to construct the facility above the ground is granted as hereinafter provided. For the purposes of this chapter, appurtenances and associated equipment such as, but not limited to, surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts in an underground system may be placed above ground. Any person subdividing land shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies involved to provide for the underground installation of these facilities. (Ord. 955 § 1, 1964; prior code § 18.11)

 

20.28.030 Application for exception—Hearing.
Where the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would result in undue hardship, property owners may make application for exception from the provisions of this chapter in the following manner:

(1)     Written application shall be filed with the planning department;

(2)     Such application shall include all information necessary to properly apprise the planning commission of the circumstances existing which require such an exception. A copy of said application shall be forwarded to the city engineer for his or her report and recommendation;

(3)     Within thirty days after the filing of such application, the planning commission shall conduct a hearing on the application. Upon completion of the hearing, the planning commission shall make its recommendation to the city council;

(4)     Within thirty days after the receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission, the city council shall conduct a hearing thereon and may grant or deny the application. (Ord. 955 § 1, 1964; prior code § 1811)

 

20.28.040 Application of chapter.
This chapter shall not apply to wires of continuous lead when such wires originate in an area in which overhead facilities are not prohibited. (Ord. 955 § 1, 1964; prior code § 18.11)

Chapter 20.32 APPROVAL OF FINAL MAP
20.32.010 City council to approve.
When all of the foregoing requirements have been complied with and when all the certificates which appear on the final map, except the approval certificate of the city council, have been signed and, where necessary, acknowledged, the final map may be filed for presentation to the council for approval; provided, however, that none of such certificates shall predate the time when the tentative map shall have been approved by the council.

If a final map is not submitted and approved within one year from the approval of the tentative map, the subdivider may apply for an extension of time within which to apply for the approval of the final map if such application is made before the year has expired from the approval of the tentative map. Any application for an extension of time within which to submit a final map for approval, shall be submitted in writing and accompanied by the payment of a plan checking fee as established by city council resolution. (Ord. 1561 § 2, 1989; Ord. 1040 § 6, 1967; prior code § 18.8)

 

20.32.020 Notification of disapproval.
If the planning commission shall either conditionally approve or disapprove the map of the subdivision it may report its action to the subdivider with the kind, nature and extent of the improvements commended by the commission to be required. (Prior code § 18.3)

Chapter 20.34 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
20.34.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a method whereby lot lines may be adjusted between four or fewer existing adjoining parcels, up to a maximum of four parcels. Not lot line adjustment may take place where the effect is to create any additional parcels. (Ord. 1760 § 2, 2002)

 

20.34.020 Definition.
A “lot line adjustment” means the adjustment or relocation of any property line between four or fewer existing adjoining, legally recognized parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjoining parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created. (Ord. 1760 § 4, 2002)

 

20.34.030 General requirements.
Any persons who desire to obtain approval of a lot line adjustment shall submit an application on forms obtained from the department of planning and redevelopment. The application for a lot line adjustment requires the completion of a form regarding information of ownership and legal descriptions of the properties involved, the payment of a processing fee, and the preparation of a map which illustrates the proposed adjustment.

The required map shall contain the following information:

(1)     Applicant’s name, address and phone number;

(2)     Legal description of both properties as they exist and how they will exist following the adjustment;

(3)     Map of the property with the location of all buildings, structures, streets and alleys;

(4)     Location and width of all easements upon or abutting the properties;

(5)     The location of the proposed lot line adjustment, along with all dimensions and bearings;

(6)     Scale; north arrow and the date of preparation of the map.

The director of planning and redevelopment may, at his or her discretion, require a survey of the properties involved, if he or she finds it necessary in order to provide an adequate description of the subject properties. (Ord. 1450 § 1, 1985)

 

20.34.040 Requirements for approval.
The director of planning and redevelopment may approve, or conditionally approve a request for a lot line adjustment if he or she finds that:

(1)     No street or alley dedication or improvements are necessary to properly service the properties involved;

(2)     The adjustment does not substantially change the size or shape of the lots involved;

(3)     The lot line adjustment complies with the general plan of the city;

(4)     The lot line adjustment, as proposed, will comply with all zoning regulations of the city.

If the director of planning and redevelopment finds any of the foregoing facts not present, he or she shall deny the lot line adjustment. In case of denial, the applicants may appeal the decision to the planning commission within fifteen days of the date of such decision. (Ord. 1450 § 1, 1985)

 

20.34.050 Recordation.
Upon approval of a lot line adjustment, the director of planning and redevelopment shall authorize a certificate of compliance to be filed for recording with the county recorder. The certificate of compliance shall state the legal description of the parcels and the compliance with all applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and the Glendora Municipal Code. The lot line adjustment shall be reflected in a deed, which shall be approved by the director of planning and redevelopment, and shall be recorded with the county recorder. (Ord. 1760 § 6, 2002)

 

20.34.060 Filing fee.
The application for a lot line adjustment shall be accompanied by the payment of a filing fee as established by city council resolution. (Ord. 1450 § 1, 1985)

Chapter 20.36 LOT MERGERS
20.36.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a method whereby a maximum of two contiguous parcels under the same ownership may be merged into one lot. No merger may take place where the effect is to create any additional parcels. (Ord. 1474 § 1, 1985)

 

20.36.020 Definition.
A “lot merger” means the consolidation of a maximum of two legally recognized contiguous parcels into one parcel. (Ord. 1474 § 1, 1985)

 

20.36.030 General requirements.
Any property owner who desires to obtain a merger of two legally recognized contiguous parcels shall submit an application on forms obtained from the department of planning and redevelopment. The application form shall require information regarding ownership and legal descriptions of the properties involved, and shall be accompanied by a map which illustrates the proposed merger and a filing fee, established by resolution of the city council.

The required map shall contain the following information:

(1)     The applicant’s name, address and phone number.

(2)     The legal description of all properties as they presently exist and how they will exist following the merger.

(3)     The location of all buildings, existing and proposed streets and alleys.

(4)     Location and width of all easements upon or abutting the properties.

(5)     A scale, north arrow and the date of preparation.

The director of planning and redevelopment may, at his or her discretion, require a survey of the properties involved, by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, if he or she finds it necessary in order to provide an adequate description of the subject properties. (Ord. 1474 § 1, 1985)

 

20.36.040 Requirements for approval.
The director of planning and redevelopment may approve, or conditionally approve, a request for a lot merger if he or she finds that:

(1)     No off-site dedication or improvement is necessary to properly service the properties involved.

(2)     The lot merger complies with the general plan and any applicable specific plan of the city.

(3)     The lot merger complies with all zoning regulations of the city.

If the director of planning and redevelopment finds any of the foregoing facts not present, he or she shall deny the lot merger. In case of denial, the applicant may appeal the decision to the planning commission within fifteen days of the date of such decision. Any such appeal shall be taken by filing a letter of appeal with the secretary to the planning commission. Said letter of appeal shall indicate wherein the director of planning and redevelopment erred, or such other grounds upon which the appeal is based. The commission shall hear the appeal within thirty days after the letter is filed. The applicant shall be given at least ten days written notice of the time and date of the hearing. The decision of the planning commission shall be final. (Ord. 1474 § 1, 1985)

 

20.36.050 Recordation.
Upon approval of a lot merger, the director of planning and redevelopment shall file an instrument for record by the county recorder. The instrument shall state the legal description of the merged parcels and the compliance with all applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and the Glendora Municipal Code, and shall be signed by the director of planning and redevelopment. A certificate shall appear on the instrument signed and acknowledged by all parties having record title interest in the parcels being merged consenting to the preparation and filing of the lot merger. (Ord. 1474 § 1, 1985)

 

20.36.060 Filing fee.
The application for a lot merger shall be accompanied by the payment of a filing fee as established by city council resolution. (Ord. 1561 § 3, 1989)

Chapter 20.38 PARK AND RECREATION REQUIREMENT FOR NEW SUBDIVISIONS
20.38.010 Intent and purpose.
The city council declares that the intent and purpose of this chapter is to provide a procedure by which new subdivisions will bear their appropriate share of the cost of acquisition, development, rehabilitation and expansion of the park and recreational facilities of the community. The continued development of residential subdivisions in the city, with the attendant increase in the number of people living in the city, has created the need to acquire and develop new, and rehabilitate and expand existing public parks, playgrounds and recreational facilities and to provide the means by which to finance such works of improvement. (Ord. 1571 § 3, 1990)

 

20.38.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

(1)     “Dwelling unit” means each single-family, two-family or multiple-family residence as defined in Title 21 of this code.

(2)     “Mobile home space” means each space, or area in a mobile home park that is rented or leased for use and occupancy by a mobile home as defined in Title 21 of this code. (Ord. 1571 § 3, 1990)

 

20.38.030 Land dedication or in-lieu fee required.
(a)     In addition to any other fee, license, or permit prescribed by this code, land or a fee in lieu of land for park or recreation shall be dedicated or paid to the city pursuant to this chapter prior to release by the city of the final tract map or parcel map for recordation. At the time of tentative tract map or parcel map approval, the city council shall determine whether to require dedication of land, payment of the in-lieu fee or a combination of both.

(b)     When a subdivision contains fifty lots or less, only the payment of the in-lieu fee shall be required. This subsection shall not apply to a condominium project, stock cooperative or community apartment project that exceeds fifty dwelling units, not withstanding that the number of lots may be less than fifty. (Ord. 1571 § 3, 1990)

 

20.38.040 Standards for land dedication.
(a)     Park Land Dedication Standards. The amount of land required to be dedicated shall be equal to five acres per one thousand persons residing within the subdivision. The number of persons per dwelling unit or mobilehome space shall be presumed to be equal to the average household size as identified in the most recent available federal census. The total number of dwelling units or mobilehome spaces shall be the number of such units or spaces included in the subdivision at the time the tentative tract map or parcel map is approved.

 

(b)     Park Land Dedication Formula. The formula for determining the amount of park land to be dedicated to the city per subdivision is as follows:

Acres of land dedication = 5 x number of persons per dwelling unit or mobile home space x number of dwelling units or mobile home spaces/1000.

(c)     Acceptance of Land Dedication. In the event that land is required to be dedicated to the city, the requirement shall be satisfied only by land that is acceptable to the city at the time the tentative tract map or parcel map is approved. The acceptance of land shall be based on, but not limited to, the following:

(1)     The recreational portions of the open space and land use elements of the city’s general plan;

(2)     The topography, geology, access and location of the land in the subdivision available for dedication; and

(3)     The size and shape of the subdivision and of the land in the subdivision available for dedication.

(d)     Fee or Land Dedication Required on Less Than Fifty Parcels. When a condominium project, stock cooperative or community apartment project exceeds fifty dwelling units, the city council may require land dedication and/or payment of fees not withstanding that the number of parcels may be less than fifty. (Ord. 1571 § 3, 1990)

 

20.38.050 Establishment of fee in lieu of land dedication.
The fee to be paid in lieu of land dedication shall be as established by resolution of the city council. The amount of the in lieu fee shall not exceed the value of the amount of land which would otherwise be required to be dedicated pursuant to this chapter and shall be based on the following standards:

(1)     The estimated density of the subdivision, as determined by the city. Density shall fluctuate by zone classification and shall be expressed as the maximum number of dwelling units per gross acre permitted by the city’s zoning ordinance for the particular zone classification not to exceed thirteen dwelling units per gross acre for any zone;

(2)     The estimated value of the land, per lot prior to development, as determined by the city. Value may fluctuate by zone classification;

(3)     The required land dedication, provided that council may establish fees based on a land dedication of less than the ratio of five acres per one thousand residents in order to establish a reasonable fee; and

(4)     The formula to be used in establishing in lieu fees is as follows:

{(Land value per lot x Units per acre)/43,560} x {(Acres of required land dedication x 43,560 x Population per household)/ 1000} = Fee per dwelling unit or mobilehome space. (Ord. 1571 § 3, 1990)

 

20.38.060 Credit for private open space.
(a)     If the subdivider agrees to provide park and recreational improvements to the dedicated land, the value of the improvements, together with the equipment located thereon, shall be credited against the requirement for the dedication of land or payment of an in-lieu fee.

(b)     Where private open space land in a real estate development stock cooperative, or community apartment project, as defined in Sections 11003, 11003.1, 11003.2, 11003.4 and 11004, respectively, of the Business and Professions Code, or a condominium, as defined in Section 783 of the Civil Code, is to be improved by the subdivider for active recreational uses and such land and improvements are to be owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision, fifty percent of the value of the land and improvements shall be credited against the requirement for the dedication of land or the payment of an in-lieu fee, provided the following standards are met:

(1)     That yards, court areas, setbacks and other open areas required to be maintained by the zoning and building regulations are not included in the computation of such private open space land;

(2)     That the private ownership and maintenance of the land and associated improvements will be adequately provided for by written agreement;

(3)     That the use of the land and associated improvements will be restricted for active recreational uses by recorded covenants that run with the land in favor of the future owners of lots within the subdivision and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the city council;

(4)     The city council finds that the land is adaptable for active recreational uses, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access, and location; and

(5)     The city council approves the associated improvements proposed for the land. (Ord. 1571 § 3, 1990)

 

20.38.070 Not applicable to certain subdivisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:

(1)     Subdivisions Containing Five or Less Parcels and Not Used for Residential Purposes. However, a condition may be placed on the approval of such parcel map that if a building permit is requested for construction of a residential structure or structures on one or more of the parcels within four years, the in-lieu fee in effect at the time application for the building permit is made may be required to be paid by the owner of such parcel as a condition to the issuance of such permit;

(2)     Commercial, industrial or manufacturing subdivisions;

(3)     Condominium projects or stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are added. (Ord. 1571 § 3, 1990)

 

20.38.080 Restriction on use of fees.
All of the fees collected pursuant to this chapter and any interest earned thereon shall be deposited in a capital improvement fund for park and recreation purposes and shall be used solely for capital outlay expenditures such as, but not limited to, the following:

(1)     Acquisition and development of parks and recreation facilities;

(2)     Acquisition, development and preservation of open space for outdoor recreation, including areas of scenic, historic or cultural value;

(3)     Acquisition and development of bicycle trails, riding trails and other types of trails for recreational use; and

(4)     Rehabilitation or expansion of existing parks, recreational facilities, recreational open space and trails. (Ord. 1571 § 3, 1990)

 

20.38.090 Refund of fee.
If any fee collected under this chapter is not committed within five years of the date the fee is deposited with the city or the issuance of building permits on one-half of the lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later, the city shall refund to the then current record owner or owners of the subdivision in the same proportion that the size of their lot bears to the total area of all lots within the subdivision the uncommitted portion of the fee, and any interest accrued thereon. The city shall refund the fees by direct payment. (Ord. 1571 § 3, 1990)

Title 21 ZONING
Chapter 21.01 ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 21.02 PERMITS
Chapter 21.03 GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter 21.04 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Chapter 21.05 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONES
Chapter 21.06 SPECIAL USE ZONES
Chapter 21.07 OVERLAY ZONES
Chapter 21.08 GLENDORA COMMERCIAL SPECIFIC PLAN
Chapter 21.09 THE VILLAGE ON THE GREEN SPECIFIC PLAN
Chapter 21.10 ROUTE 66 CORRIDOR SPECIFIC PLAN
Chapter 21.11 DIAMOND RIDGE SPECIFIC PLAN
Chapter 21.12 WILLIAM LYON HOMES ARBORETA SPECIFIC PLAN
Chapter 21.13 MONROVIA NURSERY SPECIFIC PLAN
Chapter 21.14 ARROW HIGHWAY SPECIFIC PLAN
Appendix 21.A TABLES
Appendix 21.B DESIGN GUIDELINES

Chapter 21.01 ADMINISTRATION
21.01.010 Purpose.
A.      Title. This title is known as the zoning ordinance of the city of Glendora.

B.      Adoption. This title is adopted in accordance with the authority granted by Section 65800 et seq., of the Government Code of the state of California.

C.      Purpose. The standards adopted in this title are for the protection and promotion of the public health, safety, welfare, and more particularly:

1.       To implement the policies and programs of the general plan and to guide and manage the future development of the city in accordance with such plan;

2.       To protect the physical, social and economic stability of residential, commercial, industrial and open space land uses within the city;

3.       To reduce and minimize hazards to the public resulting from inappropriate location, use or design of structures and other improvements;

4.       To attain the physical, social and economic benefits resulting from comprehensive and orderly land use and development;

5.       To maintain, protect and preserve the environment for the benefit and enjoyment of the community and future residents;

6.       To conserve nonrenewable resources through design;

7.       To protect and promote the aesthetic qualities of the manmade and natural environment. (Ord. 1618 § 1 Exh. A, 1993)

 

21.01.020 Definitions.
A.      Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote consistency in the application and interpretation of regulations throughout this title. The meaning and construction of words and phrases defined in this section are to apply throughout this title.

B.      General Interpretation.

1.       The word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary. The word “may” is permissive and discretionary.

2.       In the case of any differences of meaning or implication between the text of any provision and any caption or illustration, the text shall control.

3.       Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words in the present and the future tense are interchangeable and words in the singular and plural are interchangeable.

4.       The word “person” shall include natural individuals and artificial entities.

5.       The word “use” shall include alter, arrange, build, construct, convert, design, develop, enlarge, erect, establish, expand, lease, maintain, occupy, operate, rent or intend to use.

C.      Definitions.

“Access” means entrance to or exit from a parcel of land or use from a right-of-way or easement.

“Accessory dwelling unit” means an attached or detached dwelling unit that provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons and is located on lot with a proposed or existing primary residence. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family or multifamily dwelling is or will be situated. An accessory dwelling unit also includes the following: (1) an efficiency unit as defined in Section 17958.1 of the Health and Safety Code; (2) a manufactured home, as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code.

“Accessory use” means a use that is subordinate and incidental to a principal use on a parcel of land, provided, that such use does not alter the principal use of the land.

“Addition” means any construction that increases the size of a structure.

“Adult business” means any establishment that offers its patrons—as a substantial or significant portion of the business—materials, services or entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activity or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such materials, services or entertainment. Such establishments may include, but not be limited to, any of the following:

1.       Adult Bookstore. An establishment having, as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, material that is characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activity or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material.

2.       Adult Hotel or Motel. A hotel or a motel where material is presented through closed circuit television, cable television or any other form of media or telecommunications that is characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activity or specified anatomical areas.

3.       Adult Theater. An establishment where there is presented live entertainment, motion pictures, slide photographs, closed circuit television, cable television or any other form of media or telecommunications that is characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activity or specified anatomical areas.

4.       Modeling Studio. An establishment where figure models display specified anatomical areas to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by persons paying consideration or gratuity.

For the purpose of the definition of “adult business”:

1.       “Material” includes books, drawing, magazines, motion pictures, newspapers, paintings, pamphlets, periodicals, photographs, prints, video cassettes or any other similar matter or combination.

2.       “Specified anatomical areas” includes less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock and female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola and human male genitals in a discernibly enlarged state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

3.       “Specified sexual activities” includes human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or enlargement; actual or simulated acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breasts.

“Aisle” means a driveway that abuts and provides direct access to parking stalls.

“Alteration” means any change in the arrangement of the supporting members of a structure or change in the appearance of a structure, but excluding work for which a building permit is not required.

“Alteration (of a preserved feature of a historic resource or landmark)” means any exterior change in a preserved feature of a historic resource or landmark, such as color, texture, topography, grading, plant materials, paving, natural features, archaeological areas, signs, fixtures, furniture, walls, fences, stairs, etc.

“Amusement device” means any device that provides entertainment in exchange for payment. This definition shall not include jukeboxes, telephone devices or machines that dispense food, beverages or merchandise.

“Antenna” means any system of wires, poles, rods, towers, whips, reflecting discs, dishes or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio, telephone, television or other audio or visual signals.

“Antique store” means a retail business engaged in buying and selling antiques which consist of old objects such as china or furniture considered valuable because of their age, beauty or rarity. All business activity and storage shall be conducted within a building.

“Apartment” means a room or set of rooms leased as a dwelling unit. A building containing several individual apartments.

“Applicable development” means a development project that meets the threshold criteria contained in Section 21.03.070(C)(1), (2) and (3), Trip Reduction and Travel Demand Management Measures.

“Application workshop” means an informal workshop to familiarize applicants and property owners with the regulations and procedures that apply to the projects.

“Arcade” means an establishment containing three or more amusement devices.

“Architectural feature” means a physical element embodying the style, design, arrangement and components of an improvement that provides variation or relief, including, but not limited to, the kind, color and texture of building materials and the type and style of windows, doors, lights, signs and other fixtures added to such improvement.

Area, Gross. “Gross area” means the total land area of a parcel of land before rights-of-way, easements and other areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use are deducted.

Area, Net. “Net area” means the total land area of a parcel of land after rights-of-way, easements and other areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use are deducted.

“Basement” means a floor level partly or wholly underground.

“Beauty/health spa” means a commercial establishment, such as a (nonmedical) health spa or day spa, providing a comprehensive range of beauty, health, relaxation, and personal care and grooming services including, but not limited to, hair cutting and styling, facials and skin care, skin treatments, aesthetician services, nail care, hair removal, electrolysis, cosmetics, tanning, body wrapping, and weight management. A “beauty/health spa” does not include massage/massage therapy as defined in Title 5 Chapter 1.10 Massage Establishments.

“Beauty shop” means a commercial establishment that sells beauty and health products and/or provides personal care and grooming services such as hair cutting and styling, nail care, facial hair removal, and make-up application to the face. A “beauty shop” does not include electrolysis, facials, skin care and skin treatment services, massage, reflexology, tanning, body wrapping or weight management.

“Bedroom” means a private room furnished with a bed and intended primarily for sleeping, being separated from other rooms by a door and generally having a closet or storage nook.

“Boarding house” means a residence or dwelling, other than a hotel, wherein three or more rooms, with or without individual or group cooking facilities, are rented to individuals under separate rental agreements or lease, either written or oral, whether or not an owner, agent, or rental manager is in residence.

“Body art” means to adorn the body through the permanent application of a tattoo or insertion of an object, such as jewelry, into a hole (pierced in the body) for display purposes. “Body art” is the collective term for any single activity or combination of activities defined as tattooing, body piercing or permanent cosmetics.

“Body art establishment” means any business, facility, room, or any portion thereof, used or operated as a tattoo parlor or as a body piercing parlor or as a permanent cosmetics parlor.

“Building” means any structure used to support or shelter any use or occupancy.

Building, Accessory—Attached. “Attached accessory building” means a building that is subordinate and attached or closer than six feet to a main building.

Building, Accessory—Detached. “Detached accessory building” means a building that is subordinate and located at least six feet from a main building.

Building, Main. “Main building” means a building used for principal uses.

“Building official” means the person designated by the city to administer and enforce the provisions of the building code.

“Building restriction area” means those land areas identified on a final subdivision map or parcel map approved by the city to remain in their natural state to the greatest extent feasible and to prohibit all structures or grading in those land areas.

“Bus pool” means a vehicle carrying sixteen or more passengers commuting on a regular basis to and from work with a fixed route and according to a fixed schedule.

“California licensed medical professional” means a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, acupuncturist, osteopath, nurse, or physical therapist who is duly licensed to practice his or her respective profession in the state of California and who performs activities encompassed by such professional license.

“Car pool” means a vehicle carrying two to six people commuting to and from work on a regular basis.

“Carport” means a structure consisting of a roof and supporting members, which is not enclosed on all sides and is designed or used for the parking of motor vehicles.

“Church” means a use located in a permanent building and providing regular organized religious worship and religious education incidental to, but excluding a private education facility. A property tax exemption obtained pursuant to the Constitution of the state of California and of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California shall constitute prima facie (obvious) evidence that such use is a church.

“City” means the city of Glendora.

“Coin dealer” means any person, firm, partnership, or corporation whose principal business is the buying, selling and trading of coins, monetized bullion, or commercial grade ingots of gold, silver or other precious metals.

“Commercial” means carrying on a trade, commerce and/or service for the purpose of providing substance or profit and into which the elements of bargain, sale, barter, exchange or traffic enter.

“Commercial grade ingots” mean 0.99 fine ingots of gold, silver, or platinum, or 0.925 fine sterling silver art bars and medallions, provided that the ingots, art bars, and medallions are marked by the refiner or fabricator as to their assay fineness.

“Commission” means the planning commission of the city of Glendora.

“Community care facility” means a facility licensed by the state or county, which provides lodging, meals, nursing, dietary or other personal services to convalescents, invalids or the elderly for six or more patients, but does not include surgery or the care of substance abusers or persons with communicable diseases.

“Construction” means the placement of construction materials in their permanent positions fastened in a permanent manner; excavation for a basement; or removal of an existing structure prior to construction.

Convalescent Facility. See definition for “Community care facility.”

“Convenience store” means a commercial establishment with retail sales of groceries, staples, sundry items and/or alcoholic beverages within a structure of less than five thousand square feet of gross floor area.

“Convenience store (in conjunction with a service station)” means a building or portion of a building that is devoted to the sales of items which may include, but not be limited to, food, dairy and tobacco products; canned goods; cosmetics; nonprescription drugs; plastic goods; newspapers; periodicals; automobile fluids; and automobile accessories.

“Convenience zone” means an area designated by the State Department of Conservation, Division of Recycling within a one-half mile radius of a host use.

“Council” means the city council of the city of Glendora.

“County” means the county of Los Angeles.

“Cultural resource” means an improvement or site of scientific, community, aesthetic, educational, archaeological, cultural, architectural or historical significance that may be recommended as a preserved feature of a historic resource or landmark.

 

“Dancing” means any dance where two or more persons dance in or upon any premises to which the public is admitted, or at an event held by a dancing club or a bona fide memorial, fraternal, or civic association, or held under the auspices of a school, public recreation, or community service organization.

 

“Deck” means any structure which serves as a raised horizontal platform on floor constructed of wood or other materials, without enclosing walls or roof. The structure may be detached or attached to another structure (residential, commercial, educational, industrial, etc.).

“Development” means any manmade change to real property, including but not limited to, construction, grading or paving.

“Diameter at breast height (DBH)” means a measure of the diameter of a tree trunk at four and one-half feet above grade.

“Director” means the planning director of the city of Glendora or designee.

“Display area” means the amount of shelf space, whose minimum dimension is fifteen inches and is calculated in lineal feet, for the display of products accessible for purchase by the public.

“Drive-in business” means a commercial enterprise designed or operated so as to enable persons to receive service or purchase or consume goods while remaining within a motor vehicle.

Drive-Through Business. See definition for “Drive-in business.”

“Driveway” means a permanently surfaced area providing direct vehicular access between a street and an off-street parking or loading area.

“Dwelling unit” means a house, an apartment, employee housing, a mobile home, a group of rooms or a single room that is occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters in which the occupants live and eat separately from any other people in the building and which have direct access from the outside of the building or through a common hall.

“Ecological restoration project” means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.

“Emergency shelter” means housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay.

“Employee housing” means accommodations for six or fewer employees, as described, defined, and regulated by the Employee Housing Act, Section 17000 et seq. of the California Health and Safety Code.

“Entertainment” means and includes any activity planned or engaged in or permitted to occur for the purpose of or resulting in attracting, amusing, diverting or retaining the attention of or participation of patrons or customers at any public place, whether or not food or beverages are sold, offered for sale, or given away, and shall specifically include, but not be limited to, any act, play, performance, show, exhibition, dancing, concert, multi-media or telecommunication entertainment, contest or similar activity. “Entertainment” shall not include electronically reproduced music provided solely for ambience.

Floor Area, Gross. “Gross floor area” means the area of the ground floor and any additional stories of a building. Measurements shall be taken from the exterior faces of walls.

“Floor area ratio (FAR)” means the combined floor area of all stories of all buildings on a lot divided by the lot area. The area of an attached garage, up to a maximum of four hundred square feet, shall not be included in the calculation of floor area ratio.

“Fortunetelling” means and includes the telling of fortunes, forecasting of future events or furnishing of any information not otherwise obtainable by the ordinary process of knowledge, by means of any occult or psychic power, faculty or force, including, but not limited to, divination, clairvoyance, clairaudience, cartomancy, psychometry, phrenology, spirits, horoscopic reading, tea leaves or other such reading, mediumship, seership, prophecy, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mind-reading, telepathy or other craft, art, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or substance, crystal gazing, oriental mysteries or magic, of any kind or nature. “Tell fortunes” means to actively conduct, engage in, carry on or participate in fortunetelling for pay.

“Fortunetelling” does not include any of the following persons or activities:

1.       Any person who engages solely in the business of entertaining the public by fortunetelling at a public place and within the presence and hearing of all other persons in attendance, and at which no questions are an swered as part of such entertainment except in a manner to permit all persons present at such public place to hear such answers;

2.       Any person who conducts, engages in, carries on or participates in any religious ceremony or service when such person holds a certificate of ordination as a minister, missionary, medium, healer, or clairvoyant (hereinafter collectively referred to as minister) from any bona fide church or religious association maintaining a church and holding regular services and having a creed or set of religious principles that is recognized by all churches of like faith, provided that the fees, gratuities, emoluments and profits thereof shall be regularly accounted for and paid solely to, or for the benefit of, the bona fide church or religious association, as defined in this subsection, except that the bona fide church or religious association, as defined in this exception, may pay to its minister a salary or compensation based upon a percentage basis, pursuant to an agreement between the church and the minister which is embodied in a resolution and transcribed in the minutes of such church or religious association.

“Garage” means a fully enclosed accessory structure used for the parking of motor vehicles.

Garage, Subterranean. “Subterranean garage” means a garage that has a vertical measurement from the upper surface of the garage floor to the ceiling of the garage not exceeding eight feet, is attached to the main building, is below finish grade except the main entrance and is not visible from public rights-of-way.

“Gated community” means a residential neighborhood where accessibility is controlled by means of a gate, barrier or other similar improvements within or across a privately maintained right-of-way.

“General plan” means a comprehensive declaration of goals, objectives, policies and programs for the development of the city, which includes diagrams, maps and text that have been adopted by the city council.

“Gold and silver dealer” commonly referred to as “cash for gold,” means the operation of a gold and silver business, either stand alone or in conjunction with the operation of a retail store (e.g., jewelry store, or other similar store) which results in twenty percent or more of their gross business receipts being derived from the purchase of gold or silver jewelry or other similar items (including, but not limited to, art objects, flatware, tableware or other personal household items). Gold and silver dealers are required to obtain a license from the police chief and file reports pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Sections 21625 through 21647. Gold and silver dealer does not include:

1.       Coin dealers;

2.       Participants at gun shows or events who are not a “gun show trader”;

3.       Antique stores;

4.       Auctioneers;

5.       Reconditioning and sale of household appliances.

“Grade” means the vertical elevation of the ground surface.

Grade, Existing. “Existing grade” means the grade prior to grading.

Grade, Finish. “Finish grade” means the grade after grading, which conforms to the approved grading or drainage plan.

“Grading” means any excavating, filling, stripping or stockpiling of earth.

Grade, Rough. “Rough grade” means the grade after grading, which approximately conforms to the approved grading or drainage plan.

 “Guest house” means living quarters within an accessory building for the exclusive use of temporary, nonpaying guests of the resident family and limited to one bedroom and a three-quarter bathroom (sink, toilet and bath or shower only) with no kitchen facilities and no additional sinks allowed.

“Gym” means a commercial fitness center, athletic club, or health club for the purpose of exercising and improving physical fitness and health. A “gym” includes, but is not limited to, group exercise facilities such as exercise machines/equipment, weights, training/classrooms, and/or the sale of health/fitness products, and can include massage as an accessory use with a CUP.

“Hazardous materials” means any substance that appears on the “List of Acutely Toxic Chemicals” maintained by the Environmental Protection Agency or the “List of Hazardous Materials” maintained by the CAL OSHA director.

Height, Building. “Building height” means the vertical distance between any point on the roof and the exterior finish grade at the nearest exterior wall of the building, except that if the exterior wall contains the main entrance to a subterranean garage, the vertical distance shall be measured to the ceiling of the garage. When two or more walls are an equal distance from the point of measurement, the lowest finish grade elevation shall be used.

Height, Fence or Wall. “Fence or wall height” means the vertical distance between the top of a fence or wall and the finish grade level measured on the highest grade level immediately adjacent to the base of the fence or wall.

“Historic resource” means a cultural resource that has received such designation by resolution of the commission. This designation requires the planning commission review of all alterations that affect the exterior appearance of any preserved feature and requires the issuance of a building permit.

“Home occupation” means a commercial enterprise conducted as an accessory use on a residentially zoned lot.

“Hospital” means a facility providing health, medical or surgical care with inpatient facilities.

“Host use” means a full-line, self-service retail store with gross annual sales of two million dollars or more, sells a line of dry grocery, and is the center of a convenience zone as used in Section 21.03.080 of this title.

“Hotel” means any building or portion containing rooms that are occupied for sleeping purposes by transient guests for compensation, whose stay shall not exceed thirty consecutive days or be less than one day.

“Household” means all the persons who occupy a dwelling unit. The occupants may be a single-family, two or more families living together, one person living alone or any other group of related or unrelated persons who share living arrangements.

“Hydrozone” means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs that are served by a valve or set of valves with the same schedule. A hydrozone may be irrigated or nonirrigated. For example, a naturalized area planted with native vegetation that will not need supplemental irrigation once established is a nonirrigated hydrozone.

“Improvement” means any manmade, immovable item that is part of, located on, or affixed to a lot.

“Infiltration rate” means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time.

“Junior accessory dwelling unit” means a dwelling unit that is no more than five hundred square feet in size and contained entirely within the walls of a single-family residence.

“Kitchen” means any room or any portion of a structure designed to be used for cooking and preparing food.

“Landmark” means a cultural resource that has received such designation by resolution of the council. This designation requires the planning commission review of all alterations that affect the exterior appearance of any preserved feature and prohibits their demolition or relocation outside city boundaries.

“Landscaped area” means the entire lot area less the building footprints, driveways, parking areas and hardscapes such as decks, patios and other nonporous areas. Water features are considered landscaped areas. Areas dedicated to edible plants, such as orchards or vegetable gardens, are not considered landscaped areas.

“Landscaping” means the planting, irrigation and maintenance of trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers, flowers or lawns and which may include other features such as earth mounds, stone, masonry, pools, art works, screens, walls, fences and benches.

“Living area” means the interior habitable area of a dwelling unit, including basements and attics, excluding a garage.

“Loading space” means an off-street space for the loading or unloading of commercial vehicles.

“Lot” means a designated parcel of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law.

“Lot coverage” means the area of a lot covered by buildings, structures and other impervious surfaces.

“Lot depth” means the distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and the midpoint of the rear lot line.

Lot Line, Front. “Front lot line” means the property line along the narrowest street frontage of a lot or the property line toward which the front of an existing residence is oriented.

Lot Line, Rear. “Rear lot line” means a lot line that is opposite and the most distant from the front lot line. In the case of an irregular-shaped lot, a line ten feet in length within the lot that is parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.

Lot Line, Side. “Side lot line” means any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line.

“Lot width” means the distance between the side lot lines measured along the required front setback line.

“Marijuana” means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not, and includes Cannabis or Cannabis-infused products used for medicinal purposes in accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5.

“Marijuana dispensary” means any facility or location, whether fixed or mobile, where marijuana or marijuana-infused products such as tinctures, baked goods, or other consumable products are cultivated, manufactured, or by any means transported or delivered, or arranged to be transported or delivered, made available to or distributed by or distributed to one or more of the following: a primary caregiver, a qualified patient, or a person with an identification card. The terms “primary caregiver,” “qualified patient” and “person with an identification card” as used within this definition shall be identified in strict accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq., inclusive of California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7.

Massage. See Section 5.10.010(4) for definition.

Massage Establishment. See Section 5.10.010(3) for definition.

Massage Therapy. See Section 5.10.010(12) for definition.

“Medical office/medical clinic” means a facility, commercial office or clinic in which a “California licensed medical professional,” as defined by Title 21, Zoning, Section 21.01.020, Definitions, of the Glendora Municipal Code, practices his or her respective profession and performs activities encompassed by such professional license, including, but not limited to, seeing patients and providing health, medical, or surgical treatment for outpatients only, including, but not limited to, massage therapy conducted by a California licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor, acupuncturist, osteopath, nurse or physical therapist (“California licensed medical professional”).

“Mined-land reclamation project” means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975.

“Mobile recycling unit” means an automobile, truck, trailer or van, licensed by the Department of Motor Vehicles that is used for the collection of recyclable materials and the bins, boxes or containers transported by such vehicles.

Motel. See definition for “Hotel.”

“Mulch” means any material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, manure or other materials left loose and applied to the soil surface to reduce evaporation.

“Nonconforming improvement” means an improvement that conformed to applicable laws when constructed, but which fails to conform to any one or more of the applicable standards of this title. See definition for “Improvement.”

“Nonconforming lot” means a lot that conformed to applicable laws when created, but which fails to conform to any one or more of the applicable standards of this title for size, dimension, or configuration. See definition for “Lot.”

“Nonconforming structure” means a structure that conformed to applicable laws when constructed, but which fails to conform to any one or more of the applicable standards of this title. See definition for “Structure.”

“Nonconforming use” means a use that conformed to applicable laws when initiated, but which fails to conform to the permitted uses of the underlying zone and the applicable provisions of this title.

“Nozzle” means a device used to transmit motor fuels from a storage tank to a motor vehicle or other approved storage container.

Nursing facility. See definition for “Community care facility.”

Open Space, Common. “Common open space” means an area intended for the nonexclusive use of the occupants of more than one dwelling unit and which may include recreation facilities and landscaped areas, but not including driveways, parking areas, service areas, setbacks abutting a street, parkways and portions of balconies or roof decks that extend into required setback areas.

Open Space, Private. “Private open space” means an area intended for the exclusive use of the occupants of one dwelling unit and which may include recreation facilities and landscaped areas, but not including driveways, parking areas, service areas, setbacks abutting a street, parkways and portions of balconies or roof decks that extend into required setback areas.

“Overlay zone” means the classification of property for special uses or standards in addition to or in lieu of the uses or the standards of the underlying zone.

“Overspray” means the water that is delivered beyond the landscaped area, wetting pavements, walks, structures or other non-landscaped areas.

“Owner” means any person having a legal or equitable interest in real property.

Parcel. See definition for “Lot.”

“Parking stall” means a space for the parking of a vehicle.

Patio Structure, Open. “Open patio structure” means a roofed structure with at least one side completely open and used principally for recreation.

“Pawnbroker” means any person, co-partnership, firm, or corporation in possession of a valid pawnbroker’s license (California Finance Code, Section 2100) whose business includes buying, selling, trading, taking in pawn, accepting for sale on consignment, accepting for auctioning, or auctioning secondhand tangible personal property. The key difference between a “pawnbroker” and a “secondhand dealer” is that a pawnbroker loans money for tangible personal property while a secondhand dealer does not. Pawnbrokers are required to obtain a license from the police chief and file reports pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Sections 21625 through 21647. Pawnbroker does not include:

1.       Coin dealers;

2.       Participants at gun shows or events who are not a “gun show trader”;

3.       Antique stores;

4.       Auctioneers;

5.       Reconditioning and sale of household appliances.

“Pawn shop” means a business engaged in conducting, managing, or carrying on the business of pawnbroking or loaning money, which includes buying, selling, taking in pawn tangible personal property. All business activities and storage shall be conducted inside the building.

“Pedestrian corridor” means an area of not less than ten feet in width through which the general public has access to a business tenant enclosure.

“Personal services and sales” means an establishment that provides non-medical services including, but are not limited to, retail sales of small personal convenience items and professional services which are used frequently by the business community. Uses typically include, beauty and barber shops, florist shops, photography studios, private postal service, travel agencies, tailors, tanning salons, shoe repair, video sales and/or rental, apparel laundering and dry cleaning agencies.

“Planned development” means a comprehensive residential project that is developed through the use of site planning techniques not permitted through the literal application of zoning and subdivision regulations.

“Planned redevelopment” means a comprehensive development project that is developed through the use of site planning techniques not permitted through the literal application of zoning and subdivision regulations.

“Preferential parking” means parking stalls designated or assigned through the use of signs or markings for car pool and van pool vehicles that are provided in a location more convenient to a place of employment than parking stalls provided for single-occupant vehicles, but without displacing handicapped and customer parking needs.

“Preservation” means the identification, study, protection, restoration, rehabilitation or enhancement of cultural resources.

“Preserved feature” means a cultural resource to be preserved by a historic resource or landmark designation.

“Prezone” means the designation of an area by zoning classification as shown on the official prezone map for unincorporated properties within the planning area.

“Primary color” means any of a set of colors from which all other colors may be derived.

“Principal use” means the primary or predominant use of any lot.

“Public facility” means any government-owned building, structure, improvement, service, use or combination thereof which comprises the primary use on a parcel or site and is necessary to provide essential services to the general public. Examples of such facilities include parks, community buildings, transportation facilities, civic centers, police stations, fire stations, libraries, post offices and maintenance yards.

“Public storage facility” means any structure with separate storage spaces that are leased or rented to the public on an individual basis.

“Public utility transmission facility” means a public utility electrical power substation.

“Pump” means a device used to operate at least two nozzles.

“Pump island” means an elevated concrete pad where one or more pumps are situated.

“Rain-sensing override device” means a system that automatically shuts off the irrigation system when it rains.

“Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle towed or self-propelled on its own chassis or attached to the chassis of another vehicle and designed or used for recreational purposes. The term includes, but is not limited to, travel trailers, pick-up campers, camping trailers, motor coach homes, converted trucks or buses, boats and boat trailers, and all-terrain vehicles.

“Recyclable material” means reusable material, including, but not limited to, newspapers, glass, plastic, aluminum and bi-metal containers which are intended for reuse, remanufacture or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. Recyclable material does not include refuse, hazardous materials or motor oil.

“Rehabilitated landscape” means any re-landscaping on a project that requires a permit, including a grading permit, building permit or conditional use permit.

“Rehabilitation” means the act of returning an improvement or site to a condition of use, through repair, remodeling or alteration that makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those features of the improvement or site that are significant to the city’s historical, architectural, archaeological, cultural or aesthetic heritage.

Residence, Multiple-Family. “Multiple-family residence” means a building used to house two or more families living independently of each other, including domestic employees.

Residence, Single-Family. “Single-family residence” means a building used to house one family, including domestic employees.

Restaurant, Dining. “Dining restaurant” means a use providing preparation and retail sale of food and beverages which are consumed primarily within the principal building and any patio attached thereto, and which may: (1) provide, as an ancillary service, food to be taken out of the premises from the principal building only; (2) include licensed “on-site” provision of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises of the principal building and any patio attached thereto, when such beverages are accessory to, and served with, such food to be eaten within the principal building or the attached patio; and (3) include the licensed sale of beer and/or wine for “off-site” consumption, as an ancillary service, only when such beverages are sold in conjunction with a take-out order of food. This use shall not provide drive-through lanes and/or outside walk-up windows or the ordering and dispensing of food and beverages to patrons.

Restaurant, Fast Food. “Fast food restaurant” means a use providing primarily for the preparation and retail sale of pre-prepared or rapidly prepared food and beverages in a ready-to-consume state for consumption either within or about the restaurant building premises or off the premises. A fast food restaurant may include one or more drive-through lanes and/or outside walk-up windows for the ordering and dispensing of food and beverages to patrons. This use may include licensed “on-site” provision of beer and/or wine for consumption on the premises of the principal building and any patio attached thereto, when such beverages are accessory to, and served with, food to be eaten within the principal building or attached patio. This use may include the licensed sale of beer and/or wine for “off-site” consumption, as an ancillary service, only when such beverages are sold in conjunction with a take-out order of food. Neither the “on-site” nor “off-site” sale of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted at a fast food restaurant where drive-through lanes and/or outside walk-up windows are provided.

“Restoration” means the act or process of accurately recovering the form and details of a preserved feature and its setting as it appeared at a particular period of time by removing later additions and replacing missing earlier portions of the feature.

“Reviewing body” means and can be, depending on the entitlement requested, the planning director, the planning commission and/or the city council.

“Ridgeline” means a ground line located at the highest elevation of a connected series of hills or mountains.

“Right-of-way” means the entire width of an area open for public use, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian access, as measured from the abutting property lines.

“Runoff” means water that is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the area.

School, Educational. “Educational school” means a public or private institution conducting regular academic instruction at the kindergarten, elementary, secondary or collegiate levels including graduate schools, universities and research institutions.

School, Public. “Public school” means a school or institution controlled and operated by publicly elected or appointed officials and deriving its primary support from public funds.

School, Vocational. “Vocational school” means an institution offering instruction in the technical, commercial or trade skills, such as real estate, business, electronics, automotive and aircraft mechanics, music and similar skills.

“Secondhand dealer” means any person, co-partnership, firm or corporation in possession of a valid secondhand dealer’s license (California Finance Code, Section 2100) whose business includes buying, selling, trading, accepting for sale on consignment, accepting for auctioning or auctioning secondhand tangible personal property. A secondhand dealer who buys secondhand tangible personal property would be required to obtain a license from the police chief and file reports pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Sections 21625 through 21647. Secondhand dealer does not include:

1.       Coin dealers;

2.       Participants at gun shows or events who are not a “gun show trader”;

3.       Antique stores;

4.       Auctioneers;

5.       Reconditioning and sale of household appliances.

“Secondhand store” means a retail store or reseller operated by a secondhand dealer and offering used clothes, furniture, household appliances or similar merchandise, providing: (1) used merchandise may be purchased for resale or accepted for consignment; and (2) used materials or goods for sale that may require cleaning, repair or assembly or refurbishment before it can be worn or put to normal use. Merchandise may be donated. All business activity, collection, and storage shall be conducted inside the building.

Service Station, Full. “Full service station” means a retail place of business engaged in minor automotive repair and the sale of motor fuels, oils, fluids and accessory items such as tires, wiper blades, fuel tank caps, radiator pressure caps and radiator hoses that are generally required for the operation of motor vehicles and which may include a convenience store.

Service Station, Self. “Self service station” means a retail place of business engaged in the sale of motor fuels, oils, fluids and accessory items such as tires, wiper blades, fuel tank caps, radiator pressure caps and radiator hoses that are generally required for the operation of motor vehicles and which may include a convenience store.

“Setback” means the distance between a structure and a property line.

“Short-term rental” or “STR” means any dwelling unit,single-family residence, multiple-family residence, guest house, accessory dwelling unit, or junior accessory dwelling unit within all zones in the city of Glendora that support or include residential uses, whether as a permitted use or conditionally permitted use, which is rented to one or more guests for compensation for the purpose of lodging or hosting events for a period of thirty or fewer consecutive days.

“Short-term rental” encompasses such dwelling units regardless of whether the owner, permanent occupant or other STR host is present on-site during the rental period. For purposes of this definition only, “for compensation” includes, but is not limited to, rental of the short-term rental for any form of monetary or non–monetary consideration, including but not limited to money, goods, or services, as well as in-kind exchanges of goods, services, or premises. “Short-term rental” does not include any commercial use for which a business license or other permit pursuant to Title 5 of this code has been issued prior to the effective date of Section 21.03.140 of this code.

“Single-feed reverse vending machine” means a mechanical device that occupies an area of less than fifty square feet; accepts one or more types of empty beverage containers one at a time, including, but not limited to, aluminum cans and glass and plastic bottles; and issues a cash refund or a redeemable coupon.

“Single room occupancy (SRO) housing” means housing (consisting of single-room dwelling units) that is the primary residence of its occupant or occupants. The unit must contain either food preparation or sanitary facilities (and may contain both).

“Slope” means the degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal plane, expressed as degrees, percent or ratio.

“Small recycling collection facility” means a facility that occupies an area of less than five hundred square feet and is intended for collection only. Such facilities include a single-feed reverse vending machine, a group of reverse vending machines, bulk reverse vending machines, kiosk type units, mobile recycling units and containers for the collection of newspapers.

“Soil moisture-sensing device” means a device that measures the amount of water in the soil and automatically shuts off the irrigation system when the soil obtains the proper amount of moisture.

Spa. See definition for “Swimming pool.”

“Stacking space” means a waiting area for vehicles at a drive-through business.

“Story” means that portion of a building between the upper surface of a floor and the upper surface of the next floor above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling. If the upper surface of any floor that is directly above a basement or under floor space is more than two feet above finish grade at any point, such basement or under floor space shall be considered a story.

“Street” means that portion of the right-of-way designed for vehicular traffic.

Street, Private. “Private street” means any parcels of land or portions that are used for access to public streets, but which are not driveways or dedicated public rights-of-way.

“STR Advertisement[ing]” means any announcement, whether in a magazine, newspaper, handbill, notice, display, billboard, poster, email, internet website, platform or application, including any STR hosting platform, any form of television or radio broadcast or any other form of communication, whose primary purpose is to propose a transaction for renting a short-term rental. For purposes of this definition, a “hosting platform” is a company that participates in the short-term rental business by collecting or receiving a fee, directly or indirectly through an agent or intermediary, for conducting a booking transaction using any medium of facilitation.

“STR Host” means the owner or authorized agent, of a short-term rental, who is responsible for its operation. The property owner is always deemed to be a host for purposes of the ordinance codified in this chapter; however, in conjunction with the property owner,a tenant, mortgagee in possession, a management company, or any combination thereof may also qualify as hosts for short-term rental purposes.

“Structure” means anything constructed or any piece of work built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.

“Supportive housing” means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to on-site or off-site services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community.

Swap Meet, Indoor. “Indoor swap meet” means an establishment housing three or more separate business tenants, each of whom conducts business from an enclosure that separates the business from other businesses by less than complete floor to ceiling walls and that lacks lockable access doors.

Swap Meet, Outdoor. “Outdoor swap meet” means a business conducted outdoors at which two or more persons offer merchandise for sale or exchange and that meets at least one of the following conditions: (1) a fee is charged for the privilege of offering or displaying merchandise for sale or exchange or (2) a fee is charged to prospective buyers for parking or for admission to the area where merchandise is offered or displayed for sale or exchange.

“Swimming pool” means a body of water created by artificial means that is designed for swimming or bodily immersion and any portion of which exceeds thirty-six inches in depth.

“Tandem parking stall” means a parking stall so located that it is necessary to move one or more other vehicles in order for a vehicle to access the tandem parking stall.

“Tangible personal property” means all secondhand property including, but not limited to: clothing, jewelry, personal property which bears a serial number or personalized initials or inscription which is purchased by a secondhand dealer or pawnbroker; or, which, at the time it is acquired by the pawnbroker, or secondhand dealer bears evidence of having had a serial number or personalized initials or inscription. Tangible personal property also includes new or used motor vehicles received in pledge as security for a loan by a pawnbroker. Tangible personal property does not include new goods or merchandise purchased from a bona fide manufacturer or distributor or wholesaler of such new goods or merchandise, or coins, monetized bullion, or commercial grade ingots of precious metals.

Tenant, Business. “Business tenant” means a person or entity who, by an oral or written lease or license, is permitted to sell new or used goods or merchandise.

Tenant Enclosure, Business. “Business tenant enclosure” means an area from which one tenant can engage in the sale of new or used goods or merchandise.

“Thrift store” means a retail store offering used clothing, furniture or household items which are in good repair providing: (1) all clothes are displayed on racks, folded on shelves or tables, or in some organized fashion as distinguished from heaps or piles; (2) no merchandise shall be accepted on consignment; and (3) merchandise requires no cleaning, repair assembly, or refurbishment before it can be worn or put to normal use. The majority of merchandise offered for sale can be donated. All business activity and storage shall be conducted inside the building.

“Transitional housing” and “transitional housing development” mean buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months.

“Travel demand management (TDM)” means the alteration of travel behavior through programs of incentives, services and policies. TDM addresses alternatives to single-occupant vehicles such as car pooling, van pooling and changes in work schedules that move trips out of the peak period or eliminate them altogether (as in telecommuting or compressed work weeks).

“Trip reduction” means the reduction in the number of work-related trips made by single-occupant vehicles.

“Turf” means a surface layer of earth containing mowed grass with its roots.

“Van pool” means a vehicle carrying seven or more persons commuting to and from work on a regular basis, usually in a vehicle with a seating arrangement designed to carry seven to fifteen adult passengers.

Vehicle Service and Repair, Major. “Major vehicle service and repair” means any activity in which vehicles are maintained or repaired including body work, painting, removal, repair, rebuilding, replacement or exchanges of engines, drive-trains, transmissions or exterior body parts.

Vehicle Service and Repair, Minor. “Minor vehicle service and repair” means any activity in which vehicles are maintained or repaired not including body work, painting, removal, repair, rebuilding, replacement or exchange of engines, drive-trains, transmissions or exterior body parts.

“Warehouse” means a building primarily for the storage of goods and materials.

“Wind sensor device” means a system that automatically shuts off the irrigation system when the wind starts blowing.

“Wine/beer tasting room” means a business offering on-site and off-site wine and beer sales which might include food service including full restaurant service or hors d’oeuvres and prepackaged gourmet foods and other retail sales of associated merchandise including gift baskets. Entertainment restricted to unamplified live music may be included as part of the use.

“Work” means any construction, restoration, alteration, rehabilitation, relocation or demolition.

Yard, Front. “Front yard” means a space extending the width of a parcel between the front property line and a line parallel at a distance equal to the required front setback.

Yard, Rear. “Rear yard” means a space extending the width of a parcel between the rear property line and a line parallel at a distance equal to the required rear setback.

Yard, Side. “Side yard” means a space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the side property line and a line parallel at a distance equal to the required side setback.

“Zone” means the classification of property for uses as reflected on the official zoning map.

Zoning Map, Official. “Official zoning map” means a diagram of the applicable zones for all property in the city and maintained on file in the planning department. (Ord. 2055 §§ 3—6, 2020; Ord. 2053 § 2, 2020; Ord. 2017 § 2, 2017; Ord. 2015 § 2, 2017)

 

21.01.030 General administration.
A.      Director. The provisions of this title shall be administered by the director.

B.      General Plan Consistency. No use of land or structures shall be approved for processing under this title unless the use is consistent with the general plan and applicable specific plans. In any case where there is a conflict in regulation between this title and the general plan or applicable specific plans, the general plan or applicable specific plans shall prevail. A proposed use is consistent with the general plan and applicable specific plans when all of the following conditions exist:

1.       The proposed use is allowed under the land use designation as shown on the land use map and described in the text of the general plan or applicable specific plans.

2.       The proposed use is consistent with the goals, objectives, policies and programs of the general plan and applicable specific plans.

3.       The proposed use is to be established and maintained in a manner which is consistent with the general plan and applicable specific plans.

C.      Interpretation. The provisions of this title shall be applied as the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and welfare. Where this title imposes greater restrictions upon the use of structures or land than are required by other regulations, the provisions of this title shall apply. Any permit or other entitlement issued in conflict with the provisions of this title shall be null and void.

 

D.      Use Determination. A use not listed as a permitted use or a conditional use in a zone is prohibited in that zone unless it is determined that the use is similar to other uses listed in the zone.

1.       Initiation. The director, upon written request, shall determine whether an unlisted use shall be deemed a permitted use or a conditional use in one or more zones on the basis of similarity to uses listed in those zones. A request for use determination shall include a detailed description of the proposed use and such other information as may be required by the director to facilitate the determination.

2.       Determination. The director shall compare the proposed use characteristics with the general plan as well as the purpose of the zones and shall determine if the proposed use should be a permitted or conditional use in any of the zones.

3.       Findings. The determination shall be based upon the following findings:

a.       The proposed use is similar in intensity to permitted or conditionally permitted uses in the zone;

b.       The proposed use is consistent with the purpose of the zone;

c.       The proposed use is consistent with the goals, objectives, policies and programs of the general plan and applicable specific plans.

4.       Appeal. The action of the director shall be final unless appealed as prescribed in subsection F of this section.

E.       Public Hearings. A public hearing shall be held by the reviewing body when required by state law or the provisions of this title or when deemed necessary or desirable by the reviewing body.

1.       Notice of Hearing. At least ten days prior to a public hearing, notice of the date, time and place of the public hearing, the identity of the reviewing body, a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description, in text or by diagram, of the location of the subject property, if any, shall be given in the following manner:

a.       Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city;

b.       Notice shall be mailed or delivered to all owners of real property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll of the county assessor within five hundred feet of the subject property, with the following exceptions:

i.        If the number of owners to whom notice would be mailed or delivered pursuant to this subsection or subsection (E)(1)(c) of this section is greater than one thousand, the city, in lieu of mailed or delivered notice, may provide notice by placing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth page in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the city,

ii.       For general plan amendments that designate non-residential real property for residential use, or would increase the density of residential use on real property, owners of real property within two thousand feet of the subject property shall be notified. Such notices shall be mailed or delivered even though the number of owners is greater than one thousand;

c.       Notice shall be mailed or delivered to the applicant and owner of the subject property or an authorized representative;

d.       Notice shall be mailed or delivered to any person who has filed a written request for notice with either the city clerk or the director. The city may charge a fee that is reasonably related to the costs of providing this service and may require each request to be annually renewed;

e.       Notice shall be mailed or delivered to each local agency expected to provide water, sewage, streets, roads, schools or other essential facilities or services to the project, whose ability to provide those facilities and services may be significantly affected;

f.        Any other manner deemed necessary or desirable by the reviewing body.

2.       Supplemental Notice Requirement: Small Posted Signs. Whenever a public hearing is to be held by the planning commission or the city council on a proposed general plan amendment initiated by the city that designates non-residential real property for residential use, or would increase the density of residential use on real property; in addition to any other notice that may be required by law, the director shall cause the subject property to be posted in accordance with the following:

a.       The property shall be posted with notices within the rights-of-way that abut the subject property not more than three hundred feet apart, provided that there shall be not less than three notices in all.

b.       The notice shall be one and one-half feet by two feet in size and shall be headed “NOTICE OF GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENT” in letters of not less than one inch in height and in legible lettering shall include the date, time and place of the public hearing, the identity of the hearing body, telephone number of contact person to respond to questions or to attend a neighborhood meeting, a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description, in text or by diagram, of the location of the real property.

c.       Posting of the notice shall be completed at least ten days prior to the date of the public hearing.

Provided the director has made a good faith effort to comply with these posted sign notice requirements, no action by the planning commission or city council relative to the proposed general plan amendment shall ever be invalidated by any court for failure to post the notices required by this subsection.

3.       Supplemental Notice Requirements: Large Posted Signs.

a.       Applicability. In addition to standard notice requirements in subsection (E)(1) of this section, large four-foot by eight-foot sign or signs shall be required to be posted at the project site for development related projects that require a public hearing in any one of the following circumstances:

i.        Projects or subdivisions that involve the development of five or more new residential units; or

ii.       Projects that involve the new development of ten thousand or more non-residential square feet of interior habitable area; or

iii.     General plan amendments initiated by property owners that designate non-residential real property for residential use, or would increase the density of residential use on real property;

iv.      As determined to be necessary and desirable by the director based on the nature of the proposed project. For large projects, the director may determine that more than one sign is necessary.

The purpose of the supplemental large sign notice requirement is to notify the community and the neighbors in the affected area early in the review process, allowing the applicant and the city the benefit of citizens’ comments during the initial stages of project review.

If it is determined upon initial submittal that a large, four-foot by eight-foot notification sign(s) is necessary, the applicant shall be notified of required cash deposit and sign permit filing requirements within thirty days as part of the city’s project application review process. A cash deposit as established by fee resolution is required to ensure compliance with the supplemental notification requirements including maintenance and removal of the large notification sign. The project application shall not be deemed complete until the large sign is installed and required cash deposit made.

b.       Sign Criteria/Maintenance. All large notification sign(s) shall be installed by the applicant at the project site. In order to implement the large signs as an effective form of public notification, the following rules and standards shall apply:

i.        Sign Size and Specifications. All large sign(s) shall be four feet by eight feet in size and be constructed to the specifications of Figure 21.01.030(A). The specific project information text on the sign shall be provided by the planning department.

 



FIGURE 21.01.030(A) DESIGN OF LARGE NOTIFICATION SIGN

 

ii.       Location and Installation Standards. All large sign(s) shall be installed according to the specifications of Figure 21.01.030(B). The location for the sign(s) on the project site shall be determined by the director.



FIGURE 21.01.030(B) LARGE NOTIFICATION SIGN SPECIFICATIONS

 

iii.     Sign Removal and Maintenance. All large sign(s) must be kept adequately maintained and remain in place until the final decision on the application has been made or the application is withdrawn. All large sign(s) shall be removed by the applicant within thirty days of the final decision or date of withdrawal. Failure to remove the sign within the prescribed period may result in forfeiture of the cash deposit and removal of the sign by the city.

4.       Other Notice Requirements. Notices required by this section shall be in addition to any other or different notice required by other provisions of this code or by state law; provided, however, that nothing therein shall require separate notices to be given if the same notice will satisfy the requirements of this section and any other applicable section of this code or state law.

5.       Failure to Give/Receive Notice. The failure of any person to receive notice pursuant to this title shall not constitute grounds for any court to invalidate the action for which notice was given. No action, inaction or recommendation regarding any project by the director, planning commission or city council shall be held void or invalid or be set aside by any court by reason of any error or omission pertaining to the notices, including the failure to give any notice required by this section, unless the court after an examination of the entire case shall be of the opinion that the error or omission complained of was prejudicial, and that by reason of such error or omission the party complaining or appealing sustained and suffered substantial injury, and that a different result would have been probable if such error or omission had not occurred or existed. There shall be no presumption that error or omission is prejudicial or that injury was done if error or omission is shown.

6.       Continuance of Hearing. Any public hearing may be continued to a time and date certain by the reviewing body subject to limitations provided by law and no further notice need be given.

 

F.       Appeals. Unless otherwise expressly stated in this title, any action of the director, committee, or commission may be appealed to the council by any person or two members of the council. While an appeal is pending, the establishment of a use shall be held in abeyance (set aside). When an enforcement action has been initiated on a use, such enforcement action shall be held in abeyance while an appeal is pending. The council may affirm, modify or reverse the previous decision which is the subject of the appeal.

1.       Filing Appeals. Appeals shall be filed in writing with the city clerk within fifteen days of the action of the reviewing body. The city clerk shall schedule the matter for reconsideration at a regularly scheduled meeting of the council held within thirty days of receiving the written appeal.

2.       Public Hearing. If the matter which is the subject of an appeal was acted on or decided at a public hearing, a public hearing shall be held as prescribed an subsection E of this section.

3.       Appeal Fees. The council shall, by resolution, impose such fees for filing appeals as are deemed necessary to cover the costs incurred in the processing of such appeals.

G.      Contrary Use/Construction. It is unlawful for any person to use or cause or permit to be used any structure or land contrary to the provisions of this title. Nothing in this title shall prohibit the owner of any structure or land from repairing or replacing any portion that has become so worn from use as to make such portion unusable for the purpose for which it was used next, prior to such repair or replacement.

H.      Violation. Any person violating any of the provisions of this title or any permit or entitlement granted is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day or portion of a day during which any violation of this title occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense and upon conviction shall be punishable as provided.

I.        CEQA. The director shall direct city staff regarding the appropriate document to prepare on each proposed development for commission and/or council review and certification pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). Where a project is subject to review only by the director, the director shall have the power to review and approve exemptions, negative declarations and mitigated negative declarations pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act and CEQA guidelines.

 

J.       Subsection reserved.

K.      Referrals. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter giving the director the power and authority to hear and determine the foregoing matters, the director may, in his or her discretion, decline to handle or determine the matter and instead may refer it to the planning commission for complete hearing. (Ord. 1983 § 2, 2014; Ord. 1836 §§ 3, 9, 25, 2006; Ord. 1830 § 2, 2005; Ord. 1775 §§ 5—6, 2003; Ord. 1618 § 1 Exh. A, 1993)

 

21.01.040 Zone classifications.
A.      Zone Classifications. In order to establish zone districts to classify and regulate the use of land and structures, the following zone classifications are established:

1.       Single-Family Residential Zones.

 

R-1 (7,500)

Single-family residential

E-3 (8,000)

Single-family estate

E-4 (8,500)

Single-family estate

E-5 (10,500)

Single-family estate

E-6 (12,500/15,000)

Single-family estate

E-7 (20,000 / 30,000 / 40,000 / 80,000 / 200,000 / 500,000 / 800,000)

Single-family estate

RHR

Rural hillside residential

2.       Multiple-Family Residential Zones.

 

R-2

Restricted multiple-family residential

R-3

Multiple-family residential

GA

Garden apartment

LGA

Limited garden apartment

3.       Commercial and Industrial Zones.

 

C-1

Professional

C-2

Limited retail business

C-3

Retail and commercial

CM

Commercial-manufacturing

MS

Medical services

M-1

Light manufacturing

M-1A

Limited manufacturing

IP

Industrial park

4.       Special Use Zones.

 

B

Cemetery

PR

Planned redevelopment

PD

Planned development

R-4

Railroad purposes

OSN

Open space—natural

SP

Specific plan

CCAP

Civic Center area plan

5.       Overlay Zones.

 

H

Special height overlay zone

MHP

Mobilehome park overlay zone

HPOZ

Historic preservation overlay zone

 

Grand-Foothill multifamily residential overlay zone

 

B.      Prezoning of Unincorporated Areas. Properties located in unincorporated areas, which are within the planning area as designated in the general plan, shall be prezoned to determine the zones that will apply if such properties are annexed. Such zoning shall be effective at the time of annexation and shall be indicated on the official zoning map.

C.      Official Zoning Map. The zone classifications established shall be shown on the official zoning map. The official zoning map, including all legends, symbols, notations, references and other information, shall be part of this title. The official zoning map shall be kept on file in the office of the department of planning and redevelopment.

D.      General Applicability. The following shall apply in the determination of the boundaries of any zone district shown on the official zoning map:

1.       Where boundaries follow street or alley lines or identifiable rights-of-way, the centerline shall be the boundary;

2.       Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following property lines, such lines shall be construed to be the boundary;

3.       Where a public right-of-way is officially vacated, the zones applying to abutting properties shall thereafter extend to the centerline of the vacated right-of-way;

4.       The director shall determine locations of zone boundaries if any uncertainty exists. (Ord. 1983 § 3, 2014; Ord. 1927 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1858 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1699 § 1, 1999: Ord. 1679 § 1, 1998: Ord. 1637 § 2, 1995: Ord. 1618 § 1 Exh. A, 1993)

 

21.01.050 Amendments.
A.      Purpose. This section establishes procedures for amending the provisions of this title, including the official zoning map. The amendment process is necessary to ensure consistency with the general plan and applicable specific plans and conformity to state law. It also provides for changes in order that community values and policies may be reflected in this title.

B.      Initiation of Proceedings.

1.       An amendment of the official zoning map to any zone other than SP (specific plan) zone may be initiated by the property owner or an authorized agent or by the city. An amendment of the official zoning map to the SP (specific plan) zone may be initiated by the property owners of one hundred percent of the parcels proposed to be reclassified to the SP (specific plan) zone, or by an authorized agent of such property owners, or by the city.

2.       An amendment of the provisions of this title, including the official zoning map, may be initiated by the director, commission or council.

C.      Application. Applications for amendment of the official zoning map initiated by the property owner or an authorized agent shall be made on forms provided by the director. If the property is under multiple ownership, all owners or authorized agents must file the application. The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee as established by council resolution.

D.      Public Hearing. The commission and council shall hold a public hearing on each proposed amendment of the provisions of this title, including the official zoning map. Notice of the hearing for an amendment of the official zoning map shall be given as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(E) of this chapter.

E.       Action by Commission. The commission shall take action by recommending either approval or denial of the amendment to the council. Such recommendation shall include the reasons for the recommendation and the relationship of the proposed amendment to the general plan.

F.       Action by Council. The council shall take action by approving, modifying or denying the recommendation of the commission provided that any modification not previously considered by the commission shall first be referred to the commission for recommendation.

G.      Prezones. Procedures for change of prezones of property shall be the same as for zone changes as set forth in this section. (Ord. 1983 § 4, 2014; Ord. 1679 § 2, 1998: Ord. 1618 § 1 Exh. A, 1993)

Chapter 21.02 PERMITS
21.02.010 Permit applications.
A.      Purpose. This chapter contains the procedures and regulatory provisions necessary to administer this title in order to provide for land use consistency with the general plan, regulate uses that have the potential to adversely affect surrounding properties, promote a visually attractive community, and provide flexibility in standards when special circumstances exist.

B.      Applications. Applications for permits shall be made on forms provided by the director and shall be accompanied by a fee, as established by council resolution. Applications shall be made by the owner of the property and/or business for which the permit is sought, or an authorized agent.

1.       Complete Applications. Permit applications pursuant to this title must be accepted as complete for processing by the director in order to initiate the official review process. Applications shall include completed application forms, plans prepared pursuant to specifications provided by the planning director, documents, materials and all other information deemed necessary by the planning director to allow complete analysis and evaluation. The planning director shall maintain a list of all required application materials and specifications, which may be amended from time to time as deemed necessary and appropriate by the director.

2.       Review for Completeness. The director shall review the application and determine if it is complete for processing and shall notify the applicant of such determination. In addition to the standard submittal requirements, the director may request additional information necessary for the complete analysis and evaluation of an application.

3.       Incomplete Applications. If an application is determined not to be complete, written notice shall be provided to the applicant specifying those portions of the application that are incomplete. The notice shall indicate the items necessary to make the application complete. The applicant must supply the items within sixty days of the notice or the application may be terminated. Upon receipt of the required items, the director shall review the application for completeness.

4.       Application Workshop. The purpose of the application workshop is to achieve better projects through early consultation between city staff and applicants prior to significant investment in the design of a project. The workshop identifies issues that may arise during review of the projects (e.g., conformance with any applicable design guidelines, conformance with the goals, policies, and objectives of the general plan and the purpose and intent of any applicable specific plan, environmental requirements and possible recommended mitigation measures, conditions of approval, requirements for public improvements, and possible concerns from adjoining neighborhoods).

a.       Applicability.

i.        Applicant. The application workshop shall be conducted if requested by an applicant for a project that would require a discretionary land use entitlement or a zoning map amendment.

ii.       Director. Where there is the existence of public controversy over the effects of a project, the director may request an application workshop requiring the attendance of the applicant and city staff.

b.       Procedures.

i.        Scheduling. An application workshop shall be conducted before the application hearing.

ii.       Meeting. The application workshop shall be conducted at a meeting in which the applicant for a project is in attendance and the applicable/responsible city department staff are in attendance.

iii.     Applicable/Responsible Staff. The city manager, or designee shall be invited. The director shall determine which city departments shall participate. The director shall designate the staff person(s) to be responsible for scheduling and conducting the application workshop. The advisory architect shall attend and provide architectural commentary on the project.

iv.      Disclaimer. Neither the application workshop nor information or pertinent policies provided by the city departments shall be construed as a city recommendation for approval or disapproval of the application/project.

c.       Administrative Guidelines. The planning director, or designee, shall issue administrative guidelines for implementation of the application workshop process.

C.      Reviewing Body and Appeal. Permit applications shall be considered and approved or denied by the reviewing body stated in this chapter for each permit type. Any decision of the director or planning commission regarding a permit application may be appealed to the city council within fifteen days of the decision as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(F). If no appeal is filed within fifteen days, the decision of the reviewing body shall be final. Decisions of the City Council shall be final and not subject to further administrative appeal. Appeals shall be considered, and public notice provided, in the same manner as the original decision.

D.      Conditions of Approval. The reviewing body may impose upon a permit approval such conditions as it deems necessary to ensure that the use and/or improvements will be established, operated and maintained in accordance with the findings required for the permit; and/or to protect the public health, safety and welfare.

E.       Time Limit. Any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter is conditional upon the use and/or construction work beginning within eighteen months after the effective date of the approval or such other period specified as a condition of approval. If the use or construction work is not started within the required time and carried on diligently to completion, the permit shall become void; however, the reviewing body may extend the time limit in the case of unavoidable delay. The applicant must submit a written request to the reviewing body for a time extension at least thirty days before the original time limit expires. Consideration of a time extension does not require a public hearing even if a hearing was required for the original permit.

F.       Amendment or Modification. A request to modify a project authorized by a previously approved permit, modify approved conditions of approval, or otherwise amend a permit, except for time extension requests, shall be applied for and considered in the same manner as the original permit.

G.      Revocation or Imposed Modification.

1.       The reviewing body may revoke a permit or impose modifications upon a previously approved permit if it makes any of the following findings:

a.       The use is detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare;

b.       The approval was obtained by fraud;

c.       The use has ceased or been suspended for six or more consecutive calendar months;

d.       One or more of the conditions of approval have not been complied with.

2.       The reviewing body shall hold a public hearing upon the question of the revocation or imposed modification. Notice of the hearing shall be given as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(E).

3.       The reviewing body shall take action by resolution either revoking or modifying the permit or allowing the permit to remain unchanged. The action of the reviewing body shall be final unless appealed as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(F).

H.      New Applications Following Denial. Following the denial of an application, no application for the same, or substantially the same, use or development on the same, or substantially the same, site shall be filed within one year from the date of denial.

I.        Building Permits. No building permit shall be issued for any structure for which a permit is required by this chapter until such permit has been issued. (Ord. 1984 § 2, 2014; Ord. 1836 § 4, 2006; Ord. 1648 §§ 3—5, 1996; Ord. 1618 § 1 Exh. A, 1993)

 

21.02.020 Conditional use permits.
A.      Purpose. One of the principal objectives of planning is to provide for the proper location of all types of land uses. To accomplish this objective, certain types of land use are classified as being permitted as a matter of right in one or more of the various zones established in this title. However, certain other types of land uses require special consideration in a particular zone or in the city as a whole because of the size of area needed for development of such uses; the traffic, noise, vibration, toxic materials, emissions and other factors incidental to their operation; special locational requirements; or the effect they may have on public health, safety and welfare. Such uses, together with the conditions that are imposed through the permit process, are designated as conditional uses and shall be regulated by the provisions of this section.

B.      Reviewing Body. Conditional use permit applications shall be considered by the commission.

C.      Public Hearing. The reviewing body shall hold a public hearing on each application for a conditional use permit. Notice of the hearing shall be given as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(E).

D.      Action by Reviewing Body. The commission shall take action by resolution either granting or denying approval of the conditional use permit. The action of the commission shall be final unless appealed as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(F). When an application for a conditional use permit is processed in conjunction with another application for which council action is required, the commission shall take action by recommending either approval or denial of the application for a conditional use permit. The council shall take action by resolution either granting or denying approval of the application for a conditional use permit.

E.       Findings for Approval. The reviewing body shall grant a conditional use permit if all of the following findings are made:

1.       The use is authorized by conditional use permit pursuant to this title;

2.       The use is consistent with the general plan and other applicable plans;

3.       The site can accommodate the development standards of this title or as is otherwise required;

4.       The site is adequately served by streets, utilities and other services, facilities and improvements;

5.       The use will not adversely affect the character and integrity of the area, the utility and value of properties in the area and the health, safety and welfare of the public.

F.       Conditions of Approval. The reviewing body may impose such conditions as it deems necessary to ensure that the use will be established, operated and maintained in accordance with the findings required by this section. In the case of an administrative conditional use permit upon the transfer of ownership of a state-issued alcoholic beverage license, the reviewing body may impose conditions that are consistent with the originally issued conditional use permit.

G.      Issuance of Permits. Upon the effective date of any conditional use granted by the reviewing body, subject to the conditions of approval, the conditional use permit shall be issued by the director. The effective date shall be expiration of the fifteen-day appeal period or the date upon which the council takes action on the application.

H.      Time Limit. Any conditional use permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this section is conditional upon the use and/or construction work beginning within eighteen months after the effective date of the approval or such other period specified as a condition of approval. If construction work does not begin within the required time and carried on diligently to completion, the conditional use permit shall become void; however, the reviewing body may extend the time limit in the case of unavoidable delay. The applicant must submit a written request to the reviewing body for a time extension before the original time limit expires.

I.        Amendment. Amendment of a conditional use permit, other than the time limit, shall require filing of an application for a conditional use permit as set forth in this section.

J.       Revocation or Modification.

1.       The reviewing body may revoke or modify a conditional use permit if it makes any of the following findings:

a.       The use is detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare;

b.       The approval was obtained by fraud;

c.       The use has ceased or been suspended for six or more consecutive calendar months;

d.       One or more of the conditions of approval have not been complied with.

2.       The reviewing body shall hold a public hearing upon the question of the revocation or modification. Notice of the hearing shall be given as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(E).

3.       The reviewing body shall take action by resolution either revoking or modifying the conditional use permit or allowing the permit to remain unchanged. The action of the reviewing body shall be final unless appealed as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(F).

K.      Administrative Conditional Use Permits. Subsection 21.02.020(B) through (J) shall apply except that “commission” shall mean “the director of planning and redevelopment.” In addition, no notice shall be required to be published. A courtesy notice shall be mailed to all affected property owners within a radius of five hundred feet at least ten days prior to the director’s decision date. When an application for an administrative conditional use permit is processed in conjunction with another application for which commission or council approval is required, the director shall take no action. The commission or council shall take action by resolution either granting or denying approval of the application for the administrative conditional use permit.

L.       Minor Conditional Use Permits. Subsections 21.02.020(B) through (J) shall apply except that “commission” shall mean “director.” In addition, no notice shall be required to be published. A courtesy notice shall be mailed to all affected property owners within a radius of five hundred feet at least ten days prior to the director’s decision date. When an application for a minor conditional use permit is processed in conjunction with another application for which commission or council approval is required, the director shall take no action. The commission or council shall take action by resolution either granting or denying approval of the application for the minor conditional use permit. (Ord. 1984 § 2, 2014; Ord. 1836 §§ 5, 6, 2006; Ord. 1775 §§ 7—10, 2003; Ord. 1735 §§ 1 and 2, 2001; Ord. 1648 § 6, 1996: Ord. 1618 § 1 Exh. A, 1993)

 

21.02.025 Minor conditional use permits.
A.      Purpose. One of the principal objectives of planning is to provide for the proper location of all types of land uses. To accomplish this objective, certain types of land use are classified as being permitted as a matter of right in one or more of the various zones established in this title. However, certain other types of land uses require special consideration in a particular zone or in the city as a whole because of the size of area needed for development of such uses; the traffic, noise, vibration, toxic materials, emissions and other factors incidental to their operation; special locational requirements; or the effect they may have on public health, safety and welfare, while not requiring the same level of review as those uses requiring a conditional use permit. Such uses, together with the conditions that are imposed through the permit process, are designated as minor conditional uses and shall be regulated by the provisions of this section.

B.      Reviewing Body. Minor conditional use permit applications shall be considered by the director.

C.      Public Hearing. No public hearing shall be required. In lieu of the notice required for a public hearing, a courtesy notice shall be mailed to all property owners within a radius of five hundred feet at least ten days prior to the director’s decision date.

D.      Action by Reviewing Body. The director shall take action by resolution either granting or denying approval of the minor conditional use permit. The action of the director shall be final unless appealed as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(F). When an application for a minor conditional use permit is processed in conjunction with another application for which commission or council action is required, the director shall take no action. The commission or council shall take action by resolution either granting or denying the minor conditional use permit application.

E.       Findings for Approval. The reviewing body shall grant a minor conditional use permit if all of the following findings are made:

1.       The use is authorized by conditional use permit pursuant to this title;

2.       The use is consistent with the general plan and other applicable plans;

3.       The site can accommodate the development standards of this title or as is otherwise required;

4.       The site is adequately served by streets, utilities and other services, facilities and improvements;

5.       The use will not adversely affect the character and integrity of the area, the utility and value of properties in the area and the health, safety and welfare of the public. (Ord. 1984 § 2, 2014)

 

21.02.030 Variances.
A.      Purpose. Because of special circumstances applying to a particular property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of this title may deprive such property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification. Where such circumstances apply, state law empowers the city to grant variances from the strict application of this title as it applies to such properties.

B.      Reviewing Body. Variance applications shall be considered by the commission.

C.      Public Hearing. The reviewing body shall hold a public hearing on each application for a variance. Notice of the hearing shall be given as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(E).

D.      Action by Reviewing Body. The commission shall take action by resolution either granting or denying approval of the variance. The action of the commission shall be final unless appealed as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(F). When an application for a variance is processed in conjunction with another application for which council action is required, the commission shall take action by recommending either approval or denial of the application for a variance. The council shall take action by resolution either granting or denying approval of the application for a variance.

E.       Findings for Approval. The reviewing body shall grant a variance if all of the following findings are made:

1.       Because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of the zoning ordinance deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification.

2.       The variance will not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is situated.

3.       The variance will not adversely affect the character and integrity of the area, the utility and value of properties in the area, and the health, safety and welfare of the public.

4.       The variance will be consistent with the general plan and other applicable plans.

5.       The variance will not authorize a use that is not otherwise expressly authorized by the zone regulation governing the property.

F.       Conditions of Approval. The reviewing body may impose such conditions as it deems necessary to ensure that the variance will be used in accordance with the findings required by this section.

G.      Issuance of Permits. Upon the effective date of any variance granted by the reviewing body, subject to the conditions of approval, the variance shall be issued by the director. The effective date shall be expiration of the fifteen-day appeal period or the date upon which the council takes action on the application.

H.      Time Limit. Any variance granted pursuant to the provisions of this section is conditional upon construction work beginning within eighteen months after the effective date of the approval of such other period specified as a condition of approval. If construction work is not begun within the required time and carried on diligently to completion, the variance shall become void; however, the reviewing body may extend the time limit in the case of unavoidable delay. The applicant must submit a written request to the reviewing body for a time extension before the original time limit expires.

I.        Amendment. Amendment of a variance, other than the time limit, shall require filing of an application for a variance as set forth in this section.

J.       Revocation or Modification.

1.       The reviewing body may revoke or modify a variance if it makes any of the following findings:

a.       The variance is detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare;

b.       One or more of the conditions of approval has not been complied with;

c.       The approval was obtained by fraud.

2.       The reviewing body shall hold a public hearing upon the question of the revocation or modification. Notice of the hearing shall be given as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(E).

3.       The reviewing body shall take action by resolution either revoking or modifying the variance or allowing the variance to remain unchanged. The action of the reviewing body shall be final unless appealed as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(F). (Ord. 1984 § 2, 2014; Ord. 1775 § 11, 2003; Ord. 1648 §§ 3 and 4, 1997; Ord. 1618 § 1 Exh. A, 1993)

 

21.02.035 Minor modifications.
A.      Purpose. This section provides procedures whereby development plans can be approved with minor deviations from the zoning code.

B.      Reviewing Body. Minor modification applications shall be considered by the director.

C.      Applicability. Minor modifications shall apply to the following:

1.       Setbacks, to reduce the minimum required by fifteen percent or less;

2.       Floor area, to reduce the minimum required or increase the maximum permitted by five percent or less;

3.       Antenna development standards, to reduce the minimum required or exceed the maximum permitted by fifteen percent or less;

4.       Fence or wall height, to increase the maximum permitted by fifteen percent or less;

5.       Parking stalls, to reduce the minimum required by ten percent or less;

6.       Landscaping, to reduce the minimum required by ten percent or less;

7.       Open space required pursuant to Section 21.04.020(D)(4) of this title, to reduce the minimum required by ten percent or less;

8.       Roof-mounted mechanical equipment in a residential zone;

9.       Second Floor to First Floor Area Ratio in a Hillside Area. To increase the second floor to first floor area ratio up to eighty-five percent of the first floor excluding a four hundred square foot attached garage.

D.      Public Hearing. No public hearing shall be required. In lieu of the notice required for a public hearing, a courtesy notice shall be mailed to all property owners of adjacent properties and all properties within a radius of one hundred feet at least ten days prior to the director’s decision date.

E.       Action by Director. The planning director shall approve or deny the application contingent on the making of findings pursuant to subsection F of this section. When an application for minor modification is processed in conjunction with another application for which the commission or council approval is required, the director shall

 

take no action. The commission or council shall take action by resolution either granting or denying approval of the application for the minor modification.

F.       Findings. All of the following findings shall be made in connection with a minor modification:

1.       That the modification will not adversely affect the character and integrity of the area, the utility and value of properties in the area, and the health, safety and welfare of the public;

2.       That the modification will be consistent with the general plan and other applicable plans;

3.       That the modification will not authorize a use that is not otherwise expressly authorized by the zone regulation governing the property.

G.      Conditions of Approval. The reviewing body may impose such conditions as it deems necessary to ensure that the modification will be used in accordance with the findings required by this section.

H.      Issuance of Permits. Upon the effective date of any minor modification granted by the reviewing body the minor modification shall be issued by the director. The effective date shall be the expiration of the fifteen-day appeal period or the date upon which the council takes action on an appeal of the decision of the reviewing body on an application.

I.        Affected Property Owner. For the purposes of this section, “affected property owner” shall mean the owner of a property contiguous to a property for which a minor modification has been filed. Owners of property located across a public or private street, and within one hundred feet of a property for which a minor modification has been filed, shall also be considered affected property owners. (Ord. 1984 § 2, 2014; Ord. 1868 § 2, 2007; Ord. 1836 § 7, 2006; Ord. 1775 §§ 12—13, 2003; Ord. 1648 § 2, 1996)

 

21.02.040 Development plan review.
A.      Purpose. This section provides procedures whereby development plans can be reviewed to ensure orderly development, aesthetic design, safe and harmonious placement and to:

1.       Prevent or minimize adverse impacts on property in the vicinity;

2.       Implement the general plan and applicable specific plans;

3.       Protect the public health, safety and welfare;

4.       Site structures and other improvements in a manner that is in harmony with the terrain and existing developments in the vicinity;

5.       Encourage and promote energy-efficient design.

B.      Projects requiring development plan review (the reviewing body is in parenthesis):

1.       Hillside development (commission);

2.       Multiple-family projects—Apartments, condominiums and cooperatives (commission);

3.       Construction of non-residential building area over five thousand square feet (commission);

4.       Planned redevelopment (commission, council);

5.       Planned development (commission, council);

6.       Civic Center Area plan development, exclusive of permits for signage and awnings (commission);

7.       Mobilehome park overlay development (commission);

8.       Second story construction for all single-family residential zones including hillside lots (director);

9.       Non-residential construction greater than two stories (commission);

10.     Mixed-Use development (commission);

11.     Temporary structures (commission);

12.     Relocated structures (commission);

13.     Tennis courts (commission);

14.     Public facilities located in residential zones (commission);

15.     Recycling facilities, except single-feed vending machines (director);

16.     Open space development (commission);

17.     Gated communities (commission council);

18.     Radio and television broadcasting antennae, private transmitting antennae and satellite receiving antennae (director);

19.     Cantilevered decking (director).

C.      Reviewing Body. Development plan review applications shall be considered by the director, commission, or council as listed in subsection B. For those projects where both the commission and council are listed, the commission shall make a recommendation to the council and the council shall take action to approve or deny the application.

D.      Public Hearing. The reviewing body shall hold a public hearing on each application for a development plan review. Notice of the hearing shall be given as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(E) of this title, except that no notice shall be required to be published. A public hearing shall not be required when the director is the reviewing body. In lieu of a public hearing, a courtesy notice shall be mailed to all property owners within a radius of five hundred feet from the proposed project at least ten days prior to the director’s decision date.

E.       Action by Reviewing Body. The reviewing body shall take action by resolution either granting or denying approval of the development plans. The action of the reviewing body shall be final unless appealed as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(F) of this title. When an application for a development plan review is processed in conjunction with another application for which final council action is required, the director shall take no action and the commission shall take action by recommending either approval or denial of the development plan. The council shall take action by resolution either granting or denying approval of the development plan.

F.       Findings for Approval. The reviewing body shall grant approval of a development plan if all of the following findings are made:

1.       The use is authorized by development plan review pursuant to this title;

2.       The use is consistent with the general plan and other applicable plans;

3.       The site can accommodate the development standards of this title or as is otherwise required;

4.       The site is adequately served by streets, utilities and other services, facilities and improvements;

5.       The use will not adversely affect the character and integrity of the area, the utility and value of properties in the area, and the health, safety and welfare of the public.

G.      Conditions of Approval. The reviewing body may impose such conditions as it deems necessary to ensure that the project will meet the development standards of the zone and the purpose and intent of this section.

H.      Time Limit. Any development plan approved pursuant to the provisions of this section is conditional upon construction work beginning within eighteen months after the effective date of approval or such other period specified as a condition of approval. If construction work is not begun within the required time and carried on diligently to completion, the development plans shall become void; however, the reviewing body may extend the time limit in the case of unavoidable delay. The applicant must submit a written request to the reviewing body for a time extension before the original time limit expires.

I.        Amendment. Amendment of an approved development plan, other than the time limit, shall require the filing of an application for a development plan review as set forth in this section.

J.       Revocation or Modification.

1.       The reviewing body may revoke or modify an approved development plan if it makes any of the following findings:

a.       The project is detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare;

b.       One or more of the conditions of approval have not been complied with;

c.       The approval was obtained by fraud.

2.       The reviewing body shall hold a hearing upon the question of the revocation or modification. Notice of the hearing shall be given as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(E) of this title, except that no notice shall be required to be published.

3.       The reviewing body shall take action by either revoking or modifying the development plan or allowing the development plan to remain unchanged. The action of the reviewing body shall be final unless appealed as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(F) of this title. (Ord. 2050 §§ 3 ,4, 2020; Ord. 2017 § 2, 2017)

 

21.02.045 Nonconforming lot development plan review.
A.      Purpose. This section provides procedures whereby a nonconforming lot that cannot be developed or improved in conformance with the provisions of this title due to the nonconforming condition of the lot, including size, dimension, or configuration, may be granted a nonconforming lot development plan review permit to allow the development or improvement of the lot.

B.      Reviewing Body. Nonconforming lot development plan review applications shall be considered by the commission.

C.      Public Hearing. The planning commission shall hold a hearing on each application. Notice of the hearing shall be given as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(E) of this title.

D.      Action by Reviewing Body. The planning commission shall take action by resolution either granting or denying the application request. The action of the planning commission shall be final unless appealed as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(F) of this title. When an application is processed in conjunction with another application for which final council action is required, the commission shall take action by recommending either approval or denial of the application request, and the council shall take action by resolution either granting or denying application request.

E.       Findings for Approval. The reviewing body shall grant approval of an application request if all of the following findings are made:

1.       The use is authorized pursuant to this title.

2.       The use is consistent with the general plan and other applicable plans.

3.       Because of the nonconforming condition of the lot, including size, dimension, or configuration, the strict application of this title deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification.

4.       The lot will be adequately served by streets, utilities, and other services, facilities, and improvements.

5.       The development or improvement of the lot will not adversely affect the character and integrity of the area, the utility and value of properties in the area, and the health, safety, and welfare of the public.

6.       Approval of the development or improvement of the lot will not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification.

F.       Conditions of Approval. The reviewing body may impose such conditions as it deems necessary to ensure that the development or improvements of the lot will not adversely affect the character and integrity of the area, the utility and value of properties in the area, and the health, safety, and welfare of the public.

G.      Issuance of Permits. Upon the effective date of any permit granted by the reviewing body, subject to the conditions of approval, the permit shall be issued by the director. The effective date shall be the expiration of the fifteen day appeal period or the date upon which the council takes action on the application.

H.      Time Limit. Any application request approved pursuant to this section is conditional upon construction beginning within eighteen months after the effective date of approval or such other period specified as a condition of approval and carried on diligently to completion. If construction has not commenced within the specified period and carried on diligently to completion, the approval shall become void, unless the reviewing body extends the specified period.

I.        Amendment. Amendment of an approved application request, other than time limits, shall require the filing of an application request as set forth in this section.

J.       Revocation or Modification.

1.       The reviewing body may revoke or modify an approved application request if it makes any of the following findings:

a.       The project is detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare.

b.       One or more of the conditions of approval have not been complied with.

c.       The approval was obtained by fraud.

2.       The reviewing body shall hold a hearing upon the question of the revocation or modification. Notice of the hearing shall be given as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(E) of this title.

3.       The reviewing body may take action by either revoking or modifying the approved application request. The action of the reviewing body shall be final unless appealed as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(F) of this title. (Ord. 1984 § 2, 2014; Ord. 1712 § 3, 2000)

 

21.02.050 Development agreements.
A.      Purpose. These regulations provide a means whereby the city and property owners can conclude agreements on proposed development plans for specific property. The agreements assure property owners that development may proceed in accordance with the terms and conditions of said agreements and assures the city that the property will be developed in the manner agreed to in the development agreement. Specifically, these regulations are designed to achieve the following purposes:

1.       To contribute to strengthening the public planning process;

2.       To achieve consistency with the general plan and applicable specific plans;

3.       To encourage private participation in comprehensive planning;

4.       To reduce the economic costs of development.

B.      Applicability. The city may enter into a development agreement with any owner of property within the planning area for the development of such property as provided for in this section.

C.      Application. Applications for development agreements shall be made on forms provided by the director and shall be accompanied by a fee, as established by council resolution. Applications shall be made by the owner of the property for which the development agreement is sought, or an authorized agent.

D.      Contents. Development agreements shall include the following:

1.       A specified duration of the agreement;

2.       The permitted uses of the property;

3.       The density or intensity of use;

4.       The maximum size and height of proposed structures;

5.       A provision for the reservation or dedication of land for public purposes;

6.       A provision that the conditions of the agreement are binding upon and the benefits of the agreement inure to all successors in interest to the parties of the agreement;

7.       A provision for the periodic review of the agreement in accordance with the procedures provided in this section;

8.       A provision that construction shall be commenced within a specified time and that the project or any phase be completed within a specified time;

 

9.       Conditions, terms, restrictions and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions, provided such conditions, terms, restrictions or requirements do not prevent the development of the land for the uses and the intensity of development set forth in the agreement;

10.     Terms and conditions relative to applicant financing of necessary public facilities and subsequent reimbursement over time.

E.       Concept Plans. Concept plans shall consist of plans and narrative support.

1.       Plans shall contain or illustrate the following:

a.       All proposed land uses;

b.       The relationship of proposed uses to existing and future uses of abutting parcels;

c.       The location and sequence of each phase;

d.       A circulation and parking plan;

e.       Open space areas, including landscaping, parks, recreational facilities, building restriction areas;

f.        The location of public and private easements.

2.       A narrative text shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

a.       A general description of the project including the uses proposed, building densities, heights, floor areas, parking ratios and similar information;

b.       A legal description of the parcels involved;

c.       The proposed starting and completion date for the project and its phases;

d.       A description of geological, seismic or other hazards and measures to mitigate these;

e.       A statement of the relationship of the project to the general plan and any applicable specific plan;

f.        Other such information that may be required to sufficiently describe the proposed project.

F.       Action by Commission. The commission shall hold a public hearing on each application for a development agreement. Notice of the hearing shall be given as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(E) of this title. The commission shall recommend to the council approval, approval with modifications or denial.

G.      Action by Council. Upon receiving the recommendation of the commission, the council shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(E) of this title. The council shall take action either granting, with or without modifications or denying approval of the development agreement. Development agreements shall be approved by ordinance of the council.

H.      Findings for Approvals. The commission shall recommend approval and the council shall approve a development agreement if the following findings are made:

1.       The provisions of the agreement are consistent with the general plan and applicable specific plans.

2.       The provisions of the agreement are consistent with this title.

I.        Designation on Official Zoning Map. Upon approval of a development agreement or an amendment, the property involved shall be identified on the official zoning map by the designation DA followed by the dates of the duration of the agreement. Said identification shall be removed from the official zoning map upon cancellation or expiration of the development agreement or upon completion in full of the agreement.

J.       Amendment or Termination. A development agreement may be amended or terminated by mutual consent of the parties to the agreement or their successors in interest. Amendment or termination of a development agreement shall be done in the manner provided in this section for recommendation, action and approval.

K.      Recordation. No later than ten days after the ordinance approving the development agreement, amendment or termination becomes effective, the city clerk shall record a copy of the agreement amendment or termination with the county recorder.

L.       Review Procedures. Development agreements shall be reviewed at least every twelve months unless otherwise provided by ordinance. Such review shall be conducted by the commission as follows:

1.       Prior to the completion of twelve months from the date of the agreement and to completion of each succeeding twelve-month period, the applicant shall file a letter with the director requesting review of the agreement. The letter shall be accompanied by plans and/or narrative description containing the following:

a.       A report on the completion of any portion or phase of the agreement;

b.       The progress made toward completion of all other portions or phases of the agreement;

c.       An explanation, with supporting information, of areas where adequate progress has not been achieved and proposals for corrective action to achieve adequate progress.

2.       On receipt of the applicant’s request for review, the director shall schedule the matter for commission review within thirty days.

3.       The commission shall consider the application for review together with the report of the director at a public hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be given as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(E) of this title. If the commission determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the applicant has not complied in good faith with the agreement, the commission shall recommend to the council that the agreement be amended or terminated.

4.       If the commission recommends to the council that an agreement be amended or terminated, the council shall hold a public hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be given as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(E) of this title and shall be scheduled no later than forty-five days after receiving the recommendation of the commission.

5.       The council shall take action either to continue the agreement as approved or to amend or terminate the agreement on the basis of substantial evidence that the applicant has not complied in good faith with the agreement. Amendment or termination of the agreement shall be by ordinance of the council. (Ord. 1984 § 2, 2014; Ord. 1618 § 1 Exh. A, 1993)

 

21.02.060 Historic resources and landmarks.
Any application for a permit, which will result in the alteration, relocation or demolition of an historic resource or landmark, shall be subject to Section 21.03.050 of this title. (Ord. 1984 § 2, 2014; Ord. 1618 § 1 Exh. A, 1993)

Chapter 21.03 GENERAL REGULATIONS
21.03.010 Property development standards.
A.      Purpose. This section contains general regulations and procedures to provide for the use and development of properties in a manner that promotes, preserves and protects a visually attractive community and minimizes hazards and inconveniences to the public.

B.      Underground Utilities. All wires, conductors, cables, raceways and conduits for electrical, telephone, CATV and similar services that provide direct service to any property being developed shall, within the boundary lines of such property, be installed underground. Associated equipment and appurtenances such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, meters and service cabinets may be placed aboveground when screened and located behind the front setback line.

C.      Street Frontage. Every parcel of land shall front on a public or private street.

D.      Setbacks. Except as stated in this subsection and otherwise provided for in this title, no structure shall be located closer to any property line than the setback requirements of the zone in which the structure is located.

1.       Setback Exceptions.

a.       Architectural features, including cornices, belt courses, fireplaces, eaves and bay windows, may project into required setback areas a distance not to exceed two feet.

b.       Unroofed decks, patios, porches, landings, steps, walks and driveways not exceeding thirty-six inches in height as measured from finish grade may be located in the required setback areas.

c.       Canopies and awnings without any supports to the ground may project into required setback areas, but no closer than three feet to a side property line and no more than four feet into the front and rear setbacks.

d.       Swimming pools may be located in the required rear and side setback areas, but no closer than six feet to a property line.

e.       Flag poles may project twenty-five percent into required front and rear setback areas.

f.        Mechanical equipment may project into the required rear or side setback area, but no closer than three feet to a property line.

g.       Additions to lawfully constructed residences within the following single-family estate zones of E-3, E-4, E-5, E-6 and E-7, which do not meet the minimum side yard setback requirements may project into the required side yard setbacks, but in no event shall the setback be less than five feet from the property line. Street side yard setbacks shall maintain the minimum required by Table A.

E.       Height. No structure or any portion shall exceed the maximum building height specified in the development standards of the zone in which the structure is located, except for elevators, stairways, equipment, screening, chimneys, antennas, architectural features, or as otherwise provided for in this title.

F.       Fences and Walls. Fences and walls shall be permitted and/or required as specified in this subsection:

1.       Fences and walls not exceeding four feet in height shall be permitted within the front yard setback if no more than three feet or fifty percent is solid and the remainder is at least fifty percent open.

2.       Fences and walls not exceeding six feet in height shall be permitted behind the front yard setback. Fences and walls exceeding six feet in height may be permitted at public facilities, subject to approval by the city council.

3.       Fences or walls shall be required for development projects involving two or more single-family residences subject to the following:

a.       Fences or walls shall be required along side and rear property lines;

b.       Fences and walls shall be designed to complement the design, colors and materials of the dwelling units;

c.       Solid fences and walls shall be articulated at least every fifty feet of length as measured from the end of a fence or wall and/or the intersection of two or more fences or walls. Fences and walls shall be articulated with either a jog, which measures a minimum of eighteen inches deep by eight feet wide, or other architectural treatment at least eight feet wide;

d.       Walls adjacent to the Gold Line railroad right-of-way may be up to eight feet in height for noise attenuation purposes. Walls greater than eight feet in height may be permitted subject to the preparation of an approved noise study by an acoustical engineer.

G.      Mechanical Equipment. Mechanical equipment, except solar collector panels, shall be screened from public view. Plans for screening shall be submitted to the director for review and approval. Roof-mounted equipment, except solar collector equipment and antennas, is prohibited in the residential zones.

H.      Irrigation. Areas required to be landscaped by any provision of this title shall be provided with automatic irrigation systems installed in conformance with the requirements of applicable codes.

I.        Solar Energy Systems. Plans shall be submitted to the reviewing body as shown in Table E, in the appendix of the zoning code, for review and approval.

J.       Antennas. Plans for antennas, except common skeletal type antennas used to receive UHF and VHF frequencies, shall be submitted to the reviewing body as shown in Table E, in the appendix of the zoning code, for review and approval.

K.      Landscaping. Required setbacks adjacent to a street shall be landscaped with drought-tolerant plant materials and permanently maintained. (Ord. 2026 § 2, 2017; Ord. 1957 § 2, 2012; Ord. 1836 §§ 21, 22, 2006; Ord. 1822 § 2 (Exh. B), 2005; Ord. 1778 § 2, 2003; Ord. 1771 § 1, 2003; Ord. 1737 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1618 § 1 (Exh. A), 1993)

 

21.03.020 Off-street parking and loading.
A.      Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure that sufficient off-street parking and loading areas are provided and properly designed and located in order to meet the parking and loading needs of specific uses and to protect the public health, safety and welfare.

B.      Regulations for Off-Street Parking.

1.       Off-street parking shall be provided according to the provisions of this section for:

a.       Any new structure;

b.       Any new use;

 

c.       Any addition to, or change in the use of, a structure. The additional off-street parking shall be required only for the addition or change of use and not for the entire structure or use, except when the addition expands the original structure by twenty-five percent or more or when the change in use involves twenty-five percent or more of the area of the original use, then the parking area for the entire structure or use shall be brought into conformance with this section.

 

2.       Required off-street parking shall be provided on the same parcel as the structure or use for which the parking is required, unless reciprocal parking or other arrangement is authorized pursuant to this title.

3.       Required off-street parking shall be maintained in accordance with the requirements of this section for the duration of the use.

4.       Required off-street parking shall be used exclusively for the temporary parking of vehicles and shall not be used for the sale, display, repair or storage of vehicles, merchandise or equipment or for any other use, unless authorized pursuant to this title.

C.      Development Standards.

1.       Parking Stall Dimensions.

 

Parking Stall

Width

Depth

Standard

9′

20′

Standard, adjacent to a side wall

10′

20′

Parallel*

10′

25′

Compact

8′

17′

*           Smaller parallel parking stalls may be permitted depending upon location, street width and traffic flow, driveway width, and other safety considerations to accommodate additional landscape areas subject to approval of the city engineer.

 

2.       Parking Aisle Widths.

 

Angle of Parking Stall

Aisle Width One-Way

Aisle Width Two-Way

Parallel

14′

18′

30 degree

14′

18′

45 degree

18′

20′

60 degree

18′

20′

90 degree

26′

26′

 

3.       Compact Parking Stalls. For any use that provides more than ten open parking stalls, a maximum of twenty-five percent of the parking stalls in excess of ten may be compact parking stalls. All compact parking stalls shall be clearly marked: “COMPACT.”

4.       Handicapped Parking. Handicapped parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements and standards as specified by the state of California.

5.       Location of Parking Stalls. Parking stalls shall not be located in any required yard setback that is adjacent to a public right-of-way, except alleys.

6.       Paving. Parking stalls and aisles shall be paved and maintained with asphaltic concrete or other materials approved by the city engineer.

7.       Landscaping.

a.       The parking area shall include landscaping equivalent to at least five percent of the total lot area. Setback areas required to be landscaped by other sections of this title shall not be considered part of the required five percent landscaping.

b.       Parking area landscaping shall include a minimum of one twenty-four-inch box tree for every three parking stalls and appropriate ground cover. Such landscaping shall be located throughout the parking area and planted according to the city forester’s recommendations.

8.       Screening. Parking areas shall be screened from public rights-of-way and adjacent land uses. Screening may consist of walls, fences, landscaping, berms or any combination to form an opaque screen three feet in height within the front or street side yard setback and six feet in height behind the front or street side yard setback as measured from finish grade. Parking areas may be lowered in grade to reduce the screening height requirements.

9.       Striping. Abutting parking stalls shall be separated by double four-inch-wide stripes painted white or by other means approved by the department. All aisles, approach lanes and turning areas shall be clearly marked with directional arrows and lines as necessary to provide for safe traffic movement.

10.     Lighting. Parking areas shall have lighting capable of providing adequate illumination for security and safety. Lighting standards shall be in scale with the height and use of buildings. Any illumination shall be directed away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. Low level lighting shall be used where possible.

11.     Noise. Parking areas, including driveways and loading areas, used for primary circulation and for frequent idling of vehicle engines shall be designed and located to minimize the impact of noise on adjacent properties.

12.     Safety Features. Parking areas shall meet the following standards:

a.       Safety barriers, protective bumpers, curbs and directional markings shall be provided to ensure pedestrian/vehicular safety, efficiency, protection of landscaping, and prevention of encroachment onto abutting property.

b.       Visibility of pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists shall be provided when entering individual parking stalls, when circulating within a parking area, and when entering or leaving a parking area.

c.       Circulation patterns and the location and direction of access drives shall be designed and maintained in accordance with accepted principles of traffic engineering and traffic safety.

13.     Design Standards.

a.       The circulation system shall be designed to provide separate vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems.

b.       Common driveways shall be provided when possible.

c.       Angled parking shall be provided when possible.

d.       Parking stalls shall not abut buildings. Parking areas shall be separated from buildings by raised concrete walkways and/or landscaping.

e.       Reciprocal parking and access agreements between adjacent properties shall be provided when possible.

f.        Vehicle access shall be provided along side streets when possible to minimize pedestrian/vehicular conflicts.

g.       Vehicle access shall be minimized and located as far as possible from street intersections to provide adequate stacking.

h.       Parking areas and pedestrian circulation shall be visible from buildings, especially entrances.

i.        The circulation system shall be designed so that pedestrian circulation will be parallel with vehicle traffic.

j.        The circulation system shall be designed to minimize the need for pedestrians to cross parking aisles and landscape areas.

k.       The circulation system shall be designed to provide pedestrian links between buildings and the street sidewalk system.

l.        The circulation system shall include adequate directional signs for entrances, exits, parking areas, loading areas, and other areas.

D.      Single-Family Residence Standards.

1.       Dwelling Unit Parking. For each single-family residence unit there shall be a minimum of two parking stalls located within a garage.

2.       Location of Carports. Carports that are not an integral part of the main residence shall be located no closer than forty feet to any street and no closer than the residence to any adjacent street.

3.       Driveways. A paved driveway shall be provided from a street or alley to garages and carports. Each driveway shall have a minimum vertical clearance of eight feet and a minimum width of eight feet.

4.       Vehicle Backout. A minimum unobstructed distance of twenty-five feet shall be provided for vehicle backout from garages, carports and other parking stalls as measured to a street or the opposite side of an alley.

E.       Multiple-Family Residence Standards.

1.       Dwelling Unit Parking.

a.       For each dwelling unit, there shall be one parking stall within a garage and one parking stall which may be open or covered, i.e., carport, or two spaces within a garage.

b.       Dwelling units having more than two bedrooms shall increase parking by two-tenths of a parking space for each bedroom in excess of two in each unit. Whenever the computation of the required number of parking stalls results in a fraction, the next higher whole number shall be the required number of parking stalls. See subsection (E)(3) for example.

c.       Tandem parking may be permitted when stalls are assigned to the same dwelling unit, but may not be permitted for guest parking. Tandem parking may be located within a garage, or on a driveway which leads to a garage, carport or open parking stall and does not impede vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic.

d.       Whenever the computation of the required number of parking stalls results in a fraction, the next higher whole number shall be the required number of parking stalls. For example, a multiple family development consisting of four units with three bedrooms each shall have 8.8 required parking stalls and 1.6 guest parking stalls. The 8.8 would change to nine required parking stalls and the 1.6 would change to two guest parking stalls.

e.       For each dwelling unit, there shall be storage area provided in the required garage of one hundred fifty cubic feet plus an additional fifty cubic feet of storage for each additional bedroom over two bedrooms per unit. The storage area shall be designated for each unit.

2.       Handicapped Parking. For each dwelling unit designed to accommodate the physically handicapped, the required parking shall be designed for the handicapped as required by the state of California.

3.       Guest Parking. For every dwelling unit, there shall be a minimum of four-tenths covered or open parking stalls, or a combination of open and covered parking stalls, for guest parking. Whenever the computation of the required number of guest parking stalls results in a fraction, the next higher whole number shall be the required number of parking stalls. For example, a multiple-family development consisting of three units with three bedrooms each shall have 6.6 required parking stalls and 1.2 guest parking stalls. The 6.6 would change to 7 required parking stalls and the 1.2 would change to two guest parking stalls.

Guest parking stalls shall be provided with permanent signs identifying them as guest parking stalls and shall be maintained at all times for guest parking.

4.       Driveways. The minimum width of driveways shall be sixteen feet for one to fifteen units and twenty-six feet for sixteen or more units. Driveways shall have a minimum vertical clearance of eight feet.

5.       Vehicle Backout. A minimum unobstructed distance of twenty-five feet shall be provided for vehicle backout from garages, carports and other parking stalls as measured to a street or the opposite side of an alley.

6.       Senior Housing. For each senior housing unit, there shall be one parking stall enclosed in a garage and one hundred fifty cubic feet of additional storage area provided in the required garage. The storage area shall be designated for each unit. For each two senior housing units, there shall also be at least one open or covered guest parking space.

F.       Mobilehome Park Standards. For every four mobilehome sites, or fraction, there shall be a minimum of nine open parking stalls.

G.      Commercial, Institutional, Recreational and Industrial Use Standards.

1.       The required number of parking stalls shall be provided for each use as specified below. For mixed uses, the required number of parking stalls shall be the sum of the number of parking stalls required for the individual uses computed separately. Whenever the computation of the required number of parking stalls results in a fraction, the next whole number shall be the required number of parking stalls for the use. Reserved or designated parking stalls are prohibited.

 

 

Use

Required Number of Parking Stalls

Animal care facilities

One for each 250 square feet of gross floor area

Arcades

The number shall be established by a parking study as prescribed in Section 21.03.020(H)

Automotive services: repair, full service stations, and washes

One for each 250 square feet of gross floor area, but not less than 7, plus one for each employee

Automotive services: self-service stations

One for each 350 square feet of gross floor area, but not less than 2

Building and landscape materials

One for each 250 square feet of interior retail space and one for each 2,000 square feet of exterior retail/storage area

Child day care centers

One for each 15 children and one for each employee

Churches, theaters, clubs, auditoriums, lodge halls and other places of fixed assembly

One for each 4 permanent seats in the main assembly area and one for each 40 square feet of seating area in the main assembly area where temporary or moveable seats are provided

Community care, convalescent, nursing and assisted living facilities

One for each 3 beds and one for each 3 employees

Convenience stores in conjunction with service stations

One for each 250 square feet of gross floor area, but not less than 7, plus one for each employee

Hospitals

One for each patient bed

Hotels and motels

One for each guest room, one for each manager’s unit and one 15′ x 35′ stall reserved for recreational vehicles for each 15 rooms

Libraries and museums

One for each 500 square feet of gross floor area

Manufacturing, industrial and wholesale uses

One for each 500 square feet of gross floor area for the first 10,000 square feet and one for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area thereafter

Medical office/medical clinic

One for each 200 square feet of gross floor area, but not less than 8

Offices

One for each 250 square feet of gross floor area, but not less than 8

Recreation and sports facilities, gyms, spas and health and fitness centers

The number shall be established by a parking study as prescribed in Section 21.03.020(H)

Restaurants and other places where food or beverages are served

One for each 100 square feet of gross floor area

Retail sales and services

One for each 250 square feet of gross floor area

Retail sales and services, including shopping centers, with over fifty thousand square feet of gross floor area

One for each 250 square feet of gross floor area or the number may be established by a parking study as prescribed in Section 21.03.020(H)

School, educational

One for each employee, one for each 20 elementary and junior high school students; one for each 5 senior high school students; and 10 for each 20 college classrooms

School, vocational

One for each 2 students and one for each employee

Swap meet, indoor

The number shall be established by a parking study as prescribed in Section 21.03.020(H)

Warehousing

One for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for the first 5,000 square feet of gross floor area. One for each 2,000 square feet of gross floor over 5,000 square feet, plus one for each vehicle stored on the premises

Uses not otherwise specified in this subsection

The number shall be established by a parking study as prescribed in Section 21.03.020(H)

2.       Drive-Through Businesses. A stacking space at least one hundred twenty feet long and ten feet wide with eight feet of vertical clearance shall be provided for drive-through businesses. The stacking space shall not block any parking stalls or any portion of a traffic lane.

3.       Driveways. The minimum width of driveways shall be twenty-six feet. Driveways shall have a minimum vertical clearance of eight feet.

H.      Parking and Loading Study.

1.       The director may require a parking and loading study. The parking and loading study shall be submitted to the director for approval. The action of the director shall be final unless appealed as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(F) of this title.

2.       The parking and loading study shall be prepared by a registered traffic engineer. The study shall describe all proposed uses and show the recommended number and layout of parking stalls and loading areas including:

a.       Standard, compact and handicapped parking stalls and the basis for the number of parking stalls proposed in each category;

b.       Access;

c.       Driveways, aisles and circulation patterns;

d.       Landscaped areas;

e.       Signs;

f.        Such other information as the director may deem necessary to adequately and completely describe the plan.

3.       The plan shall be approved as submitted or with conditions if the following findings are made:

a.       The parking and loading plan will adequately provide for the parking and loading needs of the development;

b.       The parking and loading plan will not adversely affect traffic patterns;

c.       The parking and loading plan will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare.

I.        Recreational Vehicles.

1.       Purpose. The purpose of the recreational vehicle (RV) code is to clearly define what is considered a recreational vehicle and to identify locations and standards for storage of recreational vehicles in residential zones and to identify requirements for temporary parking of recreational vehicles in order to protect the integrity, value and character of residential neighborhoods along with public health and safety.

2.       Definitions. Recreational vehicles or RVs are defined to cover both recreational vehicles that are motorized and non-motorized.

“Motorized recreational vehicle” means a motor home built on a truck or bus chassis or a van chassis which usually has a section overhanging the cab. All these vehicles are powered by internal combustion engines that run on gasoline, diesel, batteries or other fuel. Van campers and pickup truck campers are excluded from the recreational vehicle definition. Inoperative vehicles pursuant to Section 9.36.010(8) of the Glendora Municipal Code are prohibited.

“Non-motorized recreational vehicle” means a conventional travel trailer or a fifth wheel trailer utilized for recreational purposes and designed to be towed by a vehicle. Boats, horse trailers, utility trailers for storing recreational equipment or other equipment and all-terrain vehicles stored on trailers utilized for recreational purposes are considered non-motorized recreational vehicles. Pickup truck camper shells which have been removed from the vehicle and stored are considered non-motorized recreational vehicles and shall conform to the provisions of this title.

The following diagrams represent examples of recreational vehicles as defined by this subsection and are not meant to be a complete list of examples:

 

RECREATIONAL VEHICLE EXAMPLES

 



Motor Home

 



5th Wheel Trailer

 



Travel Trailer

 



Tent Trailer

 



Sea-doo (or other equipment such as a boat or motorcycles) on trailer

 



Horse Trailer

 



Utility Trailer enclosed example

 



Utility Trailer open example

 

The following examples are exempt from the recreational vehicle definition:

 



Van Camper is excluded

 



Pickup Truck Camper is excluded

 

“Recreational vehicle storage” means on-site residential parking of a recreational vehicle on a parking space approved for a recreational vehicle by this section that is separate from the required off-street parking for a single-family residence.

“Temporary recreational vehicle parking” means short-term parking for the purposes of cleaning and prepping which can occur on a public street with a valid city permit issued by the city pursuant to Section 10.12.021 of the Glendora Municipal Code or on private property within the front setback on an approved driveway leading to a garage for a time period not to exceed seventy-two hours at any one time.

“RV yard area” means those areas on a residential zoned parcel where an RV may or may not be stored relative to the main residential building and orientation to the street.

“RV front yard” for the purposes of RV storage means a space extending the width of a parcel between the front property line and the front of the residence and not less than the required front setback for the zone. If the front of the residence varies relative to the front property line, the RV front yard shall follow the front of the residence, not an imaginary straight line taken from the nearest wall of the residence to the street.

“RV side yard” for the purposes of RV storage means a space extending from the RV front yard area to the RV rear yard area between the side property line and the side wall of the main residence.

“Short RV side yard” for the purposes of RV storage means a space between the side property line and the shortest side wall of the main residence and extending from the RV rear yard area up to three feet into the RV front yard area provided it does not extend beyond the main residence building line nearest the street, does not encroach into the front setback or into the required twenty-five-foot backout distance from the garage.

“RV rear yard” for the purposes of RV storage means a space extending the width of a parcel between the rear property line and a line parallel with the rear wall of the main residence.

“Corner lot RV front yard” for the purposes of RV storage means the street frontage with the property address.

“RV street side yard” for the purposes of RV storage means the RV yard area adjacent to a street on a corner lot between the RV front yard as determined by the corner lot RV front yard definition and the RV rear yard.

“Irregular nonconforming RV lot” for the purposes of RV storage means a lot where one side is twenty-five percent or less of the other side, resulting in a lot depth of less than one hundred feet. Lot depth is measured from the mid-point of the front lot line to the mid-point of the rear lot line.

“Irregular nonconforming RV lot side yard” means the side yard for the narrowest side beginning at the side of the driveway farthest from the residence to the side property line of the narrowest side and extending from the front property line to the RV rear yard.

 

RV Yard Area Diagrams Examples (no scale):

Square residential layout



 

“L” residential layout



 

Corner lot RV yard area – Address and front door facing narrowest street frontage



 

Corner lot RV yard area – Address and front door facing longest street frontage



 

Nonconforming lot yard areas



 

3.       Zones Which Allow RV Parking. Other than as permitted under Title 21 Use Table C and Route 66 Specific Plan Use Table 6-1, recreational vehicles may only be stored on single-family zoned lots or lots in which a single-family structure is occupying the parcel even though the lot may be zoned for multifamily structures. The ability to maintain storage of recreational vehicles on multiple-family zoned parcels shall only be permitted as long as there remains a sole single-family structure on the parcel. No commercial RV storage shall be permitted in any residential zone. Commercial RV storage facilities shall refer to Table C of Title 21 and Table 6-1 of the Route 66 Specific Plan in Title 21. In all cases, storage must maintain compliance with all other sections of this code.

4.       Registered Owner. The registered owner of an RV stored on the property must either be the owner of the property or use the property as their primary residency. This subsection does not apply to a single RV stored on the property as a result of visiting guest(s) as long as the storage does not exceed seventy-two hours.

5.       RV Storage Standards.

a.       Front Yard RV Storage. No storage of recreational vehicles may occur in the front yard area or in front of the main residence of the property unless an administrative review permit has been granted, with the exception of a slight encroachment extending from the side yard into the front yard not to exceed three feet and does not encroach into the twenty-five-foot back-out distance from a garage and is screened with a six-foot wall or solid fence. The only other exception to this subsection shall be the temporary parking of the RV on a driveway leading to a garage for the purpose of prepping the vehicle for use or cleaning the vehicle after its usage. In no case shall that period of time exceed seventy-two hours. Recreational vehicle temporary parking within the front setback and/or in front of the main residence on driveways leading to a garage shall not encroach onto the sidewalk area or public right-of way. This subsection shall pertain to RV parking on private residential property. Temporary RV parking on public streets for any period of time is administered through Chapter 10.12 of the Glendora Municipal Code.

b.       Rear Yard RV Storage. Storage of recreation vehicles in the rear yard area is permissible as long as there is a six-foot wall or solid fence to screen the vehicle from view. The RV shall not encroach closer to than two feet to any wall or fence. Screening walls, gates and fences shall be required to obtain any necessary review, approvals and permits.

c.       Side Yard RV Storage. Recreational vehicle storage is permitted in the RV side yard area behind the front setback and behind the RV front yard provided it is screened to a height of six feet as required by this title.

RV side yard storage examples:

 

Side yard RV storage – Square residential building layout

 



 

Side yard RV storage – “L” residential building layout

 



 

Side yard corner lot RV storage, address and front door on narrowest frontage

 



 

Side yard corner lot RV storage—Address/front door on longest street frontage

 



 

RV side yard storage—Irregular nonconforming lots

 



 

6.       Parking Surface for RV Storage. RV storage may be on any surface. If the surface is vegetation, it must be maintained pursuant to GMC Section 9.36.020(4).

7.       Access to Side or Rear Yard Storage Area. Generally access to side or rear yard storage areas shall be from the existing driveway. However in some cases, the access may require the recreational vehicle to access over a curb and sidewalk. In those cases, the property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance and if determined by the public works director the replacement of curb and sidewalk damaged by such use.

8.       Screening. Acceptable screening is considered a wall or solid fence structure that has obtained all required approvals and permits from the city. Materials for screen fencing shall be masonry, wood or wrought iron with view-obscuring material. Materials for screening gates shall be wood or wrought iron with view-obscuring material. In no case shall an RV screening wall or fence along the side yard or rear yard be higher or lower than six feet as measured to the highest finish grade. Recreational vehicle storage in a side yard area shall be screened from view from the public right of way as provided by this section. A gate is not required.

9.       Temporary Coverings. No temporary coverings such as tarps or cloth screens are permitted. Fitted covers and permanent canopies are permitted and may be used as long as they are specifically designed for a recreational vehicle. All fitted covers and permanent canopies shall be maintained in good condition. Permanent canopies are structures which are permanently fixed to the ground and shall comply with all required building codes and Glendora Municipal Code Section 21.04.010(D)(2) Accessory Buildings.

10.     Living Quarters. Recreational vehicles shall not be used as living quarters when stored on residential or commercial property within the city except as provided in Section 19.20.140 of the Glendora Municipal Code.

11.     Temporary On-Street Parking. Temporary on-street RV parking shall be permitted for a maximum of seventy-two hours at any one time with an approved temporary RV street parking permit issued by the city as provided by Section 10.12.021, Early Morning Parking-Temporary Permits, of the Glendora Municipal Code.

12.     Grandfathering of 1993 RV Parking Exemptions. The recreation vehicles granted an exemption through the 1993 ordinance and recorded with the community preservation division shall continue to be recognized as valid until the specific vehicle referenced in the exemption is no longer located on the property.

13.     Enforcement. The effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall be six months from the date of adoption by the city council.

14.     Administrative Review Permit for RV Storage in RV Front Yard.

a.       Storage of an RV in an RV front yard area of a single-family residential zone or a multiple-family residential zone developed with only one residence is prohibited unless an administrative review permit is approved by the director of planning and redevelopment.

b.       The application for an administrative review permit for RV storage in a RV front yard area shall be denied unless all of the following five findings for approval can be made:

(A)    The subject property is unique in size or configuration;

(B)    There is no available space in a garage, side yard or rear yard area which can accommodate the RV in conformance with this title;

(C)    The property can accommodate screening from view from the public right-of-way and surrounding properties with a six-foot high wall/fence and gate constructed with view obscuring material. The six-foot high wall/fence and gate screening does not encroach into the front yard setback area or twenty-five-foot back-out distance from a required garage;

(D)    The RV can be parked parallel to the side property line and as near the property line as possible;

(E)     Only one RV can qualify for an administrative review permit for RV front yard storage on the subject property.

c.       The following development standards shall be incorporated into conditions of approval for the administrative review permit:

(A)    The RV storage space shall not encroach or block the required twenty-five-foot back-out distance from an approved garage;

(B)    The director may impose additional conditions as needed to ensure compliance with regulations and to reduce adverse impacts to surrounding neighborhood properties.

d.       The administrative permit shall be approved or denied by the director of planning and redevelopment with appeal to the planning commission. The action of the planning commission, shall be based on findings in subsections (I)(14)(b)(A) through (E) and supported by factual findings in order to grant the appeal. The action of the planning commission shall be final with no further administrative appeal possible.

J.       Off-Street Loading Standards. Every nonresidential use shall have permanently maintained off-street loading spaces pursuant to the following provisions.

1.       The following minimum number of loading spaces shall be provided for each use:

a.       Commercial, institutional, hospital and senior group housing uses:

 

Gross Floor Area

Spaces Required

Less than 5,000 sq. ft.

None

5,000—20,000 sq. ft.

One

Each additional 20,000 sq. ft.

One additional, maximum of 6

 

b.       Office uses:

 

Gross Floor Area

Spaces Required

Less than 10,000 sq. ft.

None

10,000—40,000 sq. ft.

One

Each additional 20,000 sq. ft.

One additional, maximum of 4

 

c.       Wholesale, warehousing, and industrial uses:

 

Gross Floor Area

Spaces Required

Less than 10,000 sq. ft.

One

Each additional 20,000 sq. ft.

One additional

 

d.       Requirements for uses not specifically listed shall be determined by the director based upon the requirements for comparable uses and upon the particular characteristics of the proposed use.

2.       The following design standards shall apply to all off-street loading spaces:

a.       Dimensions. Required loading spaces shall be not less than fifteen feet in width, fifty feet in length, with fourteen feet of vertical clearance.

b.       Lighting. Loading spaces shall have lighting capable of providing adequate illumination for security and safety. Lighting standards shall be in scale with the height and use of buildings. Any illumination shall be directed away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. Low level lighting shall be used where possible.

c.       Location. Loading spaces shall be located and designed to ensure that all vehicular turning maneuvers occur on site. Loading spaces shall not be located in any required yard setback that is adjacent to a public right-of-way.

d.       Screening. Loading areas adjacent to residentially zoned property shall have a six-foot-high solid architecturally treated wall with a stucco or equivalent finish or material approved by the director.

e.       Striping. Loading areas shall be striped indicating the loading spaces and identifying the spaces for loading only. The striping shall be maintained in a clear and visible manner.

f.        Surfacing. Loading areas shall be surfaced with a minimum thickness of four inches of asphaltic concrete over a minimum thickness of six inches of an aggregate base material or as otherwise approved by the city engineer.

K.      Accessory Dwelling Unit Standards. Parking is not required for an accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling unit. (Ord. 2053 § 2, 2020; Ord. 2017 § 2, 2017; Ord. 2015 § 2, 2017)

 

21.03.030 Nonconforming lots, structures, improvements, and uses.
A.      Purpose. This section is intended to regulate the use and development of nonconforming lots, the use and alteration of nonconforming structures and improvements, and the continuation of nonconforming uses.

B.      Nonconforming Lots. A nonconforming lot may be used, developed, or improved subject to the following:

1.       A nonconforming lot shall only be allowed those uses that are permitted by the underlying zone and such uses shall be subject to all other provisions of this title. (Exception: See nonconforming uses in subsection D of this section.)

2.       A nonconforming lot, other than a multifamily zoned lot, may be developed or improved provided that the nonconforming lot was legally created and the development or improvement and uses conforms to all provisions of the Glendora Municipal Code, including the standards of the applicable zone, with the exception of the nonconforming lot size, dimension or configuration. A nonconforming lot may not be developed or improved if the development or improvement does not conform to all provisions of the Glendora Municipal Code, except for lot size, dimension or configuration, unless a nonconforming lot development plan review permit is granted pursuant to Section 21.02.045 of this title and the nonconforming lot was legally created. A multifamily zoned lot which is nonconforming in lot size, dimension and configuration shall obtain approval of a nonconforming lot development plan review.

3.       Nonconforming lots may be merged and/or reconfigured with conforming or nonconforming lots to create the same or fewer number of lots but which conform more closely to the applicable standards of the underlying zone subject to all other provisions of this title, provided that the resulting lot(s) sizes and dimensions are not deficient by more than ten percent of the requirements of the underlying zone.

C.      Nonconforming Structures and Improvements. A nonconforming structure or improvement may be used or altered subject to the following:

1.       A nonconforming structure or improvement shall only be used for those uses that are permitted by the underlying zone and such uses shall be subject to all other provisions of this title. (Exception: See nonconforming uses in subsection D of this section.)

2.       An addition to a nonconforming structure or improvement shall be subject to the applicable standards of the underlying zone and all other provisions of this title; however, the nonconforming structure or improvement shall not be required to conform to the provisions of this title.

3.       The repair, maintenance, renovation, rehabilitation, or partial replacement of a nonconforming structure or improvement shall not result in a greater nonconformity to the provisions of this title.

4.       The complete replacement of a nonconforming structure or improvement shall require that the replacement conform to the provisions of this title, unless the planning commission approves a request for an exception.

5.       If the use of a nonconforming structure or improvement is discontinued for a period of one hundred eighty days or more, the nonconforming structure or improvement shall be removed or altered to conform to the provisions of this title, unless the planning commission approves a request for an extension of time.

 

D.      Nonconforming Uses. The continuance of a nonconforming use is subject to the following:

1.       A nonconforming use that is expanded, intensified, altered, terminated, abandoned, or discontinued for a period of one hundred eighty days or more shall be removed or altered to conform to the provisions of this title, unless the planning commission approves a request for a conditional use permit.

2.       The development or improvement of any property shall require that all nonconforming uses be removed or altered to conform to the provisions of this title, unless the planning commission approves a request for a conditional use permit.

3.       No nonconforming use may be expanded, intensified, or altered, unless the planning commission approves a request for a conditional use permit. (Ord. 1859 § 2, 2007; Ord. 1857 § 2, 2007; Ord. 1712 § 2, 2000: Ord. 1645 §§ 1—4, 1996: Ord. 1618 § 1 Exh. A, 1993)

 

21.03.040 Hazardous materials.
A.      Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by controlling the use of hazardous materials.

B.      Conditional Use Permit Required. An establishment using more than five hundred pounds or fifty-five gallons of hazardous materials or two hundred cubic feet of compressed gas in the aggregate at any one time shall obtain a conditional use permit as delineated in Section 21.02.020 of this title. Hazardous materials contained solely in a consumer product for direct sale or distribution to, and use by, the general public are exempted from the provisions of this subsection. (Ord. 1618 § 1 Exh. A, 1993)

 

21.03.050 Historic preservation.
A.      Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the general welfare by providing for the identification, protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of improvements and areas within the city that reflect special elements of historical, architectural, archaeological, cultural or aesthetic heritage for the following reasons:

1.       To encourage public knowledge, understanding, appreciation and use of the city’s past;

2.       To foster civic pride in the beauty and personality of the city and in the accomplishments of its past;

3.       To identify and resolve, as early as possible, conflicts between the preservation of cultural resources and alternative land uses;

4.       To encourage conservation of building material resources through maintenance and restoration of existing historical structures;

5.       To promote the enjoyment and use of cultural resources appropriate for the education and recreation of the people of the city;

6.       To encourage modification of historical buildings that is compatible with the historical character of such buildings;

7.       To promote awareness of the economic benefits of historic preservation.

B.      Powers and Duties of Planning Director Relating to Historical Preservation. The planning director shall have the following powers and duties regarding historical preservation:

1.       Establish criteria for a comprehensive survey of properties within the city;

2.       Conduct a comprehensive survey of properties within the city. The survey results shall be publicized and periodically updated;

3.       Maintain a register of historic resources and landmarks within the city;

4.       Review and comment, on an informal basis, upon the conduct of land use, housing and redevelopment, municipal improvement and other types of planning and programs undertaken by the city, the county or state as they relate to the cultural resources of the community;

 

5.       Recommend to the council the purchase of fee or less-than-fee interest in property for the purposes of cultural resource preservation;

6.       Investigate and report to the council on the use of various federal, state, local and private funding sources and mechanisms available to promote cultural resource preservation;

7.       Cooperate with local, county, state and federal governments and private organizations in the pursuit of the objectives of cultural resource preservation;

8.       Render nonbinding advice and guidance, upon the request of the property owner or occupant, on the restoration, alteration, decoration, landscaping or maintenance of any cultural resource or neighboring property within public view of a cultural resource, but shall not recommend specific contractors, distributors or manufacturers;

9.       Participate in, promote and conduct public information, educational and interpretive programs pertaining to historic resources and landmarks;

10.     Adopt guidelines to be used in reviewing applications to do work that affects a historic resource or landmark;

11.     Review applications for building and demolition permits and other similar entitlements as set forth in this section in accordance with the specific guidelines adopted by the commission;

12.     Review and make recommendations on applications for designation of historic resources and landmarks;

13.     Perform any other functions that may be designated by resolution or motion of the commission.

C.      Historic Resource or Landmark Designation Findings. Historic resources or landmarks shall be designated based upon one or more of the following findings:

1.       The proposed preserved features exemplify or reflect special elements of historical, architectural, archaeological, cultural or aesthetic heritage.

2.       The proposed preserved features are identified with persons or events significant in local state or national history.

3.       The proposed features embody distinctive characteristics of a style, type, period or method of construction or are valuable examples of the use of indigenous materials or craftsmanship.

4.       The proposed preserved features are representative of the notable work of a builder, designer or architect.

D.      Historic Resource or Landmark Designation Procedures.

1.       Any person may request the designation of real property as a landmark or historic resource for the purpose of preserving an identified cultural resource on the property by submitting an application for such designation to the planning department. The commission or council may also initiate such an application on its own motion. When the property is privately owned, the application shall include the written consent of the property owner.

2.       The planning department shall conduct a study of each proposed designation, make written reports on the applications, and transmit such reports to the council with its recommendation to approve or deny the designation.

3.       The council shall hold a public hearing within sixty days of receiving the report of the planning department. Action shall be taken by resolution of the reviewing body. The resolution shall state the findings and facts relied upon in making such determination. The action of the council shall be final.

4.       No building or demolition permits or other similar entitlements relative to a cultural resource proposed to be preserved by the designation of landmark or historic resource shall be issued while the public hearing is pending.

5.       Notice of the date, place, time and purpose of the hearing shall be given by advertisement once in a newspaper of general circulation and by first class mail to the applicants and the owners and occupants of the proposed landmark or historic resource at least ten days prior to the date of the public hearing. The names and addresses of such owners shall be obtained from the latest equalized assessment rolls of the county assessor.

6.       The designations of landmark and historic resource shall run with the land and be binding upon subsequent owners of the real property. Upon designation, the real property owner shall sign a certificate of landmark/historic resource designation. The city shall file the certificate for recording with the county recorder.

E.       Historic Resource Permit Procedure. The following procedures shall be followed in processing applications for approval to do work on any preserved feature of a historic resource:

1.       The building official shall report any application for a permit to do work that affects the exterior appearance of a preserved feature of a historic resource to the department. If the department determines that such proposed work will affect the exterior appearance of the preserved feature, the application shall be referred to the commission.

2.       Applications shall be accompanied by plans and materials as required by the department and reasonably necessary for the proper review of the proposed work.

3.       The commission shall make a decision within ninety days of acceptance of a complete application. Decisions shall be made at regular meetings of the commission. Decisions shall state the findings of fact and reasons relied upon in reaching the decision. The action of the commission shall be final unless appealed as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(F) of this title.

4.       In the request for approval to wholly or partially demolish a preserved feature of a historic resource, the commission may require a grace period of up to six months from the date of application to encourage or facilitate the saving, salvaging, moving or photographing and documenting of the preserved feature. Permits may be issued after the grace period.

5.       Notice of the date, place, time and purpose of the hearing shall be given by first class mail to the applicants and the owners and occupants of the historic resource at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing.

F.       Landmark Permit Procedure. The following procedures shall be followed in processing applications for approval to do work on any preserved feature of a landmark:

1.       The building official shall report any application for a permit to do work that affects the exterior appearance of a preserved feature of a landmark to the department. If the department determines that such proposed work will affect the exterior appearance of the preserved feature, the application shall be referred to the commission.

2.       Applications shall be accompanied by plans and materials as required by the commission and reasonably necessary for the proper review of the proposed work.

3.       When no permit is required for proposed work that will affect the exterior appearance of a preserved feature, plans for such work shall be submitted to the commission for review.

4.       The commission shall make a decision within ninety days of acceptance of a complete application. Decisions shall be made at regular meetings of the commission. Decisions shall state the findings of fact and reasons relied upon in reaching the decision. The action of the commission shall be final unless appealed as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(F).

5.       Applications for demolition or relocation of preserved features outside city boundaries may only be approved by the council upon a showing of hardship by the applicant or the owner of the subject property.

6.       Notice of the date, place, time and purpose of the hearing shall be given by first class mail to the applicants and the owners and occupants of the landmark at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing.

G.      Ordinary Maintenance and Repair. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any preserved feature that does not involve a change in design, material or external appearance, nor does this section prevent work on such feature when the building official certifies to the commission that such action is required for the public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition that cannot be rectified through the use of the California Historical Building Code. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent a public utility from trimming or removing trees that interfere with, prevent or threaten the reliability of service or safety in the operation of electric distribution, transmission or communication.

H.      Duty to Keep in Good Repair. The owner of a historic resource or landmark shall keep in good repair all of the exterior portions of the preserved feature and all interior portions whose maintenance is necessary to prevent deterioration and decay of the exterior.

I.        Showing of Hardship. The reviewing body shall approve or conditionally approve an application for a permit to carry out any proposed work on a preserved feature of an historic resource or landmark if disapproval would result in substantial hardship on the applicant because of conditions peculiar to the applicant or the preserved feature. The applicant shall submit a letter to the reviewing body indicating the facts upon which the hardship claim is based with any relevant evidence supporting the basis for the claim. The reviewing body may require additional information to determine substantial hardship. Within ninety days of the receipt of the hardship claim, the reviewing body shall hold a public hearing. In determining whether substantial hardship exists, the reviewing body shall consider the evidence submitted by the applicant and evidence that demonstrates, but is not limited to, the following:

1.       Bona fide efforts to rent or sell the property have been unsuccessful;

2.       Approval or conditional approval to do work permitted by this section will not enable the applicant to rent or sell the property at a reasonable rate of return;

3.       It is not economically or technically feasible to renovate or undertake an alternative development compatible with the permit criteria outlined in this section;

4.       Personal or economic circumstances exist, which preclude the applicant from performing work in compliance with the permit criteria outlined in this section;

5.       Regulations and standards set forth in this title or Title 20 of this code preclude necessary renovations or a feasible use of the preserved feature.

The reviewing body may delay the decision on the application for a period not to exceed nine months to investigate plans to allow for a reasonable use of or return from the property or other measures to preserve the preserved feature, including selling the property to an individual or group that would preserve it. The reviewing body shall take action by resolution stating the findings and facts relied upon in making the decision. (Ord. 1983 § 6, 2014; Ord. 1960 § 1, 2012; Ord. 1663 § 1, 1997: Ord. 1618 § 1 Exh. A, 1993)

 

21.03.060 State model water efficient landscaping ordinance adopted by reference.
The city adopts by reference the California State Model Water Efficient Landscaping Ordinance (AB 1881), and any amendments thereto, as the law of the city. One copy of the California State Model Water Efficient Landscaping Ordinance has been, and is now, filed in the office of planning, and the ordinance is adopted by reference as if incorporated and set out in full in this chapter. (Ord. 2043 § 3, 2019; Ord. 1997 § 3, 2015; Ord. 1996 § 3, 2015)

 

21.03.070 Trip reduction and travel demand management.
A.      Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the efficient use of existing and planned transportation infrastructure, maintain or improve traffic levels of service, lower motor vehicle emissions, minimize the number of peak vehicle trips generated by development, promote the use of alternative transportation, improve air quality and participate in regional and national efforts to improve travel demand management.

B.      Review of Transit Impacts. Prior to approval of any applicable development for which an environmental impact report (EIR) will be prepared pursuant to the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), regional and local fixed-route transit operators providing service to the project shall be identified and consulted in accordance with CEQA. Projects for which a notice of preparation (NOP) for a draft EIR has been circulated pursuant to the provisions of CEQA prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be exempted from its provisions.

The “Transit Impact Review Worksheet” contained in the Los Angeles County Congestion Management Program Manual, or similar worksheets, shall be used in assessing impacts. Pursuant to the provisions of CEQA, transit operators shall be sent an NOP for all contemplated EIRs and shall, as part of the NOP process, be given opportunity to comment on the impacts of the project, to identify recommend transit service or capital improvements that may be required as a result of the project, and to recommend mitigation measures that minimize automobile trips on the CMP network. Impacts and recommended mitigation measures identified by the transit operator shall be evaluated in the Draft EIR prepared for the project. Related mitigation measures adopted shall be monitored through the mitigation monitoring requirements of CEQA.

Applicable development that is phased subject to a development agreement or that requires subsequent approval need not repeat this process as long as no significant changes are made to the project. It shall remain the discretion of the lead agency to determine when a project is substantially the same and therefore covered by a previously certified EIR.

C.      Trip Reduction and Travel Demand Management Measures. Prior to approval and during the life of any applicable development project, the property owner shall provide for all applicable trip reduction and travel demand management measures specified below. All facilities and improvements constructed or otherwise required shall be maintained in a state of good repair.

1.       Nonresidential development of twenty-five thousand square feet or more shall provide a bulletin board, display case or kiosk displaying transportation information in a location where the greatest number of employees are likely to see it. Information shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

a.       Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit serving the site;

b.       Telephone numbers for referrals on transportation information, including numbers for the regional ride sharing agency and local transit operators;

c.       Ride sharing promotional material supplied by commuter-oriented organizations;

d.       Bicycle route and facility information, including regional/local bicycle maps and bicycle safety information;

e.       A listing of facilities available for car poolers, van poolers, bicyclists, transit riders and pedestrians at the site.

2.       Nonresidential development of fifty thousand square feet or more shall comply with subsection (C)(1)(a) of this section and shall provide all of the following measures:

a.       Not less than ten percent of the employee parking area (thirty percent of required parking for commercial uses, eighty-five percent for office/professional uses and ninety percent for industrial/manufacturing uses) shall be reserved for preferential parking. The preferential parking area shall be identified on the site plan upon application for zoning and building permits. A statement that preferential parking is available and a description of the method for providing such parking shall be included on the required transportation information board. Preferential parking stalls shall be signed or marked.

b.       Preferential parking stalls reserved for van pools shall be accessible to van pool vehicles. A minimum vertical interior clearance of seven feet, two inches shall be provided for such parking stalls and access ways to be used by such vehicles. Adequate turning radii and parking stall dimensions shall be provided for van pool parking areas.

c.       Bicycle racks or other secure bicycle parking facilities shall be provided to accommodate four bicycles for the first fifty thousand square feet and one bicycle for each additional fifty thousand square feet of nonresidential development. Calculations that result in a fraction of one-half or higher shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. A bicycle parking facility may be a fully enclosed space or locker accessible only to the owner or operator of the bicycle. Specific facilities (e.g., racks, lockers and locked rooms) and locations shall be determined by the director.

3.       Nonresidential development of one hundred thousand square feet or more shall comply with subsections (C)(2)(a) and (b) above and shall provide all of the following measures:

a.       A safe and convenient zone in which van pool and car pool vehicles may deliver or board their passengers;

 

b.       Sidewalks or other designated pathways following direct and safe routes from the external pedestrian circulation system to each building in the applicable development;

c.       Transit improvements shall be provided if required by a final EIR to mitigate project impacts. The developer shall consult with local transit providers in determining appropriate improvements. Transit improvements and building entrances shall be designed to provide safe and efficient access to nearby transit facilities;

d.       Safe and convenient access from the external circulation system to on site bicycle parking facilities.

D.      Compliance. To ensure compliance, all improvements required by this section shall be in place prior to the issuance of certificates of occupancy. The director shall be responsible for determining whether the project has complied with this section. (Ord. 1618 § 1 Exh. A, 1993)

 

21.03.080 Recycling facilities.
A.      Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the locations of recycling facilities within the city to be compatible with adjacent land uses and to ensure the proper development, operation and maintenance of such facilities.

B.      Development standards for single-feed reverse vending machines, with the exception of machines located within a commercial building:

1.       Shall be established in conjunction with a host use, which is in compliance with applicable codes of the city, county and state;

2.       Shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation;

3.       Shall not occupy setbacks, parking stalls or landscaped areas required for the host use and commercial center;

4.       Shall occupy no more than fifty square feet of area per installation, including any enclosure, and shall be no more than eight feet in height;

5.       Shall be constructed of durable waterproof and rustproof material;

 

6.       Shall be clearly signed to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions, the identity and phone number of the operator or responsible person to call if the machine is inoperative and a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the machine;

7.       Shall have a sign area not to exceed four square feet per machine, exclusive of operating instructions;

8.       Shall be maintained in a clean, litter-free condition on a daily basis;

9.       Shall be illuminated to ensure safe operation if operating hours are between dusk and dawn;

10.     Exterior colors and materials shall be reviewed and approved prior to installation;

11.     Shall be located on the premises of the host use in manner to ensure harmony and continuity with the commercial use;

12.     Shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations;

13.     Shall not exceed noise levels of fifty-five dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned or occupied property, otherwise shall not exceed seventy dBA;

14.     Shall accept only recyclable materials.

C.      Development standards for small recycling collection facilities other than single-feed reverse vending machines are as follows:

1.       Shall be established in conjunction with a host use, which is in compliance with applicable codes of the city, county and state;

2.       Shall occupy no more than five hundred square feet, including any enclosure;

3.       Shall accept only recyclable materials;

4.       Shall use no power-driven processing equipment except for reverse vending machines;

5.       Shall use containers constructed of durable waterproof and rustproof materials;

6.       All recyclable material shall be stored in containers and shall not be left outside of containers when an attendant is not present;

7.       Shall be maintained in a clean, litter-free condition on a daily basis;

8.       Shall not exceed noise levels of fifty-five dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned or occupied property; otherwise shall not exceed seventy dBA;

9.       Facilities within one hundred feet of a property zoned or occupied for residential use and requiring an attendant shall operate between nine a.m. and seven p.m. Self-service facilities shall be located at least thirty feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use unless there is a recognized service corridor and acoustical shielding between the facility and the residential use;

10.     Shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions, the identity and phone number of the operator or responsible person to call if the machine is inoperative and a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the machine;

11.     Small recycling collection facilities may have signs, as described in subsection (C)(10) above, with a maximum of twenty percent per side or sixteen square feet per side, whichever is larger. In the case of a wheeled facility, the side will be measured from the pavement to the top of the container. Directional signs may be installed if deemed necessary;

12.     One parking stall shall be provided for the attendant’s personal vehicle, if applicable;

13.     Shall not occupy setbacks, parking stalls or landscaped areas required for the host use and commercial center;

14.     Shall be located on the premises of the host use in a manner to ensure harmony and continuity with the commercial use;

15.     Shelter for the attendant shall be provided if necessary;

16.     Shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations;

 

17.     Shall be illuminated to ensure safe operation if operating hours are between dusk and dawn;

18.     Shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation.

D.      Development plan review pursuant to Section 21.02.040 is required for recycling facilities, except single-feed reverse vending machines in a commercial building. (Ord. 1983 § 7, 2014; Ord. 1618 § 1 Exh. A, 1993)

 

21.03.090 Urban runoff pollution.
A.      Title. The ordinance codified in this section shall be known as “storm water and runoff pollution control” and may be referred to as such.

B.      Statutory Authority. The provisions of this section are adopted pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.

C.      Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this section is to protect and improve water quality of receiving waters by:

1.       Reducing illicit discharges to the municipal storm water system to the maximum extent practicable;

2.       Eliminating illicit connections to the municipal storm water system;

3.       Eliminating spillage, dumping, and disposal of pollutant materials into the municipal storm water system;

4.       Reducing pollutant loads in storm water and urban runoff, from land uses and activities identified in the municipal NPDES permit.

The intent of this section is to enhance and protect the water quality of the receiving waters of the United States in a manner that is consistent with the Clean Water Act and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto; applicable implementing regulations; the municipal NPDES permit and any amendment, revision, or re-issuance thereof.

D.      Definitions. For the purpose of the provisions of this chapter concerning water quality hereinafter set forth, the following words and phrases shall be construed to have the meanings set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:

1.       “Best management practice” or “BMP” means any program, technology, process, siting criteria, operating method, measure, or device which controls, prevents, removes, or reduces pollutants in storm water and non-storm water runoff.

2.       “Clean Water Act” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq.

3.       “Discretionary project” means a development project which requires the exercise of judgment or deliberation when the city decides to approve or disapprove a particular activity, as distinguished from situations where the city merely has to determine whether there has been conformity with applicable statutes, ordinances, or regulations.

4.       “Executive officer” means the executive officer of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles.

5.       “Good housekeeping practice” means a best management practice related to the transfer, storage, use, or cleanup of materials performed in a regular manner that minimizes the discharge of pollutants to the storm drain system and/or receiving waters.

6.       “Illicit connection” means any device through or by which an illicit discharge is conveyed into the municipal storm water system without a permit, including, but not limited to, floor drains, pipes or any fabricated or natural conduits, excluding roof drains which convey only storm water.

7.       “Illicit discharge” means the entry of any material other than storm water unless such discharge is exempted under California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region, NPDES No. CAS004001 unless such discharge is allowed under a separate NPDES permit, including, but not limited to, a point source permit, a General Industrial Activity Storm Water Permit, or a General Construction Activity Storm Water Permit. Means any discharge to the storm drain system that is prohibited under local, state, or federal statutes, ordinances, codes or regulations. Illicit discharges include all non-storm water discharges except discharges pursuant to a NPDES permit or discharges that are excepted or conditionally excepted by such permit.

8.       “Industrial activity” means any of the ten classifications of industrial facilities specified in 40 Code of Federal Regulations Section 122.26(b)(14), defined by Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) and which is required to obtain a NPDES permit, not including construction activities that cause the disturbance of five acres of soil by clearing, grading, excavation, or a combination thereof.

9.       “Low impact development” means building and landscape features designed to retain or filter storm water runoff.

10.     “LID manual” means the county of Los Angeles Low Impact Development Standards Manual and all revisions/updates.

11.     “Maximum extent practicable” means, within the context of BMP selection, choosing effective BMPs, and rejecting applicable BMPs only: (a) where effective BMPs will serve the same purpose; (b) the BMPs would not be technically feasible; or (c) the cost would be prohibitive.

12.     “Municipal NPDES permit” means California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region, Order No. R4-2012-0175, NPDES No. CAS004001 Waste Discharge Requirements for Municipal Storm Water and Urban Runoff Discharges within the county of Los Angeles.

13.     “Municipal separate storm sewer system” or “MS4” means those facilities within the city by which storm water discharge is conveyed to waters of the United States, including, but not limited to, flood control channels, roads with drainage systems, alleys, streets, catch basins, grates, inlets, curbs, gutters, ditches, storm drains, canals, pipes, and fabricated and natural channels.

14.     “New development” means land disturbing activities; structural development, including construction or installation of a building or structure, creation of impervious surfaces; and land subdivision.

15.     “Non-storm water discharge” means any fluid discharge to the storm drain system and/or receiving waters that is not composed entirely of storm water.

16.     “NPDES” or “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System” means a permit issued by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the State Water Resources Control Board or a California Regional Water Quality Control Board pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U. S. C. 1251, et seq., which authorizes discharges to waters of the United States.

17.     “Owner” as applied to a building or real property, means any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or real property.

18.     “Person” means, within the context of this chapter, any natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, corporation, or company.

19.     “Pollutant” means the same as it is defined in California Water Code Section 13373 and includes, but is not limited to, garbage, debris, lawn clippings, leaves, fecal waste, biological waste, sediment, sludge, manure, fertilizers, pesticides, oil, grease, gasoline, paints, solvents, cleaners, and any fluid or solid containing toxic or non-toxic chemicals, metals, including batteries.

20.     “Public works director” means the director of public works of the city.

21.     “Receiving waters” means rivers, lakes, oceans, or other bodies of water that receive runoff.

22.     “Redevelopment” means, on an already developed site, the creation or addition of at least five thousand square feet of impervious surfaces on an already developed site. It does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity or original purpose of facility nor does it include emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety.

23.     “Regional Board” means the appointed members of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region.

24.     “Runoff’ means the portion of rainfall or irrigation water or other water activities also known as dry-weather flows that flow across the ground surface and eventually to receiving waters. Runoff can pick up pollutants from the air or the land and carry them to receiving waters.

25.     “State Board” means the State Water Resources Control Board of the California Environmental Protection Agency (hereinafter “SWRCB”).

26.     “Storm water runoff’ means any surface water flow produced by rain or snow melt.

27.     “Urban runoff’ means surface water flow produced by non-storm water resulting from residential, commercial and industrial activities.

E.       Illicit Discharges and Non-Storm Water Discharges.

1.       No person shall cause or allow an illicit discharge to enter the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4.)

2.       Any person causing an illicit discharge to the MS4 may be required by the public works director to pay for the cost of clean-up and remediation.

3.       Any owner of any private property from which a non-storm water discharge is observed may be required by the public works director to pay for the cost of collecting and analyzing the discharge to determine if it is an illicit discharge.

4.       The following non-storm water discharges are not considered illicit discharges:

a.       Exempt discharges specified in the municipal NPDES permit, including flows from riparian habitats, diverted stream flows, springs, rising ground waters, uncontaminated groundwater infiltration; and discharges or flows from emergency fire fighting activities.

b.       Conditionally exempt non-storm water discharges have been determined by the executive officer not to be significant sources of pollution. Such discharges include, but are not limited to landscape irrigation, potable water, foundation drains, footing drains, air conditioning condensate, irrigation water, lawn watering, water from crawl space pumps, dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, individual residential car washing, street or sidewalk washing, or any other discharge that the executive officer deems not to be a significant source of pollution such non-storm water discharges shall be conducted in a manner not in violation of other provisions of this chapter.

c.       Non-storm water discharges specifically allowed under a separate NPDES permit, including but not limited to, a general industrial storm water activity permit or general construction storm water activity permit.

F.       Illegal Disposal/Dumping. No person shall intentionally place, litter, accumulate, maintain, discharge, or cause to enter into the MS4 any pollutant or any foreign object such as batteries, tires, waste receptacles, yard debris, refuse, rubbish, food waste, chemicals, animal waste or oil cans.

G.      Illicit Connections.

1.       No person shall maintain or intentionally use a connection that operates to convey an illicit discharge to the MS4.

2.       Upon discovery of an illicit connection, the person owning or operating such connection shall either remove it or render it incapable of conveying an illicit discharge.

3.       If any person fails to eliminate an illicit connection after being called upon by the city to do so, the public works director shall take appropriate measures to remove or disable the illicit connection and may recover such costs from the owner of such illicit connection.

H.      Reduction of Pollutants in Runoff. No person shall cause or threaten to cause the discharge of pollutants to the MS4 by exposing such pollutants to storm water runoff.

1.       The owner of parking lot surfaces, public or private, with a capacity of twenty-five spaces or more, shall cause the parking lot surface to be cleaned as often as necessary to remove refuse, residual oil, grease, or other pollutants that might otherwise be discharged to the MS4 by runoff.

I.        Control of Pollutants from Commercial Facilities. Commercial facilities specified in the municipal NPDES permit shall implement BMPs prescribed by the regional board or its executive officer, through programs or actions made pursuant to the municipal NPDES permit, or by the city’s director of public works, to minimize the discharge of pollutants to the MS4.

J.       Control of Pollutants from Industrial Activities.

1.       It shall be a violation of this chapter for any industry in the city that is subject to waste discharge requirements specified in the SWRCB Water Quality Orders No. 97-03-DWQ Permit No. CAS00001, to operate without a NPDES General Industrial Activities Storm Water Permit.

2.       Industries that require a NPDES General Industrial Activities Storm Water Permit shall retain on-site the following documents which evidence compliance with permit requirements:

a.       A copy of the Notice of Intent for General Permit to Discharge Storm Water Associated with Industrial Activity;

b.       A waste discharge identification number issued by the SWRCB; and

c.       A Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan and Monitoring Program Plan.

3.       Any industry in the city requiring a NPDES General Industrial Activities Storm Water Permit shall, upon reasonable request from a duly authorized officer of the city, provide any of the documents described in paragraph B of this section.

K.      Erosion and Sediment Control Plan (ESCP)—Control of Pollutants from Construction Activities.

1.       No person shall be granted a grading permit or shall commence or continue any construction activity in the city that causes the disturbance of less than one acre or more of soil by clearing, grading, and excavating, without submitting an ESCP/local SWPPP for review and approval by the city.

2.       No person shall be granted a grading permit or shall commence or continue any construction activity in the city that causes the disturbance of one acre or more of soil by clearing, grading, and excavating, without demonstrating to the city that such person has prepared a ESCP/SWPPP and obtained a NPDES General Construction Activity Storm Water Permit from the SWRCB. The SWPPP shall be prepared by a Qualified SWPPP Developer (QSD). All structural BMPs must be designed by a licensed California civil engineer.

3.       The landowner or landowner’s agent must sign a statement for the SWPPP as follows:

“I certify that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, to the best of my knowledge and belief, the information submitted is true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that submitting false and/or inaccurate information, failing to update the ESCP to reflect current conditions, or failing to properly and/or adequately implement the ESCP may result in revocation of grading and/or other permits or other sanctions provided by law.”

4.       NPDES construction activity does not include:

a.       Routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade;

b.       Hydraulic capacity;

c.       The original purpose of the facility; or

d.       Emergency construction activities required to immediately protect the public health and safety.

5.       Any person engaged in a construction activity in the city requiring a NPDES construction permit shall retain at the construction site the following documents:

a.       A copy of the Notice of Intent to Comply with Terms of the General Permit to Discharge Water Associated with Construction Activity;

b.       A waste discharge identification number issued by the SWRCB;

c.       A Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan and Monitoring Program Plan for the construction activity requiring the construction permit; and

d.       Records of all inspections, compliance and non-compliance reports, evidence of self-inspection and good housekeeping practices.

6.       Any person engaged in a construction activity in the city requiring a General Construction Storm Water Activity Permit shall, upon reasonable request from a duly authorized officer of the city, provide any of the documents specified in paragraph B of this section and shall retain said documents for at least three years after completion of construction.

L.       Control of Pollutants from Other Construction Activities. Any person engaged in a construction activity subject to the municipal NPDES permit, shall be required to implement BMPs specified by the regional board, its executive officer, or the city’s public works director.

M.     Control of Pollutants from New Development and Redevelopment—Low Impact Development (LID).

1.       This section creates Glendora’s Planning and Land Development Program for all new development and redevelopment to accomplish the following:

a.       Lessen the water quality impacts of development by using smart growth practices such as compact development, directing development towards existing communities via infill or redevelopment, and safeguarding of environmentally sensitive areas.

b.       Minimize the adverse impacts from storm water runoff on the biological integrity of natural drainage systems and the beneficial uses of waterbodies in accordance with requirements under CEQA (California Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq.).

c.       Minimize the percentage of impervious surfaces on land developments by minimizing soil compaction during construction, designing projects to minimize the impervious area footprint, and employing LID design principles to mimic predevelopment hydrology through infiltration, evapotranspiration and rainfall harvest and use.

d.       Maintain existing riparian buffers and enhance riparian buffers when possible.

e.       Minimize pollutant loadings from impervious surfaces such as roof tops, parking lots, and roadways through the use of properly designed, technically appropriate BMPs (including source control BMPs such as good housekeeping practices), LID strategies, and treatment control BMPs.

f.        Properly select, design and maintain LID and hydromodification control BMPs from the LID manual to address pollutants that are likely to be generated, reduce changes to pre-development hydrology, assure long-term function, and avoid the breeding of vectors.

g.       Prioritize the selection of BMPs to remove storm water pollutants, reduce storm water runoff volume, and beneficially use storm water to support an integrated approach to protecting water quality and managing water resources in the following order of preference:

i.        On-site infiltration, bioretention and/or rainfall harvest and use.

ii.       On-site biofiltration, off-site ground water replenishment, and/or off-site retrofit.

2.       Applicability.

a.       New Development Projects. Development projects subject to LID requirements during conditioning and approval for the design and implementation of post-construction controls to mitigate storm water pollution, prior to completion of the project(s), are:

i.        All development projects equal to one acre or greater of disturbed area and adding more than ten thousand square feet of impervious surface area.

ii.       Industrial parks ten thousand square feet or more of surface area.

iii.     Commercial malls ten thousand square feet or more of surface area.

iv.      Retail gasoline outlets five thousand square feet or more of surface area.

 

v.       Restaurants five thousand square feet or more of surface area.

vi.      Parking lots five thousand square feet or more of impervious surface area, or with twenty-five or more parking spaces.

vii.    Street and road construction of ten thousand square feet or more of impervious surface area shall follow USEPA guidance regarding managing wet weather with green infrastructure: Green Streets (December 2008 EPA-833-F-08-009 or most recent edition) to the maximum extent practicable. Street and road construction applies to standalone streets, roads, highways, and freeway projects, and also applies to streets within larger projects.

viii.   Automotive service facilities five thousand square feet or more of surface area.

ix.      Redevelopment projects in subject categories that meet redevelopment thresholds identified in subsection (M)(2)(b) (Redevelopment projects).

x.       Projects located in or directly adjacent to, or discharging directly to a significant ecological area (SEA), where the development will:

(A)    Discharge storm water runoff that is likely to impact a sensitive biological species or habitat; and

(B)    Create two thousand five hundred square feet or more of impervious surface area.

xi.      Single-Family Hillside Homes. During the construction of a single-family hillside home, the following measures shall be implemented:

(A)    Conserve natural areas.

(B)    Protect slopes and channels.

(C)    Provide storm drain system stenciling and signage.

(D)    Divert roof runoff to vegetated areas before discharge unless the diversion would result in slope instability.

(E)     Direct surface flow to vegetated areas before discharge unless the diversion would result in slope instability.

b.       Redevelopment Projects. Redevelopment projects subject to LID conditioning and approval for the design and implementation of post-construction controls to mitigate storm water pollution, prior to completion of the project(s), are:

i.        Land-disturbing activity that results in the creation or addition or replacement of five thousand square feet or more of impervious surface are on an already developed site on development categories as stated in subsection (M)(2)(c)(i) (Integrated water quality/flow reduction/resources management criteria).

ii.       Where redevelopment results in an alteration to more than fifty percent of impervious surfaces of a previously existing development, and the existing development was not subject to post-construction storm water quality control requirements, the entire project must be mitigated.

iii.     Where redevelopment results in an alteration of less than fifty percent of impervious surfaces of a previously existing development, and the existing development was not subject to post-construction storm water quality control requirements, only the alteration must be mitigated, and not the entire development.

(A)    Redevelopment does not include routine maintenance activities that are conducted to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, original purpose of facility or emergency redevelopment activity required to protect public health and safety. Impervious surface replacement, such as the reconstruction of parking lots and roadways which does not disturb additional area and maintains the original grade and alignment, is considered a routine maintenance activity. Redevelopment does not include the repaving of existing roads to maintain original line and grade.

 

(B)    Existing single-family dwelling and accessory structures are exempt from the redevelopment requirements unless such projects create, add, or replace ten thousand square feet of impervious surface area.

c.       New Development/Redevelopment Project Performance Criteria.

i.        Integrated Water Quality/Flow Reduction/Resources Management Criteria.

(A)    Each new development and redevelopment project (referred to hereinafter as “new projects”) shall control pollutants, pollutant loads, and runoff volume emanating from the project site by: (1) minimizing the impervious surface area; and (2) controlling runoff from impervious surfaces through infiltration, bioretention and/or rainfall harvest and use.

(B)    All projects shall retain on-site the stormwater quality design volume (SWQDv) defined as the runoff from:

(1)     The 0.75-inch, twenty-four-hour rain event or

(2)     The 85th percentile, twenty-four-hour rain event, as determined from the Los Angeles County 85th percentile precipitation isohyetal map, whichever is greater.

(C)    Bioretention and biofiltration systems shall meet the design specifications provided in Attachment H of the MS4 NPDES permit.

(D)    When evaluating the potential for on-site retention, credit will include considering the maximum potential for evapotranspiration from green roofs and rainfall harvest and use.

ii.       Technical infeasibility may result from conditions including the following:

(A)    The infiltration rate of saturated in-situ soils is less than 0.3 inch per hour and it is not technically feasible to amend the in-situ soils to attain an infiltration rate necessary to achieve reliable performance of infiltration or bioretention BMPs in retaining the SWQDv on-site;

(B)    Locations where seasonal high ground water is within ten feet of the surface;

(C)    Locations within one hundred feet of a ground water well used for drinking water;

(D)    Brownfield development sites where infiltration poses a risk of causing pollutant mobilization;

(E)     Other locations where pollutant mobilization is a documented concern;

(F)     Locations with potential geotechnical hazards; or

(G)    Smart growth and infill or redevelopment locations where the density and/or nature of the project would create significant difficulty for compliance with the on-site volume retention requirement.

iii.     To utilize alternative compliance measures to replenish ground water at an off-site location, the project applicant shall demonstrate: (A) why it is not advantageous to replenish ground water at the project site; (B) that ground water can be used for beneficial purposes at the off-site location; and (C) that the alternative measures shall also provide equal or greater water quality benefits to the receiving surface water than the water quality/flow reduction/resource management criteria as listed in NPDES municipal permit from the Regional Board.

iv.      If the city determines a project has demonstrated that it is technically infeasible to retain one hundred percent of the SWQDv on-site, or is proposing an alternative off-site project to replenish regional ground water supplies, applicant will be required to comply with one of the alternative compliance measures as stated in the NPDES MS4 permit. The applicant will still be required to provide treatment for their on-site storm water runoff in the off-site project as approved by the city engineer.

v.       Alternative Compliance Measures. Applicants may propose other off-site projects to utilize these alternative compliance provisions if they meet the requirements of five conditions for off-site projects and are approved by the city engineer.

d.       Hydromodification (Flow/Volume/Duration) Control Criteria. All new development and redevelopment projects located within natural drainage systems must implement hydrologic control measures, to prevent accelerated downstream erosion and to protect stream habitat in natural drainage systems. The purpose of the hydrologic controls is to minimize changes in post-development hydrologic storm water runoff discharge rates, velocities, and duration. This shall be achieved by maintaining the project’s pre-project storm water runoff flow rates and durations.

i.        Description.

(A)    Hydromodification control in natural drainage systems shall be achieved by maintaining the erosion potential (Ep) in streams at a value of 1, unless an alternative value can be shown to be protective of the natural drainage systems from erosion, incision, and sedimentation that can occur as a result of flow increases from impervious surfaces and prevent damage to stream habitat in natural drainage system tributaries (see municipal NPDES permit Attachment J - Determination of Erosion Potential).

(B)    Hydromodification control may include one, or a combination of on-site, regional or sub-regional hydromodification control BMPs, LID strategies, or stream and riparian buffer restoration measures. Any in-stream restoration measure shall not adversely affect the beneficial uses of the natural drainage systems.

(C)    Natural drainage systems that are subject to the hydromodification assessments and controls as described in the municipal NPDES permit, include all drainages that have not been improved (e.g., channelized or armored with concrete, shotcrete, or rip-rap) or drainage systems that are tributary to a natural drainage system, except as provided in the municipal NPDES permit “Exemptions to Hydromodification Controls.” The clearing or dredging of a natural drainage system does not constitute an “improvement.”

ii.       The following new development and redevelopment projects are exempt from implementation of hydromodification controls where assessments of downstream channel conditions and proposed discharge hydrology indicate that adverse hydromodification effects to beneficial uses of natural drainage systems are unlikely:

(A)    Projects that are replacement, maintenance or repair of a permittee’s existing flood control facility, storm drain, or transportation network.

(B)    Redevelopment projects in the urban core that do not increase the effective impervious area or decrease the infiltration capacity of pervious areas compared to the pre-project conditions.

(C)    Projects that have any increased discharge directly or via a storm drain to a sump, lake, area under tidal influence, into a waterway that has a one hundred-year peak flow (Q100) of twenty-five thousand cfs or more, or other receiving water that is not susceptible to hydromodification impacts.

(D)    Projects that discharge directly or via a storm drain into concrete or otherwise engineered (not natural) channels (e.g., channelized or armored with rip rap, shotcrete, etc.), which, in turn, discharge into receiving water that is not susceptible to hydromodification impacts.

(E)     LID BMPs implemented on single-family homes are sufficient to comply with hydromodification criteria.

iii.     Hydromodification Control Criteria. The hydromodification control criteria to protect natural drainage systems are as follows:

(A)    Projects disturbing an area greater than one acre but less than fifty acres within natural drainage systems will be presumed to meet pre-development hydrology if one of the following demonstrations is made:

(1)     The project is designed to retain on-site, through infiltration, evapotranspiration, and/or harvest and use, the storm water volume from the runoff of the 95th percentile, twenty-four-hour storm; or

(2)     The runoff flow rate, volume, velocity, and duration for the post-development condition do not exceed the pre-development condition for the two-year, twenty-four-hour rainfall event. This condition may be substantiated by simple screening models, including those described in Hydromodification Effects on Flow Peaks and Durations in Southern California Urbanizing Watersheds (Hawley et al., 2011) or other models acceptable to the Executive Officer of the Regional Water Board; or

(3)     The erosion potential (Ep) in the receiving water channel will approximate 1, as determined by a hydromodification analysis study and the equation presented in Attachment J in the current NPDES MS4 permit.

(B)    Projects disturbing fifty acres or more within natural drainage systems will be presumed to meet pre-development hydrology based on the successful demonstration of one of the following conditions:

(1)     The site infiltrates on-site at least the runoff from a two-year, twenty-four-hour storm event; or

(2)     The runoff flow rate, volume, velocity, and duration for the post-development condition does not exceed the pre-development condition for the two-year, twenty-four-hour rainfall events. These conditions must be substantiated by hydrologic modeling acceptable to the Regional Water Board executive officer; or

(3)     The erosion potential (Ep) in the receiving water channel will approximate 1, as determined by a Hydromodification Analysis Study and the equation presented in Attachment J.

e.       Alternative Hydromodification Criteria.

i.        The requirement for hydromodification controls may be satisfied by implementing the hydromodification requirements in the county of Los Angeles Low Impact Development Manual (2009) for all projects disturbing an area greater than one acre within natural drainage systems.

ii.       Each project may alternatively develop and implement watershed specific hydromodification control plans (HCPs).

iii.     The HCP shall identify:

(A)    Stream classifications.

(B)    Flow rate and duration control methods.

(C)    Sub-watershed mitigation strategies.

(D)    Stream and/or riparian buffer restoration measures, which will maintain the stream and tributary erosion potential at 1 unless an alternative value can be shown to be protective of the natural drainage systems from erosion, incision, and sedimentation that can occur as a result of flow increases from impervious surfaces and prevent damage to stream habitat in natural drainage system tributaries.

iv.      The HCP shall contain the following elements:

(A)    Hydromodification management standards.

(B)    Natural drainage areas and hydromodification management control areas.

(C)    New development and redevelopment projects subject to the HCP.

(D)    Description of authorized hydromodification management control BMPs.

(E)     Hydromodification management control BMP design criteria.

(F)     For flow duration control methods, the range of flows to control for, and goodness of fit criteria.

(G)    Allowable low critical flow, Qc, which initiates sediment transport.

(H)    Description of the approved hydromodification model.

(I)      Any alternate hydromodification management model and design.

(J)     Stream restoration measures design criteria.

(K)    Monitoring and effectiveness assessment.

(L)     Record keeping.

(M)   The HCP shall be deemed in effect upon executive officer approval.

f.        LID Plan Review. The applicant for any development project shall submit a LID plan to the director for review and approval that provides a comprehensive, technical discussion of how the development project will comply with this code and applicable provisions specified in the LID manual. A deposit and fee to recover the costs associated with LID plan review shall be required. The time for obtaining LID plan approval shall be as follows:

i.        For subdivisions, the LID plan shall be approved prior to the tentative map approval. An operation and maintenance plan will be part of the LID plan and include requirements to keep the BMPs in proper working order and all relevant costs for upkeep of BMPs.

ii.       For any development project requiring a conditional use permit (“CUP”) or other discretionary entitlement required under the Glendora zoning code, the LID plan shall be approved prior to the issuance of any such CUP or other discretionary entitlement and

iii.     For all other development projects, the LID plan shall be approved prior to issuance of a grading permit for such development project or when no grading permit is required, prior to the issuance of a public permit for such development project or when no grading or building permit is required, prior to the commencement of any development activity or as otherwise indicated in the non-discretional land use approval.

iv.      After grading is complete and the LID plan has been implemented, a maintenance covenant will be prepared by the city, signed by the owner and recorded on the property prior to final occupancy.

v.       The approved operation and maintenance plan shall be kept on-site for periodic review by city inspectors.

N.      Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:

1.       Exempt projects as defined in the municipal NPDES permit; and

2.       Activities that do not qualify as a discretionary project.

O.      Violation.

1.       A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, except as otherwise provided herein.

2.       Except in cases where a different punishment is specifically prescribed elsewhere in this chapter, every misdemeanor offense is punishable by imprisonment in the city or County Jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or both; provided, that where the city attorney determines that such action would be in the interest of justice, the city attorney may specify in the accusatory pleadings that the offense shall be an infraction.

3.       Except as otherwise prescribed in this chapter, every offense specifically declared to be an infraction is punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same provision within one year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional infraction violation of the same provision within one year. An infraction is not punishable by imprisonment. A person charged with an infraction shall not be entitled to a trial by jury and shall not be entitled to have the public defender or other counsel appointed at public expense to represent him or her unless he or she is arrested and not released on his or her written promise to appear, his or her own recognizance, or a deposit of bail. However, any person who has previously been convicted two or more times during any twelve-month period for any offense made punishable as an infraction shall be charged with a misdemeanor upon subsequent violation(s).

4.       Payment of any penalty herein provided shall not relieve a person, firm, corporation, or any other entity from the responsibility of correcting the condition resulting from the violation. In addition to the above penalties, the court may order that the guilty party reimburse the city for all of its costs of investigation, analysis, and prosecution of the enforcement action against the guilty party; and the court shall fix the amount of any such reimbursements upon submission of proof of such cost by the city.

P.       Notices of Violation—Administrative Orders. The director of public works, or the director’s designees, may issue notices of violation and administrative orders to achieve compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of such a notice of violation or an administrative order shall constitute a violation of this chapter.

Q.      Nuisance. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and may be abated by the city in accordance with its authority to abate nuisances.

R.      Remedies Not Exclusive. The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available to the city under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the city to seek cumulative remedies.

S.       Inspections—Searches. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provisions of this chapter, the enforcement officer for the city may enter any property in the city regulated by this chapter in a manner authorized by state law.

T.       Fees. The city council may establish fees for the services provided under this chapter and such fees shall be fixed and established from time to time by the city council by resolution. (Ord. 1994 §§ 2, 4, 6, 2014; Ord. 1722 § 2, 2000: Ord. 1633 § 1, 1995)

 

21.03.100 Wireless telecommunications facilities.
A.      Purpose. This section provides a uniform and comprehensive set of development standards for the installation and operation of wireless telecommunications facilities consistent with applicable federal standards. The standards are designed to minimize the adverse visual impacts and operational effects of these facilities using appropriate design, location, and screening techniques while providing for the personal communications needs of residents, local business, and government.

B.      Definitions. As used in this chapter:

“Accessory equipment” means associated equipment(s), equipment cabinets, equipment shelter, base transceiver station (BTS), permanent emergency generators and/or structure(s) subordinate and incidental to the installation and operation of wireless telecommunications facilities.

“Antenna” means any system of wires, poles, rods, towers, whips, reflecting discs, dishes or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio, telephone, or other audio or visual signals.

“Base transceiver station (BTS)” means the electronic equipment housed in cabinets that together with antennas, comprise a wireless telecommunications facility or “site.” The equipment cabinets generally include an air conditioning unit, heating unit, electrical supply, telephone hookup and back-up power supply.

Building mounted. See definition for façade mounted.

“Cellular” means an analog or digital wireless communication technology that is based on a system of interconnected neighboring cell sites.

“Co-location” means a wireless telecommunications facility comprised of a single telecommunications tower, monopole, or building supporting antennas owned or used by more than one telecommunications carrier.

“Equipment cabinet/shelter” means a cabinet or building used to contain equipment used by telecommunications providers at a facility.

“Façade mounted” means a wireless telecommunications antenna directly mounted, attached, or affixed to the side or façade of a building or another structure such as a church steeple, freestanding sign, or similar structure not to include the roof of any structure. Also described as building mounted antennas.

“Ground mounted” means an antenna with its support structure placed directly on the ground with the total maximum height not to exceed sixty feet including the height of the antennas. The antennas shall be mounted to a monopole or other freestanding structure specifically constructed for the purpose of supporting an antenna.

“Monopole” means a structure composed of a single spire used to support telecommunications equipment.

“Roof mounted” means an antenna directly attached or affixed to the roof of an existing building or structure other than a telecommunications tower.

“Stealth facility” means any visually unobtrusive wireless telecommunications facility designed to blend into the surrounding environment. Examples of stealth facilities may include architecturally treated/screened poles and roof mounted antennas, and building mounted antennas painted and treated as architectural elements to blend with the existing building also identified as concealed telecommunications facilities.

“Telecommunications facilities” mean unstaffed facilities that transmit and/or receive electromagnetic signals for the following technologies: cellular technology, personal communications services, enhanced specialized mobile services and paging system. It includes antennas and all other types of equipment used in the transmission or receipt of such signals; telecommunication towers or similar structures supporting the equipment; associated equipment cabinets and/or structures; and all other accessory provisions. It does not include radio towers, television towers, or public safety networks.

C.      Application Submittal Requirements. Application for the installation and operation of a wireless telecommunications facility shall be made on forms provided by the department of planning and redevelopment and accompanied by a filing fee as established by council resolution. Applications shall be made by the owner of the property and business or an authorized agent (permittee) for which the permit is sought. The following items shall be required for the application submittal for the installation and operation of a wireless telecommunications facility:

1.       Zoning Applications.

a.       Minor conditional use permit as prescribed in Sections 21.02.020(I) and (L) of this title for any proposed modification to an existing wireless telecommunications facility with an approved minor conditional use permit;

 

b.       Minor conditional use permit application as prescribed in Section 21.02.020(L) of this title to allow the installation and operation of roof/façade mounted wireless telecommunications facility;

c.       Conditional use permit application as prescribed in Section 21.02.020(B) of this title to allow the installation and operation of a ground mounted wireless telecommunications facility or the co-location of a third party at seventy feet maximum height;

d.       Conditional use permit application (if necessary) as prescribed in Section 21.02.020 to allow the use of more than five hundred pounds or fifty-five gallons of hazardous materials or two hundred cubic feet of compressed gas in the aggregate at any one time as related to the use of temporary or permanent emergency generators;

e.       Environmental review pursuant to Section 21.000, et seq. of the Public Resources Code.

 

Table C.1

REQUIRED ZONING APPLICATIONS FOR WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES

 

 

Co-Location

Façade Mount

Roof Mount

Ground Mount

Minor Conditional Use Permit (Director)*

Minor Conditional Use Permit (Director)

Minor Conditional Use Permit (Director)

Conditional Use Permit (PC)*

 

*       A minor conditional use permit is required for the co-location of a second carrier at fifty feet minimum height. If required to exceed the sixty-foot maximum height allowed for the purpose of facilitating co-location of a third carrier, the applicant could apply for a conditional use permit to allow an additional ten feet over the sixty-foot maximum height requirement.

 

2.       Project Summary. A written summary describing the following items:

a.       Type of wireless telecommunications facility to be installed (e.g., façade, roof, ground mount, towers, public art, etc.);

b.       Site location process including alternative sites considered, including co-location, and satisfactory reasons for the rejection of those sites based upon safety or existing physical, engineering, technological or geographical limitations;

c.       Detailed description of material and design of antennas and poles;

d.       Detailed description of material and design of accessory equipment;

e.       Height of the proposed facility whereas provider must demonstrate the facility has been designed to attain the minimum height required based on engineering, technological, or geographical limitations;

f.        Design and screening treatment selected for the facility;

g.       Identification of easement(s) on property;

h.       Co-location accommodation;

i.        Use of temporary or permanent emergency generators.

3.       Architectural Plans. A site plan drawn to scale identifying facility location, including existing and proposed structures, utilities, lighting, signage, walls, fences, trees, landscaped areas, and other significant natural features, walkways, driveways, parking areas, streets, alleys, easements, and setbacks. Floor plans, elevations, and section views shall be included.

4.       Master Plan. A master plan identifying the subject site for the proposed wireless telecommunications facility as related to the service provider’s network of existing sites within city boundaries including illustration of the estimated coverage (propagation) area.

5.       Photographic Simulation. Photographic simulation depicting the appearance of the facility upon installation at the proposed location.

6.       Grading and Drainage Plans. Grading and drainage plans shall be provided if applicable.

7.       Landscape and Irrigation Plans. Landscape and irrigation plans identifying existing and proposed trees and/or plant materials to be used to screen the wireless telecommunications facility and its related accessory equipments.

8.       Off-Street Parking. The site plan shall identify location of all proposed designated parking (on-site or off-site) for maintenance vehicles as prescribed by subsection (D)(3)(t)(i) of this section.

9.       Licenses. The applicant shall provide verification of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility’s compliance with the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) standards by providing a copy of its FCC license agreement.

10.     A signed statement indicating:

a.       The applicant agrees to allow for the co-location of additional wireless telecommunication facility equipment by other providers on the applicant’s structure or within the same site location. The applicant shall also provide a copy of appropriate portions of the tentative lease agreement, or an affidavit signed by the service provider and the property owner as evidence that no exclusive agreements have been made to prevent future service providers from locating on the same facility.

b.       That the applicant agrees to remove the facility within thirty days after that site’s use is discontinued.

D.      Development and Design Standards.

1.       Wireless telecommunications facilities are conditionally permitted uses within the M-1 (light manufacturing) zone, M-1A (limited industrial) zone, on public utility transmission facility properties within C-3 (retail commercial) zones, and on city-owned property with approval of applicable zoning applications as prescribed in subsection (C)(1), Table C.1.

2.       Placement of Wireless Telecommunication Facilities.

a.       Location preference for wireless telecommunications facilities are as follows:

i.        Co-location with an existing facility;

ii.       City-owned property with a standard ground lease agreement as approved by the city council;

iii.     M-1 and/or M-1A zones.

b.       Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be encouraged to co-locate with an existing structure. The applicant shall provide satisfactory information that proves sufficient effort has been made by the applicant to co-locate with existing facilities in the vicinity and present satisfactory reasons if such efforts and measures to co-locating were unsuccessful (e.g., rejection based upon safety or existing physical, engineering, technological or geographical limitations). Staff shall determine whether the information provided is sufficient to justify the applicant’s statement.

c.       The location of new facilities should avoid sites near residential zones unless the application includes information supporting that the location and type of facility is proposed at a technically feasible coverage area. Good faith efforts and measures shall be taken by the carrier to secure the preferred location site identifying that the location is essential to meet the service demands of the provider. The support structure for all ground mounted wireless telecommunications facilities including accessory equipment(s) shall be set back from all residential property lines a distance equal to and no less than the height of the highest point of the facility.

d.       Ground mounted wireless telecommunications facilities shall not be located within three thousand feet of any existing telecommunications facility except when located on an existing building, structure or wireless facility. For the purpose of this section, all distances shall be measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures, from the nearest point of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility to the nearest point of another wireless telecommunications facility. The applicant shall specifically state the reasons for not co-locating on any of the existing monopoles within three thousand foot radius.

e.       Placement of wireless telecommunications facilities shall be located where existing topography, vegetation, buildings, and other structures provide the greatest amount of screening, considering all other requirements for on-going use operation and maintenance of the facility. Where insufficient screening exists, additional screening shall be provided by installation of dense landscaping, installation of enhanced architectural treatments or relocation of the facility so that the massing of existing buildings or vegetation will provide adequate screening.

f.        Ground mounted freestanding wireless telecommunications facilities shall be prohibited on or above any hill ridgeline(s).

g.       Ground mounted wireless telecommunication facilities shall be located in close proximity to existing aboveground utilities, such as electrical towers or utility poles, light poles, trees of comparable heights, and in areas where they are otherwise visually compatible and will not detract from the appearance of the city.

3.       Design Standards.

a.       Wireless telecommunications facilities shall meet all applicable zoning and setback development standards of the underlying zone and shall not create any nonconforming conditions on the site such as reduction in parking, landscaping, or other applicable development standards.

b.       Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be installed and maintained in compliance with the requirements of the Uniform Building Code, Uniform Electrical Code, Noise Standards, and other applicable codes.

c.       All wireless telecommunications facilities shall be located so as to minimize visibility. The order of preference for facility mounting based on their potential adverse impacts is as follows: (1) co-locations; (2) façade mount; (3) roof mount; and (4) ground mount. Architectural treatment and the use of “stealth design techniques” are required to reduce potential visual impacts for all wireless telecommunications facilities, especially for those proposed in areas easily visible from a major traffic corridor or commercial center.

d.       Architecturally untreated wireless telecommunications facilities are not permitted. Applicants are required to provide compatible, visually appealing architectural treatments utilizing stealth techniques to reduce potential visual impacts of facilities throughout the city and in proposed areas easily visible from a major traffic corridor or commercial center.

e.       Wireless telecommunications facilities may be designed within a piece of public art. Public art may be a functional or aesthetic item that visually benefits the community such as a clock tower or some type of attraction such as a historical monument.

f.        All telecommunication facilities shall be installed in such a manner as to maintain and enhance existing vegetation. Additional trees and other native or adapted vegetation shall be planted and maintained around the facility, in the vicinity of the project site, and along access roads in appropriate situations, where such vegetation is deemed necessary to provide screening for telecommunication facilities.

g.       All wireless telecommunications facilities including landscaping and surface areas shall be continuously maintained free of weeds, debris, litter, and temporary signage.

h.       All utilities and connection cables associated with wireless telecommunications facilities shall be placed underground.

i.        Wireless telecommunications facilities shall incorporate noncorrosive, nonmetallic, and nonreflective materials into the design of the facility. The sector(s), antenna array(s), pole(s) and accessory equipment(s) shall be painted, camouflaged or architecturally treated to blend with surrounding materials, colors, and the existing environment.

j.        Wireless telecommunications facilities shall not support any signs or advertising devices other than certification, warning, or other legally required seals or signage.

k.       The applicant shall provide signage including phone numbers of the utility provider in case of an emergency. Signs shall be posted at the communications equipment enclosures or fence/wall to ensure visibility.

l.        Fencing.

i.        Security/screening fencing for wireless telecommunications facilities and all supporting structures shall maintain a minimum height of six feet. Fencing shall include decorative masonry walls or wrought iron fences screened from view through the use of appropriate landscaping material. Color and texture of fence/walls shall match adjacent architecture or blend in with surrounding development. Prohibited fencing materials include chain link, razor wire, and barbwire.

ii.       All fencing or walls shall be designed to be graffiti-resistant. The applicant shall be responsible for graffiti-free maintenance of all telecommunication facilities. All graffiti shall be removed from the premises within forty-eight hours of discovery.

m.      Façade Mounted.

i.        To the extent feasible, all façade mounted telecommunications facilities shall be sited and designed to appear as an integral part of the structure. Façade mounted antennas shall be camouflaged and integrated architecturally with the style and character of the structure or otherwise made as unobtrusive as possible.

ii.       Façade mounted antennas shall be painted and textured to match the existing structure, unless used as a design element consistently throughout the building which is found to add visual interest to the building. When used as a design element, dummy elements may be required to be installed in order to retain the architectural integrity of the building.

iii.     Antennas and associated mounting shall generally not project beyond a maximum of eighteen inches from the face of the building.

n.       Roof Mounted.

i.        Freestanding roof mounted antennas shall not be allowed when they are placed in direct line of sight of significant view corridors or where they significantly affect scenic vistas. However, such facilities shall be allowed with incorporation of appropriate stealth techniques.

ii.       Roof mounted antennas and associated equipment shall be located as far back from the edge of the roof as technically possible to minimize visibility from street level locations, and screened from view with architectural treatment or a parapet wall that is architecturally consistent with the existing building.

iii.     All roof mounted facilities shall be painted a nonreflective matte finish using an appropriate color that blends with the backdrop. The final choice of colors shall be determined by the planning division on a case-by-case basis.

o.       Ground Mounted.

i.        Ground mounted facilities shall be located and designed to minimize visual impacts and shall incorporate stealth techniques to camouflage them as a piece of art/sculpture, a clock tower, flag pole, tree or other interesting, appropriate, and compatible visual form.

ii.       Ground mounted facilities shall be painted using nonreflective matte finished using an appropriate color that blends with the existing surroundings. The final choice of colors shall be determined by the planning division on a case-by-case basis.

iii.     Landscaping shall be used to minimize any visual impacts. All proposed vegetation shall be compatible with existing vegetation in the area and shall be drought tolerant.

p.       Co-Location of Telecommunication Facilities.

i.        Facilities shall make available unutilized space for co-location of other antennas and equipment, including space for competing service providers.

ii.       No more than four antennas per sector with a maximum allowable of three sectors per array for each facility shall be permitted to reduce any potential visual impacts.

iii.     Co-location of antennas to an existing facility shall not be considered as new construction but as a modification to the existing facility.

q.       Accessory Equipment.

i.        All accessory equipment(s) associated with the operation of the wireless telecommunications facilities including permanent emergency generators shall be located within an enclosure (wall/fence), building, or underground vault that comply with development standards of the implementing zone of the subject property and shall not exceed a maximum height of twelve feet in height. The color and texture of proposed enclosure, building, or underground vault shall match adjacent architecture or blend in with surrounding development.

ii.       The size and proposed number of accessory equipment/cabinets shall be the absolute minimum required to function.

iii.     Whenever possible, base transceiver stations, equipment cabinets, and other equipment associated with building mounted antennas should be installed within the existing building envelope or underground. If this is not feasible, the equipment shall be screened, fenced, landscaped or otherwise treated architecturally to minimize its appearance from off-site locations and to visually blend with the surrounding natural and built environment.

iv.      Accessory equipment enclosures shall be limited to the housing of any wireless telecommunications facilities and related power equipment and shall not be used for any other purpose, including storage.

v.       Cells on wheels (COWs) are prohibited. In cases of emergency, staff can approve the temporary use of COWs only during the time span necessary for replacement. A written request must be provided to the department of planning and redevelopment. The request shall include specific reasons to necessitate the use of COWs and the time necessary to resolve the problem and remove the COWs.

vi.      Microwave dishes may be proposed subject to a finding that they will not create a hazardous situation for the surrounding community. A written request must be provided to the department of planning and redevelopment for review and approval with the information to support that the microwave dishes will not be detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the surrounding community. Any proposed microwave dishes shall be limited to two feet in diameter. The maximum microwave dish per application shall be limited to one.

r.        Off-Street Parking.

i.        A minimum requirement of one parking space shall be provided on the same parcel as the facility or verification of a reciprocal parking agreement or other parking arrangements as authorized and approved by the planning and redevelopment department. Verification of reciprocal parking agreement or other parking agreements (if applicable) shall be submitted to the planning and redevelopment department for review and approval.

s.       Landscape/Vegetation.

i.        Landscape, wherever appropriate, shall be used as screening to reduce the visual impacts of telecommunications facilities. Any proposed landscaping shall be visually compatible with existing vegetation in the vicinity.

ii.       Existing trees and other screening vegetation in the vicinity of the proposed facility and associated accessways shall be protected from damage both during and after construction. Submission of a tree protection plan may be required to ensure compliance with this requirement.

iii.     All vegetation disturbed during project construction shall be replanted with compatible vegetation and soils disturbed by development shall be reseeded to control erosion.

iv.      Introduced vegetation shall be native and/or drought tolerant species compatible with the predominant natural setting of the project area.

t.        Public Safety.

i.        Each telecommunication facility may require fencing, anti-climbing devices, electronic devices or other techniques to prevent unauthorized access and vandalism. These shall not add to the visual impact of the facility and the design shall be subject to review and approval.

ii.       In the event of disaster or emergency, the installations shall not interfere with any city emergency service.

4.       Development Standards.

a.       Table 4.1 identifies the required setbacks for the different types of wireless telecommunications facilities in the applicable implementing zones:

 

Table 4.1

 

 

Zone

Minimum Front Setback

Minimum Side Setback

Minimum Street Side Setback

Minimum Rear Setback

Public utility transmission facility properties within C-3 zones

15 feet for parcels under 200 feet in depth and 20 feet for all other parcels*

10 feet*

15 feet for parcels under 200 feet in depth and 20 feet for all other parcels*

10 feet (not required when adjacent to a flood control, railroad, or public utility right-of-way to the rear)*

M-1

20 feet*

10 feet*

20 feet*

10 feet*

M-1A

20 feet*

10 feet*

20 feet*

10 feet*

City-owned property (commercial, industrial and open space zones)

20 feet*

10 feet*

20 feet*

10 feet*

 

*       Setbacks from structure to all residential property lines shall be a distance equal to and no less than the height of the highest point of the wireless telecommunications facility including location of all accessory equipments. Setbacks for roof mounted and façade mounted are subject to subsections (D)(3)(n) and (D)(3)(m) of this section.

 

b.       Development of wireless telecommunication facilities on city-owned properties need to meet all setback and other development standards in order to allow such development on a city-owned parcel.

c.       The number of freestanding monopoles and ground mounted wireless telecommunications facilities shall not exceed one per parcel.

d.       Wireless telecommunications facilities shall not be located closer to the street than the main building with the exception of stealth and façade mounted facilities.

e.       Table 5.1 identifies maximum allowable height for the different types of wireless telecommunications facilities. Antenna height is measured from finished grade to the highest point of the antenna or structure, including branches and other stealthing elements.

 

Table 5.1

 

 

 

 

 

Freestanding

Co-Location

Façade Mount

Roof Mount

Ground Mount

Freestanding Monopole

Stealth Facility

Not to exceed 60 feet**

Not to exceed height of existing façade, roof line, or parapet

Minimum functional height not to exceed the existing maximum building height by more than 10 feet (including all accessory equipment)

Maximum height required not to exceed sixty (60) feet*. Minimum functional height required is fifty (50) feet*

 

*       The provider must demonstrate the facility has been designed to attain the minimum height required based upon existing physical, engineering, technological or geographical limitations. A propagation map showing existing antennas and a detailed summary letter that defines justification for proposed facility height shall be submitted for consideration. If required to exceed the sixty-foot maximum height allowed for the purpose of facilitating co-location of a third carrier, the applicant could apply for a conditional use permit to allow an additional ten feet over the sixty-foot maximum height requirement.

**    Provided the existing service provider has received permit approval for the use at said site as approved by the city. Third carrier may co-locate at seventy feet with an approved conditional use permit by the planning commission.

 

E.       Noise and Traffic.

1.       Maintenance of wireless telecommunications facilities shall be limited to the hours of seven a.m. and six p.m., Monday through Friday, with no work allowed on Saturday, Sunday, or federal holidays excluding emergency repairs. The service provider may request a different maintenance period through approval of the minor conditional use permit application process. Emergency backup generator shall be in operation only during power outages or for testing and maintenance purposes.

2.       All noise generating equipment shall meet the requirements of the Glendora Noise Ordinance as set forth in Chapter 9.44 of the Glendora Municipal Code (GMC).

F.       Abandonment of Use. The applicant/service provider and/or property owner is responsible for the continued maintenance and care of the subject site through the duration of the wireless telecommunications facility use. In the event the wireless telecommunications facility use is not in operation for a continuous period of one hundred eighty days, all application approvals shall lapse and the facility shall be considered as a discontinued or abandoned use. The applicant/service provider and/or property owner shall remove all equipments and structures in relation to the wireless telecommunications facility. Such removal shall be in accordance with property health and safety requirements and all ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city. The site shall be converted back to its original condition within thirty days of the applicant/service provider’s receipt of written notice from the city as to the discontinued use or abandonment of the facility. If the applicant does not comply with the established time for removal of the facility, the city may proceed with abatement of the property and remove and clean up the abandoned facilities. All costs associated with the removal of the facility and cleanup of the site, including penalties for violations and the cost for the abatement shall be responsibility of the applicant/service and/or property owner. If there are two or more users of a single tower, the provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the wireless telecommunications facility.

G.      Scope of Approval.

1.       No operator of a wireless communication facility shall: (1) construct, operate, and/or maintain any greater number or type of wireless telecommunication facilities that has been expressly approved pursuant to this chapter; (2) increase the number of, or modify in any way, any antennas or other aboveground equipment constituting any part of a wireless communication facility, without the prior consent of the planning division and/or the reviewing body as shown in Table E, in the appendix of the zoning code; (3) sublet or otherwise permit any part of any approved wireless telecommunication facility to be used for any purpose other than the use so expressly approved pursuant to this chapter.

2.       In addition to any other remedies available, a violation of this section shall be deemed to be grounds for revocation of a wireless communication facility approval, pursuant to subsection I of this section.

H.      Variance. Any person may apply for a variance as to the requirements set forth herein pursuant to Section 21.02.030 of the Glendora Municipal Code.

I.        Revocation. Any approval granted pursuant to this chapter may, after notice and hearing, be terminated for violation on any provision of this chapter or any other applicable laws, or for fraud or misrepresentation in the application process. (Ord. 1982 § 2, 2014; Ord. 1836 §§ 14, 28, 29, 2006; Ord. 1822 § 1 (Exh. A), 2005)

 

21.03.110 Marijuana dispensaries and outdoor cultivation prohibited in all zones.
A.      A marijuana dispensary as defined under Sections 9.64.020 and 21.01.020(C) of this code is prohibited in all zones throughout the city of Glendora and no conditional use permit or other discretionary land use approval shall be issued therefor.

B.      Notwithstanding the provisions set forth in Section 9.64.025, cultivation of marijuana is prohibited within the city of Glendora.

C.      The findings set forth under Section 5.23.010 of this code are incorporated in this section by reference and set forth the basis for its enactment. (Ord. 2014 § 4, 2017; Ord. 1903 § 3, 2008)

 

21.03.120 Emergency shelters.
A.      Locations.

1.       Grand Avenue/Arrow Highway (midblock).



2.       Grand Avenue/Baseline (south of I-210).



B.      Maximum Number of Beds. The cumulative total number of beds allowed within the city for all emergency shelters shall be no more than twenty.

C.      Off-Street Parking. One space per employee and up to five visitor spaces for service providers based on actual need as determined by the city. If on-street parking is available, a reduction of up to two spaces may be granted.

D.      Size and Location of On-Site Waiting and Intake Areas. Ten square feet per bed, minimum one hundred square feet.

E.       Facility Management. An on-site manager shall be present during operating hours. A written management plan addressing at a minimum staff training, security, neighborhood communication, client intake, loitering control, referral services, outdoor storage, refuse control, and facility maintenance shall be approved by the city. The management plan may be reviewed as needed by the city with revisions made by the operator.

F.       Proximity to Other Shelters. A shelter may not be located closer than three hundred feet to another shelter.

G.      Length of Stay. Six month maximum. (Staff notes after six months of residency an occupant establishes permanent residency status which is not the purpose of the shelter. The goal would be to transition a homeless person from the shelter to permanent supportive housing within six months.) (Ord. 1949 § 2, 2011)

 

21.03.130 Affordable housing incentives.
A.      Purpose. The purpose of this section is to implement the general plan housing element and the incentive programs provided in the state density bonus regulations (Government Code Sections 65915 through 65918) in order to provide additional opportunities for the provision of affordable housing in the city of Glendora. The intent of this section is to ensure that the provisions of Government Code Sections 65915 through 65918 are implemented in a manner that is consistent with the city of Glendora general plan.

B.      Applicability. This section applies to any residential development of five or more dwelling units, or thirty-five or more dwelling units for a senior citizen housing development, located on contiguous sites and subject to a single development plan review application. All terms used in this section shall have the same meanings as used in Government Code Sections 65915 through 65918, as may be amended from time to time. Where regulations are not specifically addressed in this section or where there are conflicts between this section and Government Code Sections 65915 through 65918, the provisions of the Government Code, as may be amended from time to time, shall apply.

C.      Density Bonus. When an applicant of an eligible residential development project agrees to set aside a portion of the dwelling units for very low income or lower income households, senior households, or moderate income households in a common interest development, the development shall be granted a density bonus as provided in this section.

1.       Density bonuses shall be granted as a percentage above the maximum allowed density provided in the general plan land use element, applicable specific plan, and/or the zoning ordinance, as provided in the following table:

 

 

Income Group

Minimum Set-Aside of Affordable Units

Minimum Density Bonus Granted

Each Additional One Percent of Set-Aside Units Adds to Density Bonus

Maximum Possible Density Bonus

Percent Affordable Units Needed to Reach Maximum Density Bonus

Very low income

5%

20%

2.5%

35%

11%

Lower income

10%

20%

1.5%

35%

20%

Moderate income (common interest developments only)

10%

5%

1.0%

35%

40%

Senior citizen housing development

100%

20%

NA

20%

NA

Land donation (see subsection E of this section)

10%

15%

1%

35%

30%

Condominium conversions

33% lower income or moderate income; 15% very low income

25%

NA

25%

NA

 

2.       In all density bonus calculations, fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

 

3.       The additional units allowed through the density bonus shall not be included when determining the required percentage of affordable units.

4.       A developer may request a lesser density bonus than otherwise entitled, but no reduction shall be permitted in the number of required affordable units.

5.       Except where otherwise specified in this section, each residential development project is entitled to only one density bonus, and density bonuses for more than one category may not be combined.

6.       The granting of a density bonus shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, zone change, zone amendment, or other discretionary approval.

7.       Condominium conversions are not eligible for a density bonus if the original residential development received a density bonus or other incentive pursuant to this section.

8.       The following table provides example density bonus calculations for illustrative purposes only:

 

 

 

Very Low Income

Lower Income

Moderate Income Common Interest Development

Senior Citizen Housing Development

Initial project size

20 units

20 units

20 units

35 units

Set-aside units

5%

10%

10%

100%

Density bonus

20%

20%

5%

20%

Total project units

24 units

24 units

21 units

42 units

Assignment of project units

1 very low income; 23 market-rate

2 low income; 22 market-rate

2 moderate income; 19 market-rate

42 units

 

D.      Senior Citizen Housing Development.

1.       Senior citizen housing development projects qualifying for a density bonus under this section shall have a minimum of thirty-five units and shall meet the requirements described in Section 51.3 of the California Civil Code or any successor statute or regulation.

2.       Mobilehome parks qualifying for a density bonus under this section shall limit residency based on age requirements for housing for older persons pursuant to Section 798.76 of 799.5 of the California Civil Code or any successor statute or regulation.

E.       Land Donation. A residential development project shall receive an additional density bonus when the applicant donates land for the provision of residential units for very low income households. The density bonus shall be provided as shown in the above table, corresponding to the percentage of set-aside units. This density bonus shall be in addition to any other density bonus provided for in this section, up to a total combined density bonus of thirty-five percent. Applicants are eligible for the land donation density bonus if all of the following conditions are met:

1.       The developer shall donate and transfer land in fee simple ownership to the city or to a housing developer approved by the reviewing body.

2.       The developer shall donate and transfer land prior to approval of the development plan review for the residential development.

3.       The transferred land shall have the appropriate acreage, general plan land use designation, and zoning designation to permit development of affordable housing for very low income households in an amount not less than ten percent of the proposed number of residential units on the donated land.

4.       The transferred land shall be at least one acre or of sufficient size to permit development of at least forty residential units.

5.       The transferred land shall be served by adequate public facilities and infrastructure.

6.       The transferred land and the very low income units shall have a deed restriction recorded with the county recorder to ensure continued affordability of the units. The deed restriction shall be recorded on the property at the time of transfer.

7.       The transferred land shall be within the boundary of the proposed residential development, or no more than one-quarter mile from the boundary of the qualified project, if approved by the reviewing body.

8.       No later than the date of approval of the development plan review required for the residential development, the transferred land shall have all of the permits and approvals, other than building permits, necessary for the development of the very low income housing units on the transferred land.

F.       Child Care Facilities.

1.       A residential project qualifying for a density bonus under this section that includes a child care facility located on or adjacent to the premises shall be granted an additional density bonus or incentive as follows:

a.       An additional square footage density bonus in an amount equivalent to the square footage of the childcare facility; or

b.       An additional concession or incentive that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child care facility.

2.       In order to receive the additional child care density bonus, the project shall comply with the following requirements:

a.       The child care facility shall remain in operation for a period of time that is as long as, or longer than, the period of time during which the density bonus units are required to remain affordable.

b.       Of the children who attend the child care facility, the percentage of children of very low income, lower income, or moderate income households shall be equal to, or greater than, the percentage of affordable units.

3.       Notwithstanding any requirement of this section, the reviewing body shall not be required to provide a density bonus or concession for a child care facility if it finds, based upon substantial evidence, that the community already has adequate child care facilities.

G.      Standards for Density Bonus Projects. Density bonus projects shall be subject to the following requirements:

1.       The housing costs of units made available to qualifying households shall not exceed the limits of affordability established pursuant to Sections 50052.5 and 50053 of the California Health and Safety Code. Determinations of affordability for housing made available for sale or rent to qualifying households shall be governed by the regulations set forth in Title 25, Section 6910 et seq., of the California Code of Regulations.

2.       Housing units made available to qualifying households shall remain available to such households, at affordable rates, for a minimum of fifty-five years, or such longer period of time specified in loan agreements or subsidy programs associated with the development project. Deed restrictions, in form and content acceptable to the city to ensure unit affordability, shall be recorded on the property prior to project commencement to assure compliance with the affordability requirements of this section.

3.       The developer shall verify income data for each qualifying household for the purpose of establishing eligibility and affordable housing costs. The criteria and methods used in verifying income shall conform to the standards prescribed by the city. In determining eligibility, the income schedule adopted pursuant to Title 25, Section 6932 of the California Code of Regulations shall be used at the time each unit is initially occupied by a qualifying household.

4.       Housing units which are made available to qualifying households shall be constructed so as to resemble and be compatible with all other units in the same development. Affordable units shall be constructed concurrently with the market-rate units and be dispersed throughout the project, unless the reviewing body approves an alternative construction schedule and distribution pattern at the request of the developer.

H.      Incentives. Residential development projects qualifying for a density bonus under this section shall be granted incentives as follows:

1.       Number of Incentives. At least one and not more than three incentives shall be granted based on the percentage of affordable units per the following table:

 

 

Income Group

Percentage of Affordable Units

Very low income

5%

10%

15%

Lower income

10%

20%

30%

Moderate income (common interest development only)

10%

20%

30%

Number of incentives

1

2

3

Child care facility: when a qualified project includes a child care facility, the applicant shall receive one additional incentive.

 

2.       Types of Incentives. Incentives may include the following:

a.       Relaxation or other modification of zoning development standards including, but not limited to, setbacks, height limitations, open space, and parking standards.

b.       Approval of a residential and commercial mixed use development project that would not otherwise be allowed by the zoning ordinance, if the nonresidential components of the project will reduce the cost of the housing development, and the nonresidential components are compatible with the housing development and the existing or planned development in the area where the project will be located.

c.       Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the developer or the city that will result in identifiable and actual cost reductions including, but not limited to, fee waivers, expedited permit processing, and modification of requirements for off-site improvements.

3.       Approval of Incentives. Incentives shall be granted for a proposed project if the applicant provides a written financial statement detailing that the incentives are necessary to make the housing units economically feasible and will sufficiently reduce the cost of the housing development. The reviewing body may deny one or more of the requested incentives if, based on substantial evidence, it makes either one of the following written findings:

a.       The incentive is not required to ensure housing costs meet the affordability standards, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5, or any successor statute or regulation, or to ensure rents in the affordable units meet the requirements of this section; or

b.       The incentive would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in Government Code Section 65589.5(d)(2), upon:

i.        Public health and safety, or

ii.       The physical environment, or

iii.     Any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources, and

iv.      There is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low income households.

4.       Parking Incentives.

a.       All residential development projects qualifying for a density bonus under this section shall be entitled, if requested, to alternate parking requirements in lieu of the parking otherwise required by the zoning ordinance, as provided in the following table:

 

 

Number of Bedrooms

Number of Required Parking Spaces Per Unit

0 to 1

1

2 to 3

2

4 or more

2.5

 

b.       If the total number of required parking spaces is a fraction, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

c.       The above parking requirements are inclusive of tenant, guest, and handicapped spaces. Parking spaces may be covered or uncovered, and may be tandem.

d.       All parking spaces shall be provided on-site. On-street parking shall not be counted toward meeting the alternate parking requirements, even if otherwise allowed by the zoning ordinance.

5.       Waiver or Modification of Development Standards.

a.       In addition to the above incentives, residential development projects qualifying for a density bonus under this section may request waivers or modifications of development standards.

b.       The requested waivers or modifications shall be granted if the applicant provides a written statement detailing that the development standards if applied will have the effect of physically precluding the construction of a development project meeting the density bonus criteria at the densities allowed by this section and that the waivers or modifications are necessary to make the development project economically feasible.

c.       Except, however that the reviewing body may deny the requested waivers or modifications if, based on substantial evidence, it makes written findings that the waivers or modifications would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in Government Code Section 65589.5(d)(2), upon:

i.        Public health and safety; or

ii.       The physical environment; or

iii.     Any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources; and

iv.      There is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low income households.

I.        Project Review Procedures.

1.       All development projects for which a density bonus is being requested shall be subject to the development plan review process pursuant to Section 21.02.040. The density bonus and any related incentives, waivers, or modifications shall be approved by the reviewing body through the development plan review process.

2.       No additional application for a density bonus or related incentives shall be required, and a variance application shall not be required for any waiver or modification of zoning standards under this section. However, the following additional project review procedures shall apply:

a.       The project applicant shall apply for concept review prior to filing the development plan review application. The purpose of the concept review will be to review any preliminary development plans prepared and to discuss any incentives and/or waivers sought by the developer.

b.       In the event the developer requests any incentives or any waivers or modifications of zoning standards, the application shall include a detailed discussion of what is being requested and the reasons for the request, and the project plans shall clearly identify all requested waivers and modifications of zoning standards.

c.       The project record shall reflect that a density bonus has been granted and shall identify any incentives, waivers, and/or modifications granted and any special conditions imposed on the project to ensure unit affordability. (Ord. 2006 § 2, 2016; Ord. 1968 § 3, 2013)

 

21.03.140 Short-term rentals.
A.      Findings and Purpose. The city council finds that the city has seen a substantial increase in the number of dwelling units, whether they be single-family residences, multiple-family residences, guest houses, accessory dwelling units, or junior accessory dwelling units, being used as short-term rentals. With the rise in the number of short-term rentals, the city has received complaints from citizens and neighborhood groups over the adverse impacts caused by this transient use on adjacent properties. The purpose of this section is to balance the city’s desire to promote economic development and tourism with the city’s legitimate need to mitigate the adverse impacts often associated with short-term rentals, including excessive noise, overcrowding, disruptive and unruly parties, the accumulation of refuse, reduction of street parking vehicular violations and disruptions to safe traffic flow. The regulations contained herein are intended to minimize the adverse impacts short-term rentals have on surrounding properties. The city also seeks to ensure that the city is collecting transient occupancy taxes as required by Title of the Glendora Municipal Code.

B.      Short-Term Rental Permit and Business License Required. Any and all potential STR hosts for a short-term rental shall obtain a short-term rental permit from the city, as well as a current and valid city business license pursuant to Title 5 of the code, before: (1) issuing any STR advertisement for the availability of a short-term rental for occupancy; or (2) renting, operating or allowing the operation of a short-term rental in the city.

C.      Transient Occupancy Tax Compliance. Short-term rentals qualify as “hotels” for purposes of city transient occupancy taxes pursuant to Chapter 5.20, Title 5 (“Transient Occupancy Tax”) and transient occupancy taxes shall be collected on short-term rentals in accordance with Chapter 5.20. Failure to comply with city transient occupancy tax provisions may result in revocation of a short-term rental permit.

D.      Application for Short-Term Rental Permit. Short-term rentals may only be operated pursuant to a current and valid short-term rental permit from the city of Glendora, as well as a current and valid city business license, in accordance with all the requirements of this section. The permit application shall be submitted by the owner or an STR host. Even if the application is submitted by an STR host, the owner shall be jointly responsible with the STR host(s) for complying with this chapter, all other laws applicable to the short-term rental, and neither owner nor any STR host shall cause or permit any violation of this section. To “cause or permit” includes failure to correct or cause correction after receiving notice from the city of the violation.

1.       Application Form. The application for a short-term rental permit shall include the following information on a form provided by the city:

a.       The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of, and any other STR host for, the short-term rental address, including local emergency contact information for all STR hosts. If the application is submitted by a STR host, such application must also be signed by the property owner.

b.       The name, address and telephone number of all authorized representatives for all STR hosts, including twenty-four hour local emergency contact information.

c.       The address and a description of the proposed short-term rental premises. The description shall include number of rooms, maximum guest occupancy, amenities, and available parking for guests.

d.       The number of bedrooms in the short-term rental.

e.       Evidence of compliance with, or ability to comply with, Chapter 5.20, Title 5, governing transient occupancy taxes, including without limitation, submission of a “Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate” pursuant to Section 5.20.060.

f.        Information on any short-term rental permits that have been suspended or revoked by the STR host anywhere in the State of California, or as to the property, within the previous two years, and the reasons therefor.

g.       If the STR host has been asked or been compelled to no longer advertise with a STR hosting platform within the previous two years, and the reasons therefor.

h.       Acknowledgement of receipt and executed agreement to comply with the city’s “Short-Term Rental Good Neighbor Policy” requirements.

2.       Term. Permits shall be valid from the date of issuance for as long as the applicant holds a valid business license for short-term rental operation, unless revoked or otherwise terminated.

3.       Fees. The application for a short-term rental permit shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee established by resolution of the city council. The application fee shall not exceed the city’s estimated reasonable cost of administering the provisions of this Section 21.03.140.

E.       Application Review Process—Determination.

1.       Any change in the information in the application, whether the change occurs while the application is pending, or at any time after the permit issues, must be provided to the city forthwith.

2.       The city shall review the application for completeness. If the application is incomplete, the city shall inform the applicant in writing within thirty days of receipt of the application, articulating the necessary additional information for completeness. An application that is found to be incomplete upon a second submission shall be deemed abandoned.

3.       The application for a short-term rental permit will be reviewed by the community development director or designee, and a short-term rental permit will be issued unless the applicant fails to demonstrate compliance with this section, other applicable provisions of the code, any conditions of approval for the dwelling unit, or other applicable law.

a.       The community development director or designee shall deny, conditionally approve, or approve an application within forty-five days of receipt of a completed application. Conditions imposed shall be aimed at ensuring that the short-term rental does not create a disturbance in the neighborhood, and is not operated in a manner that will undermine the character of its neighborhood.

b.       The community development director or designee may deny an application for a short-term rental if the applicant fails to demonstrate compliance with, or ability to comply with, the city’s transient occupancy tax regulations. The community development director or designee may further deny the short-term rental permit if the applicant has provided any false information in the application or if the city has revoked a short-term rental permit in the applicant’s or applicants’ name(s) within the preceding twelve months. In addition to the operational standards set forth in Subsection H of this section, the community development director or designee shall have the authority to impose additional conditions on the use of any short-term rental unit in order to mitigate potential secondary effects unique to the subject property.

F.       Permit Non-Transferrable. The short-term rental permit shall not be assignable. Following a change in ownership, a new short-term rental permit shall be required before any STR host: (1) issues any STR advertisement for the availability of the short-term rental for occupancy; or (2) rents, operates or allows the operation of the short-term rental. Short-term rental permits are unique to the specific property and specific STR host(s) identified in the current application; a short-term rental permit shall not be valid for any successor owner or STR host.

G.      Short-Term Rental Locational Restrictions.

1.       Short-term rentals shall not be operated from dwellings that are designated as affordable housing units, or out of mobile home parks.

2.       Short-term rentals shall not be operated in vehicles or in non-habitable or illegally constructed structures, such as sheds, unconverted garages, cars, vans, or trucks, unpermitted attached or detached accessory dwelling units, unpermitted rooms or patios, etc.

3.       Operation of short-term rentals in housing developments served by a homeowners’ association shall be permitted to the extent they are allowed by the development’s covenants, conditions and restrictions (“CC&Rs”). All provisions of this section shall apply. In case of conflict between this section and the development’s CC&Rs, the more restrictive provisions shall apply. The city shall not be responsible for enforcing CC&R provisions relating to short-term rentals.

4.       Dwelling units held in shared leased ownership (timeshares) are prohibited from operating as short-term rentals.

H.      Short-Term Rental Operational Standards. Short-term rentals must comply with the following, and STR hosts must notify renters of the city’s permitting requirements and operational standards set forth in this section. The permit number must be included in any STR advertisement.

1.       The STR host shall use reasonably prudent business practices to ensure that the short-term rental is used in a manner that complies with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations pertaining to its use and occupancy. The STR host shall use reasonably prudent business practices to ensure that short-term rental guests do not violate the provisions of this section, or violate provisions of the code or any state law, such as but not limited to, regulations pertaining to noise, disorderly conduct, overcrowding, the consumption of alcohol, or the use of illegal drugs.

2.       STR Hosts named in the short-term rental permit shall be available to the city and its law enforcement personnel twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, to respond to complaints concerning the condition, operation or conduct of occupants at the short-term rental, or their guests. If the STR host is not directly and immediately available as required hereunder, the STR host shall identify and designate to the city a local contact individual who is personally available by telephone on a twenty-four hour, seven day per week basis, and who maintains the ability to initiate corrective action promptly upon being notified of a concern or complaint and who has authority to address violations of this section or any disturbance or problem at a short-term rental.

3.       Upon notification by the city or law enforcement that any occupant, renter or guest of a short-term rental unit has created unreasonable disturbance or violation of this section, engaged in disorderly conduct or committed a violation of an applicable law, the STR host or STR host’s designated local contact shall use all reasonable efforts to immediately halt and prevent a reoccurrence of such conduct.

4.       A copy of the short-term rental permit must be posted in a prominent location within the short-term rental. All short-term rental agreements shall have a minimum two-night consecutive stay and no more than one rental agreement per short-term rental shall be permitted for the same night(s) or rental periods.

5.       Rental occupancy for each short-term rental shall be limited to two individuals per bedroom, plus two in non-bedroom accommodations. Children under three years of age are excluded from the occupancy limits, but children three and older are included.

6.       The maximum number of daytime-only guests (i.e., those guests at the short-term rental that do not stay overnight) allowed in a short-term rental shall be ten guests, regardless of bedroom count. Daytime guests are allowed between the hours of seven a.m. and ten p.m.

7.       No one under the age of twenty-one years shall be permitted as the primary renter of a short-term rental. Pursuant to state law and Section 9.44.200 of the code, it is unlawful for any person willfully to STR host, conduct or allow, or cause to STR host, conduct or allow, any gathering and/or party where alcoholic beverages are furnished, given, obtained, possessed, or consumed by any person under twenty-one years of age.

8.       Short-term rental properties shall be kept clean with no visible trash. All trash containers shall be stored out of public view except when at the curb on trash collection days by the city’s authorized waste hauler. Short-term rentals shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 6.08 (Solid Waste). Short-term rentals shall not leave their solid waste containers curbside any earlier than the day before pickup, or any later than one day after pickup. If this requirement cannot be met, the STR host must provide for lawful trash service that is reasonably available at the property.

9.       All city parking regulations and standards shall be obeyed by short-term rental occupants, renters, their guests and any vendors servicing the short-term rental. Vehicles used by short-term rental occupants, renters, and their guests, or any persons servicing the short-term rental shall park their vehicles in accordance with all applicable laws, avoid material disruptions to traffic flow, and prevent street overcrowding or blockages.

a.       All garage, driveway and on-site designated parking spaces serving the short-term rental shall be made available for renter and guest vehicle parking.

b.       No vehicles shall be parked in a designated fire lane nor block or restrict access to adjacent properties or driveways.

c.       All vehicular parking shall conform to those regulations in Chapters 10.12 and 10.13 of the code, which govern designated parking times and zones, required permits for overnight, early morning and long-term parking, prohibitions on certain commercial vehicles in residential zones, and requires obeyance of all official traffic control devices.

d.       No short-term rental shall employ the use of buses or a vehicular busing system to transport guests to the short-term rental from remote locations.

10.     Use of short-term rentals shall at all times comply with all noise restrictions and party regulations set forth in Chapter 9.44 of the code.

a.       The city’s current noise ordinance requires reduced noise between ten p.m. and seven a.m. Section 9.44.020 defines “loud and/or disorderly gathering or party” to include a loud and/or disorderly activity attended by a group of persons on public or private property which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity. Such loud and/or disorderly gatherings are prohibited.

b.       The STR host shall notify all renters of those “general noise and party regulations” at Section 9.44.200 of the code, which prohibits the willful making or continuance of loud, unnecessary or unusual noise that disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area.

I.        STR Advertising; Renter Information. All STR advertisements shall include the short-term rental permit number. STR advertising of unpermitted short-term rentals is prohibited. Prior to the occupancy of the short-term rental by a renter, the STR host shall:

1.       Obtain the name, address, and telephone number of the renter.

2.       Provide a copy of city-prepared “Short-Term Rental Good Neighbor Policy” handout summarizing the requirements of this section and its operational standards in subsection H to the renter.

3.       Require the renter to execute a formal acknowledgement that he/she is legally responsible for compliance with all operational standards in subsection H of this section by all occupants of the short-term rental and their guests.

4.       The information required in subsections (I)(1) and (3) of this subsection shall be maintained by the STR host for a period of three years and shall be made available upon request to any officer of the city responsible for the enforcement of this section or other applicable laws.

J.       Permit Denial, Suspension, And Revocation; Appeals.

1.       A short-term rental permit may be denied, suspended, or revoked based on the following grounds:

a.       A material misrepresentation on the application or renewal materials.

b.       The short-term rental premises that are the subject of an application or permit are not in full compliance with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations.

c.       The STR host has violated, or has permitted violations of, any of the operational standards in subsection H above, or any other provisions of this section with respect to STR advertising, permitting, location or management of the subject short-term rental. A STR host is presumptively permitting violations of the applicable regulations under the following circumstances:

i.        If the violation consists of conduct by an occupant, renter or guest that is disturbing the peace and quiet of the neighbors, or that constitutes an immediate threat to the health and safety of either the public or users of the short-term rental, and the STR host or the STR host’s local contact does not exercise reasonable efforts to immediately initiate corrective action within one hour of being notified of the disturbance;

ii.       If the noticed violation is not corrected before the next renter or guest arrives at the short-term rental.

d.       The STR host has had a short-term rental permit revoked or suspended in the preceding two years.

2.       Grounds for Suspension. The community development director or designee may initiate suspension proceedings for minor violations of this section or of any other code provision applicable to the short-term rental, that are not timely corrected. A permit may be suspended for up to 180 days.

3.       Grounds for Revocation. The community development director or designee may initiate revocation proceedings for repeated or serious violations of this section or of any other code provision applicable to the short-term rental. Serious violations include any condition that is a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of any renter, guest, neighbor, or the public, or that constitutes a public nuisance.

4.       A notice of intent to suspend or revoke, and the reasons therefore, shall be provided to the permit holder. The permit holder shall have fifteen days to submit relevant evidence for the community development director’s or designee consideration. The community development director or designee shall issue a written decision articulating the grounds therefor within an additional fifteen days, taking into consideration any relevant evidence submitted by the permit holder.

5.       Any STR host whose permit is revoked may not reapply for a short-term rental for the property for which the permit was revoked, or for any other property, for two years following the date of revocation. Revocation of a permit shall not affect any other current and valid short-term rental permits by that STR host.

6.       Appeal of permit denial, suspension, or revocation. Any person whose short-term rental permit application was denied, or whose permit was suspended or revoked, may appeal the decision in accordance with the provisions of Section 21.01.030(F).

K.      Penalties and Enforcement.

1.       Violations of this section are deemed a public nuisance, and may be abated as such. Each day a violation continues is deemed a new violation.

2.       Violations of this section may be punishable as infractions or misdemeanors, pursuant to Section 1.1.110 of this code.

3.       In addition, any person who violates the provisions of this section may be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement officer pursuant to Chapter 1.18 of Title 1.

4.       Violations of this section may also be liable for the city public safety service expenses or for special security assignments pursuant to Section 9.44.198 of the code. (Ord. 2055 § 7, 2020)

Chapter 21.04 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
21.04.010 Single-family residence.
A.      Purpose. The purpose of single-family residential zones is to protect and promote the unique single-family nature of the city by limiting the uses in such zones to residential and residentially compatible uses and by requiring standards for the use, maintenance and development of single-family residential zoned properties. The single-family residence zones are:

1.       R-1 (Single-family residential);

2.       E-3, E-4, E-5, E-6 and E-7 (Single-family estate);

3.       RHR (Rural hillside residential).

B.      Permitted Uses.

1.       Single-Family Residences and Accessory Buildings. One single-family residence, an accessory dwelling unit, a junior accessory dwelling unit, and accessory buildings.

2.       Home occupations as an accessory use to a single-family residence. The establishment and conduct of home occupations shall comply with all of the following requirements to ensure that the use will be compatible with, and not detrimental to, the neighborhood:

a.       There shall be no exterior evidence of the conduct of a home occupation.

b.       The home occupation shall be conducted only within the enclosed living area of the residence or an enclosed, roofed accessory building.

c.       There shall be no storage of hazardous materials.

d.       Only the residents of the residence shall be engaged in the home occupation.

e.       There shall be no sale of goods on the premises.

f.        The establishment and conduct of the home occupation shall not change the principal character of the residence.

g.       There shall be no signs posted other than those permitted in the zone in which the residence is located.

h.       The required residential off-street parking shall be maintained.

i.        The conduct of the home occupation shall not create greater vehicular or pedestrian traffic than is normal for the zone in which it is located.

j.        There shall be no outside storage of goods, supplies, equipment or other materials.

k.       There shall be no pickups or delivery of goods, supplies, equipment, or other materials, except between the hours of seven a.m. and six p.m.

l.        The conduct of the home occupation use shall not create noise levels in excess of those permitted in the zone in which the residence is located.

3.       Boarding House. Except as otherwise permitted by state or federal law, a boarding house is prohibited in single-family zones. Any boarding house use which is nonconforming by reason of adoption of this subsection or any amendment thereto or by annexation to the city of territory upon which a boarding house is located shall be abated, that is, removed or made to comply with the provisions of this chapter, within six months.

4.       Care facilities including intermediate care facility/developmentally disabled habilitative which serves six or fewer persons or an intermediate care facility/developmentally disabled-nursing which serves six or fewer persons or a congregate living health facility, a “residential facility” defined by Section 1502 of the Health and Safety Code, or a “residential care facility” defined by the Health and Safety Code Section 1568.013 shall be considered a residential use of property and shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.

C.      Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permit.

1.       Churches;

2.       Educational schools;

3.       Lodge halls;

4.       Child daycare centers in conjunction with a church;

5.       Outdoor swap meets.

D.      Development Standards.

1.       Single-Family Residences. The minimum lot area, lot width, lot depth, floor area, setbacks and building height shall be as specified in Table A (see appendix to this title).

2.       Accessory Buildings.

a.       There shall be no more than two detached accessory buildings on any one parcel.

b.       The totaled floor area of all detached accessory buildings, including one detached accessory dwelling unit, shall not exceed one thousand square feet.

c.       The maximum height shall be sixteen feet, but not exceeding one story.

d.       Detached accessory buildings shall be set back a minimum of three feet from side and rear property lines and located no closer to a street than the front and street side yard setbacks.

e.       Attached accessory buildings shall be subject to the setback requirements of the single-family residence zones as specified in Table A (See Appendix to this title).

3.       Patio Structures. Open patio structures that are attached to a single-family residence may project into the required rear yard setback, but no closer than ten feet to the rear property line.

4.       Guest Houses.

a.       The guest house shall be limited to one bedroom and a three-quarter bathroom (sink, toilet and bathtub or shower only).

b.       The guest house shall not include kitchen facilities.

c.       The guest house shall meet the development standards for accessory buildings.

d.       The exterior architectural treatment of the guest house shall maintain consistency with the primary dwelling unit regarding roof profile and pitch, use of materials and general architectural design and style including, but not limited to, the following:

i.        All materials, finishes and colors shall match the primary dwelling unit;

ii.       All windows and doors shall maintain trim and style (i.e., grid pattern, frame thickness, opening direction, etc.) to match the existing windows and doors of the primary dwelling unit;

iii.     Architectural detailing (i.e., siding, stucco, gabled ends, etc.) shall match the existing architectural detailing of the primary dwelling unit.

5.       Churches.

a.       The minimum lot area shall be one gross acre.

b.       The maximum building height shall be thirty-five feet, but not exceeding two stories.

c.       A six-foot-high masonry wall shall be constructed and maintained on all property lines abutting residentially zoned properties.

d.       Church sites shall abut and have vehicular access directly from a minimum thirty-foot-wide public street, as measured from curb to curb.

e.       No building shall be located closer than twenty-five feet to any property line constituting the parcel boundary.

f.        A detached single-family residence shall conform to the development standards specified in Table A (see appendix to this title).

6.       Educational Schools.

a.       The minimum lot area shall be five gross acres.

b.       The maximum building height shall be thirty-five feet, but not exceeding two stories.

c.       No building shall be located closer than twenty-five feet to any property line constituting the parcel boundary.

7.       Lodge Halls. The minimum lot area shall be twice that specified in Table A (see appendix to this title). The minimum lot width, lot depth, floor area ratio, floor area, setbacks and building height shall be as specified in Table A (see appendix to this title).

8.       Public Facilities.

a.       The minimum setback for structures exceeding nine hundred square feet in area shall be as specified for the underlying zone, except that there shall be no minimum setback along property boundaries adjacent to another public facility, wash, freeway, railroad, building- or use-restricted area, or other similar rights-of-way or easements.

b.       The minimum setback for structures not exceeding nine hundred square feet in area shall be three feet, except that there shall be no minimum setback along property boundaries adjacent to another public facility, wash, freeway, railroad, building- or use-restricted area, or other similar rights-of-way or easements.

c.       The maximum lot coverage shall be determined by the reviewing body.

d.       The maximum floor area ratio shall be determined by the reviewing body.

e.       The maximum height of structures shall not exceed thirty-five feet.

9.       Gated Communities.

a.       Planning Commission and City Council Review. A gated community for new or existing areas shall be established within the city only after being reviewed by the planning commission and receiving approval from the city council pursuant to subsection 21.02.040(B)(16) of this title. The city council may impose conditions of approval deemed necessary for the public health, safety and welfare. Persons desiring a gated community shall submit an application for same to the city on forms obtained from the planning and redevelopment department. The application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by resolution of the city council.

b.       Requirement. The following must be presented in conjunction with an application to establish a gated community:

i.        Area to be Served. A plan showing that the control gates will serve a well-defined, independent neighborhood. In no event, shall a plan be approved or considered by the city where the purpose, intent or effect is to create a gated community within a gated community. Furthermore, no plan shall be approved or considered by the city where access to the proposed gated community requires vehicles to pass through more than one common gate, unless the application clearly demonstrates that the inner gate will be removed upon construction of the outer gate.

ii.       Neighborhood Support and Financial Plan. The application shall include a petition containing the notarized signatures of one hundred percent of the property owners within the proposed gated community, as shown on the latest equalized assessment roles of the Los Angeles County Assessor’s office, clearly stating their support for the creation of a gated community, a homeowners’ association and acceptance of ongoing maintenance responsibilities. A financial plan shall be submitted in connection with the petition demonstrating that the gate, roadways and other public improvements that may be vacated in connection with their request will be properly maintained on a permanent basis.

iii.     Design and Access Standards.

(A)    The gating mechanism shall provide for the installation of a system override device (e.g. Knox-box) as approved by the Chief of Police, Los Angeles County Fire Department, and other emergency and public utility service providers. Refer to Chapter 9.54 for Police Department requirements.

(B)    The gating mechanism shall be set back a distance as established in a queuing study prepared by a licensed traffic engineering firm, which is reviewed by the city and approved by the city council.

(C)    A minimum thirty-six foot radius turnaround shall be provided in front of the gating mechanism to ensure unrestricted access to and from the gate area and the public street system. This requirement may be increased based upon site specific considerations of the public health, safety and welfare at the discretion of the city.

(D)    An application for a gated community shall be accompanied by written approval from the Los Angeles Fire Department, the city police department, and other emergency service providers for the proposed development or conversion of an existing neighborhood.

(E)     The neighborhood served by the proposed gating mechanism shall be self-contained, which means that it shall not contain any public use or through streets.

(F)     The gated community must not restrict established public traffic circulation.

(G)    The gated community shall not eliminate access to existing or potential future developments or public or privately owned public use recreation resources, trails or schools. Plans for gated communities shall clearly show how these will continue to be accessible.

iv.      Utility Coordination. The plan shall show the layout of adjacent utility facilities. Any utilities that conflict with the proposed gating mechanism, or need to be relocated to provide accessibility as determined by the appropriate utility company, shall be relocated at the applicant’s expense. The plan shall also provide access to the neighborhood to perform their function.

v.       Vacation of Public Streets. When vacation of all or a portion of the public right-of-way is needed to facilitate a gated community, the applicant shall first process a street vacation application through the public works department. No action shall be taken on the gated community request until the city council has taken final action on the street vacation request.

10.     Outdoor Swap Meet Standards.

a.       The purpose of this section is to regulate the use of outdoor swap meets to ensure that the use will be compatible with and not detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the public in addition to surrounding residential land uses.

b.       Outdoor swap meets shall comply with all of the following criteria:

i.        The outdoor swap meet shall be located on real property used principally as a public school.

ii.       The site must encompass a minimum area of ten acres.

iii.     The outdoor swap meet shall be located on property with vehicular ingress and egress to two collector streets.

iv.      Vehicle parking and traffic circulation shall be in conformity with all applicable state laws and regulations and subsection 21.03.020(H).

v.       All vehicle parking shall be located on-site. Each site for which a swap meet is proposed must be sufficiently sized to provide adequate vehicle traffic circulation.

vi.      All swap meet vendors shall obtain a California State Board of Equalization seller’s permit which shall be displayed in a conspicuous location at all times.

vii.    Sanitary facilities, electrical plans, and ADA accessibility shall be in conformity with all applicable state laws and regulations.

viii.   All food services shall be licensed by the Los Angeles County Health Department.

ix.      Rides and amusement attractions are prohibited.

x.       The sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited.

xi.      The sale of animals is prohibited.

11.     Detached Accessory Structures. Properties in the RHR zone are permitted to have up to two detached accessory structures not to exceed one thousand square feet in combined total area. Detached accessory structures shall be at least six feet from the main residence, no closer than three feet from the side and rear property line and shall not exceed more than sixteen feet in height. One detached open patio up to four hundred square feet in area shall be allowed and exempted as a detached accessory structure. Any open patio structure exceeding four hundred square feet in area shall be counted as a detached accessory structure, and the area exceeding four hundred square feet will be added to the one thousand square foot total calculation. For example, if there is an existing six hundred square-foot detached garage and a new five hundred square-foot detached open ratio is proposed, the detached open patio will be considered a detached accessory structure and one hundred square feet of the open patio shall be included in the one thousand square foot calculation. Therefore, the total number of detached accessory structures will increase to two and the combined total area of detached accessory structures shall be seven hundred square feet. Open patios are structures without walls, and either a solid or a lattice roof.

E.       Rural Hillside Residential (RHR). Properties in the RHR zone shall be subject to the requirements of Section 21.04.030 and the following:

1.       For any subdivision, the number of lots shall be determined in part by the following formula, A=1/[1.089—0.01778(S)], where “A” is the area factor in acres and “S” is the average slope of the subdivision in percentage (S=x%) as computed pursuant to Section 21.04.030 of this chapter. When the average slope of the subdivision exceeds forty-five percent, the average net lot area shall be ten acres. As used in this section, net lot area means the area of a lot unrestricted by recorded instruments for ingress and egress, utilities, flood control or other purposes which prohibit the use of the land for single-family purposes. While net lot area may be less than one acre, in no event shall the minimum gross lot size be less than one acre.

2.       The maximum number of lots shall be determined by dividing the net area of the subdivision by the area factor and rounding down the next whole number.

3.       For any subdivision, no lot that can be subsequently subdivided under this section shall be included in the formula to determine the number of lots unless the development rights beyond one dwelling unit for such lot are dedicated to the city.

4.       For any subdivision, lots in excess of the maximum number permitted may be created if dedicated to the city.

5.       Care facilities including intermediate care facility/developmentally disabled habilitative which serves six or fewer persons or an intermediate care facility/developmentally disabled-nursing which serves six or fewer persons or a congregate living health facility, a “residential facility” defined by Section 1502 of the Health and Safety Code, or a “residential care facility” defined by the Health and Safety Code Section 1568.013, supportive housing, and transitional housing, shall be considered a residential use of property and shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2053 § 2, 2020; Ord. 2015 § 2, 2017; Ord. 2006 § 2, 2016; Ord. 1949 § 3, 2011; Ord. 1934 §§ 3, 4, 2010; Ord. 1836 § 15, 2006; Ord. 1782 §§ 6, 7, 10, 2003; Ord. 1777 § 2, 2003; Ord. 1773 §§ 1—2, 2003; Ord. 1756 §§ 1—3, 2002; Ord. 1724 § 2, 2000; Ord. 1713 § 3, 2000; Ord. 1675 §§ 3, 4, 1998; Ord. 1618 § 1 Exh. A, 1993)

 

21.04.020 Multiple-family residence.
A.      Purpose. The purpose of the multiple-family residential zones is to provide for the development of multiple-family residences and compatible uses in a manner that harmonizes with the residential character of the city. This designation is intended for medium to high density residential development. The multiple-family residence zones are:

1.       R-2 (Restricted multiple-family residence);

2.       R-3 (Multiple-family residence);

3.       GA (Garden apartments);

4.       LGA (Limited garden apartments).

B.      Permitted Uses.

1.       Multiple-Family Residences and Accessory Buildings. Development shall be subject to development plan review prior to the issuance of permits in accordance with Section 21.02.040.

2.       Single-Family Residence Zone Uses. Uses permitted in the single-family residence zones subject to the development standards of the R-1 single-family zone.

3.       City Facilities. Development shall be subject to development plan review prior to the issuance of permits in accordance with Section 21.02.040.

4.       Supportive housing, and transitional housing.

C.      Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permit.

1.       Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit in the single-family residence zones;

2.       Retention of an existing single-family residence or accessory building on property being developed with multiple-family residences, with the exception of properties being developed with an accessory dwelling unit.

D.      Development Standards.

1.       Multiple-Family Residences. Lot area, lot area per unit, lot width, lot depth, floor areas, building heights and setbacks shall be as specified in Table B (see appendix).

2.       Accessory Buildings. The following requirements shall apply to accessory buildings with the exception of properties that include an accessory dwelling unit as defined in Section 21.01.020(C) and required by Section 21.04.040 of this title:

a.       The floor area of a detached accessory building shall not exceed one thousand six hundred square feet.

b.       The maximum height shall be fifteen feet, but not exceeding one story.

c.       Detached accessory buildings shall be set back a minimum of three feet from side and rear property lines and located no closer to a street than the main building or the front and street side yard setbacks, whichever distance is greater.

d.       Detached accessory buildings with direct vehicular access from a public alley shall be located a minimum of twenty-five feet from the opposite side of the alley.

e.       Attached accessory buildings shall be subject to the setback requirements of the main buildings.

3.       Refuse Areas. Refuse areas shall be provided for the storage of refuse containers. All refuse shall be deposited in refuse containers in the refuse areas which shall be screened by walls six feet in height and a solid gate not less than five feet in height. The gate shall be maintained in good working order and shall remain closed except when in use. The refuse containers shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the trash generated.

4.       Usable Open Space. Each multiple-family development shall provide a minimum of four hundred square feet of usable open space per residential unit, subject to the following standards:

a.       The usable open space may be comprised of common open space shared by more than one residential unit or private open space for the exclusive use of the residents of one unit;

b.       Common open space at the ground level shall have a minimum area of two hundred twenty-five square feet and no dimension less than fifteen feet. Private open space located at the ground level shall have a minimum area of one hundred fifty feet square feet and no dimension less than ten feet. Open space provided on a balcony or roof deck shall have a minimum area of sixty square feet and no dimension less than six feet;

c.       Private open space located at the ground level adjacent to a street shall be screened to a minimum height of five feet;

d.       Parking facilities, driveways, service areas, required setback areas abutting a street and portions of balconies or roof decks, which extend into required setback areas, are not usable open space.

5.       Required Landscaping. All land not covered by structures, walkways, driveways and parking shall be landscaped and irrigated with an automatic irrigation system installed in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code. The plant material shall be of drought tolerant species and permanently maintained. Berms, walls and/or hedges shall be used in the required setbacks to separate parking facilities from abutting streets.

E.       Design Standards.

1.       New development shall be architecturally compatible with surrounding neighborhoods.

2.       Vehicular access shall be provided from alleys whenever possible.

3.       Buildings shall incorporate the following:

a.       For each dwelling unit, at least one architectural projection not less than two feet from the wall plane, not less than four feet wide, and extending the full wall height of a single-story building and at least one-half the wall height of a two-story building;

b.       For each two dwelling units, a change in wall plane of at least three feet for at least twelve feet;

c.       Relatively durable and low maintenance materials;

d.       For each dwelling unit, at least one balcony, porch or patio;

e.       Access points to dwelling units shall be clustered;

f.        Entrances to individual units shall be visible from a common open space area or the public right-of-way;

g.       Distinctive architectural elements and materials shall denote prominent entrances;

h.       Exterior stairways shall complement the architecture of the building;

i.        Stairs shall not be visible from the public right-of-way;

j.        The design and architecture of accessory buildings shall complement the main buildings;

k.       Gutters and down spouts shall be concealed or designed as architectural features and treated to complement or match fascia or wall material;

l.        Vents shall be concealed or treated to complement or match surrounding architectural materials. (Ord. 2015 § 2, 2017; Ord. 1949 § 4, 2011; Ord. 1782 §§ 12, 14, 2003; Ord. 1618 § 1 Exh. A, 1993)

 

21.04.030 Hillside development.
A.      Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the use of land in hillside areas so that natural characteristics such as land forms, vegetation, wildlife, scenic qualities and open space can substantially be maintained, and more specifically to:

1.       Preserve unique and significant geological, biological and hydrological features;

2.       Encourage alternative approaches to conventional hillside development practices by achieving land use patterns and intensities that are consistent with natural characteristics;

3.       Protect predominant vistas of hillside areas in order to maintain the identity, image, environmental quality and aesthetic quality of the city;

4.       Protect the public health and safety from potentially hazardous conditions related to the hillsides.

B.      Development Plan Review Required. The provisions of this section shall apply to all parcels with an average slope of ten percent or greater as calculated pursuant to this section. No grading or building permit shall be issued, nor tentative tract map or parcel map approved on any parcel where more than one hundred fifty cubic yards of grading is involved, until a development plan is approved in accordance with Section 21.02.040.

C.      Average Slope Determination. For the purposes of this section, the average slope of any parcel shall be determined by the formula, S = [0.0023(I)(L)] ¸ A, where “S” is the average slope in percentage (x%), “I” is the contour interval in scale feet, “L” is the combined length of contour lines in scale feet and “A” is the gross area of the parcel in acres. The topographic map used for the determination of average slope shall have a maximum contour interval of five feet and a scale of one inch equals twenty feet for parcels up to five acres in size and one inch equals forty feet for parcels in excess of five acres in size.

D.      Development Standards. In addition to the standards specified for the zone in which the parcel is located, hillside development shall comply with the following:

1.       Lot Coverage.

a.       Lot coverage shall include all impervious surface area of the lot with the exception of the following:

i.        Streets located on a parcel leading to other properties;

ii.       Fire department access turnaround requirements;

iii.     Utility structures located in easement areas such as debris basins or maintenance roads managed by the Los Angeles County flood control district or other utility;

iv.      Approved driveways leading to a two-car garage;

v.       Paved pathways or walkways up to three feet in width on flat pad areas adjacent to a residence;

vi.      Retaining walls;

vii.    Water surface area of pools and spas (pool decking is not excepted).

b.       The maximum lot coverage on any parcel shall be as follows:

 

 

Average Slope

Maximum Lot Coverage

10%—less than 25%

25%

25%—less than 35%

20%

35%—less than 40%

15%

40%—less than 45%

10%

45% or greater

5%

 

2.       Prohibited Grading. Grading shall be prohibited in any area where the natural slopes exceeds thirty-five percent. To evidence compliance with this section, the applicant shall submit a digital topographic map in a format designated by the department of planning and redevelopment under any of the following conditions:

a.       Where grading of more than one hundred fifty cubic yards is proposed on an un-graded parcel.

b.       Where grading of more than one hundred fifty yards is proposed on a previously graded parcel which was not authorized by the city of Glendora.

c.       Where grading of more than one hundred fifty cubic yards is proposed on a previously graded parcel which was authorized by the city of Glendora (unless the digital topographic map is already on file with the city of Glendora).

d.       For any proposed parcel map or subdivision map.

3.       Natural Land Form. Development of parcels shall conform to the natural land form and require minimal grading.

4.       Canyons. Development near canyons shall be prohibited to protect the watershed and preserve large areas of undeveloped space and significant natural features.

5.       Design of Structures. Structures shall be designed to relate to the overall form of the terrain and fit into the hillside rather than altering the hillside to fit the structures.

a.       Structures shall be designed to preserve or enhance vistas, particularly those seen from public property.

b.       Structures shall be designed to preserve visually significant rock outcroppings, natural hydrology, native plant materials and areas of visual or historical significance.

c.       No structure shall be located within fifty horizontal feet of a ridge line.

d.       Structures shall be designed to use the natural ridge line as a backdrop.

e.       Structures shall be designed to use plant materials as a backdrop.

f.        Structures shall be designed to conceal manufactured slopes.

g.       Stepped foundations shall be required to minimize grading.

h.       Interior fire sprinklers and fire retardant building materials shall be required.

i.        Building materials and colors shall reviewed and approved by staff and be compatible with the natural setting. The exterior colors shall be limited to earth tones found in nearby natural vegetation, soil or come from natural sources (e.g., rock, stone, wood) or resemble a natural appearance whenever possible.

j.        Reflective materials (e.g., mirrored glass, polished metal) (except for non-mirrored glass) shall not be apparent (as viewed from over one hundred feet away) on the exterior of dwelling units, accessory structures, or equipment located on the parcel to provide for utilities.

6.       Streets. Streets shall be designed to generally follow the natural contours and land form to minimize grading.

7.       Retaining Walls. Retaining walls visible from public rights-of-way shall not exceed six feet in height as measured from the base of the walls. Crib walls visible from public rights-of-way shall not exceed fifteen feet in height as measured from the base of the walls.

8.       Trails. Handicapped access, bicycle, hiking and equestrian trails shall be integrated into the overall circulation plan.

9.       Landscaping and Irrigation. Manufactured slopes and disturbed areas shall be landscaped and irrigated to prevent erosion, provide aesthetic relief and blend in with existing vegetation.

a.       Landscaping shall be adequate to protect against erosion. Such landscaping shall include at least one five-gallon shrub for each one hundred square feet of slope area or disturbed area and sufficient ground cover to cover the area within one year from time of planting.

b.       Landscape and irrigation plans shall be submitted to the director for review and approval. A functional test of the irrigation system shall be performed in the presence of a building inspector and subject to the inspector’s approval.

c.       Landscaping and irrigation shall be maintained by the developer until the property is occupied. The developer shall provide guarantees, satisfactory to the reviewing body, for maintenance.

d.       The interface between new development and natural open space shall be designed to provide a gradual transition from manufactured areas into natural areas. Landscaping (which is compatible with natural vegetation) shall be designed so that it extends out from developed areas and forms a cohesive pattern with existing natural vegetation. The purpose is to blend the new landscape with the natural vegetation. (It is intended that the transition between manufactured areas and natural areas occur sufficiently beyond residential structures so as to permit the development to meet applicable fire department brush clearance requirements.)

e.       Landscaping along the slope side of development shall be designed to maintain views from the residence yet screen and soften the architecture from views at lower elevations.

f.        Structures visible from lower elevations shall be softened with landscape screening. Walls over four feet in height and over twenty-five feet in length shall be softened and screened with plant materials. Landscape plans shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission.

          Landscape materials selected should be of a size and variety to provide any required screening within four years after planting. Approved landscape shall be installed prior to issuance of occupancy permits. Such landscaping shall be consistent with fire department fuel modification requirements and recommended plant species.

g.       Trees and shrubs shall be arranged in informal, randomly spaced masses, and shall be placed selectively to reduce the scale of and help to blend manufactured slopes into natural terrain.

h.       Landscape palettes shall be derived from the Los Angeles County fire department’s fuel modification plan desirable plant list and shall use native plant species to the greatest extent feasible.

i.        Plant materials that are used to stabilize a graded slope shall blend with the surrounding native plant materials in color and texture to the greatest extent feasible.

j.        For fire prevention purposes, a fuel modification plan consistent with Los Angeles County fire department fuel modification plan requirements shall be submitted to the department of planning and redevelopment and department of public works for review and approval prior to issuance of building permits.

k.       Building Restriction Areas. For properties with city designated building restriction areas, these designated areas shall remain in their natural state to the greatest extent feasible consistent with fuel modification plan requirements. In any case, all landscaping within building restriction areas required by a fuel modification plan shall be done with complementary native plant materials identified on the Los Angeles County fire department fuel modification plan desirable plants list. Any plant material not listed on the Los Angeles County fuel modification Appendix II desirable plants list shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission.

10.     Manufactured Slopes. Manufactured slopes shall conform to the following standards:

a.       The overall shape, height and grade of any slope shall be developed in concert with existing natural contours and scale of the natural terrain.

b.       Where slopes intersect, the intersection shall be rounded and blended.

c.       Where slopes intersect the natural grade, the intersection shall be rounded and blended with the natural contours to present a natural slope appearance.

d.       Horizontal contours of slopes shall be developed in concert with existing contours. (Ord. 1868 § 2, 2007; Ord. 1768 § 5, 2003; Ord. 1756 § 4, 2002; Ord. 1618 § 1 Exh. A, 1993)

 

21.04.040 Accessory dwelling units.
A.      Purpose. This section is intended to implement provisions of Government Code Sections 65852.2 and 65852.22 and, in case of ambiguity, shall be interpreted to be consistent with such provisions.

B.      Applicability. Accessory dwelling units shall be permitted on any lot where single-family or multifamily dwelling units are permitted. Accessory dwelling units do not exceed the allowable density for the lot upon which the accessory dwelling unit is located and will be considered a residential use that is consistent with the existing general plan and zoning designation for the lot.

C.      Accessory dwelling units.

1.       Location.

a.       An accessory dwelling unit shall be located on a lot that is zoned to allow single or multifamily residential uses and includes a proposed or existing dwelling.

b.       The accessory dwelling unit is either attached to the existing primary dwelling unit or detached and located on the same lot.

c.       An accessory dwelling unit shall not be permitted in a very high fire hazard severity zone where the lot is not served by a public or private street that meets city standards.

2.       Standards.

a.       An accessory dwelling unit must be located on the same lot as the proposed or existing primary dwelling.

b.       An accessory dwelling unit may be either attached or detached from the primary dwelling.

c.       Attached or detached accessory dwelling units shall provide a separate entrance from the primary dwelling.

d.       An accessory dwelling unit may have one or two bedrooms.

e.       An accessory dwelling unit shall comply with the lot coverage, floor area ratio, open space requirements, and limitations on the number and size of accessory structures of the zone, except that application of these standards shall not preclude the construction of an accessory dwelling unit that is eight hundred square feet and maintains four-foot side and rear setbacks, and is otherwise in compliance with all other local design, development standards.

f.        The architectural design and detailing, roof pitch and material, and exterior color and finish materials of an accessory dwelling unit shall match or complement the primary dwelling.

g.       An accessory dwelling unit may not be sold or otherwise conveyed separate from the primary dwelling.

h.       Neither the primary dwelling nor the accessory dwelling unit shall be rented for a period of less than thirty days.

i.        Accessory Dwelling Unit Standard.

 

Attached

 

Location

Attached to an existing or proposed primary dwelling unit

Minimum/Maximum Size

Minimum size: efficiency unit as defined in Health and Safety Code § 17958.1

Maximum size: 50% of primary dwelling but not more than 1,000 square feet.

Setbacks

Same as the regulatory setbacks of the building to which the accessory dwelling units is attached, except that the side and rear setbacks are not required to be more than 4 feet.

Height

One story located and attached at the ground floor. Shall not exceed the maximum building height allowed for the primary dwelling.

Detached

 

Location

Side or rear yard

Size

Minimum size: efficiency unit as defined in Health and Safety Code § 17958.1

Maximum size: 1,000 square feet subject to development standards of the zone.

Setbacks

Front - as required for accessory structures in the zone; Side - 3 feet; Rear - 3 feet

Height

One story; 16 feet

 

D.      Junior Accessory Dwelling Units.

1.       Location.

a.       A junior accessory dwelling unit may be located on a lot within a single-family zone.

b.       A junior accessory dwelling unit shall be constructed within the walls of a proposed or existing single-family residence.

2.       Standards.

a.       A junior accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed five hundred square feet and shall be constructed within the existing walls of an existing or proposed single-family dwelling. An additional one hundred fifty square feet beyond the physical dimensions of the existing structure is permitted to accommodate ingress and egress to the junior accessory dwelling unit.

b.       A junior accessory shall include a separate exterior entrance from the main entrance to the primary dwelling unit.

c.       A junior accessory dwelling unit shall include at least an efficiency kitchen which shall include all of the following: (i) a cooking facility with appliances; and (ii) a food preparation counter and storage cabinets that are of reasonable size in relation to the size of the junior accessory dwelling unit.

d.       A junior accessory dwelling unit may include separate sanitation facilities or share sanitation facilities with the existing primary dwelling.

e.       A junior accessory dwelling unit shall require owner-occupancy of the primary dwelling or the junior accessory dwelling unit. Before permit issuance, the City shall be provided a copy of a recorded deed restriction which shall include: (i) restrictions on the size and attributes of the junior accessory dwelling unit; (ii) prohibition of the sale of the junior accessory dwelling unit separate from the primary dwelling; (iii) if the junior accessory dwelling unit or primary dwelling is rented, the term shall not be for a period of less than thirty days; (iv) requirement that either the junior accessory dwelling or the primary dwelling be occupied by the property owner; and (v) a statement that the deed restriction shall be enforced against future owners.

E.       Density and Conversion of Existing Structures.

1.       The number of accessory and junior accessory dwelling units shall be permitted as follows:

a.       One accessory dwelling unit on a lot located within a single-family zone.

b.       One junior accessory dwelling unit on a lot located within a single-family zone.

c.       A junior accessory dwelling unit may be allowed on the same lot as an accessory dwelling unit provided the following criteria are met:

i.        The accessory dwelling unit is detached and the junior accessory dwelling unit is within the proposed or existing space of a primary single-family dwelling.

d.       An existing detached accessory structure may be converted to an accessory dwelling unit. No setback is required for the conversion or replacement of an existing living area, garage, or accessory structure to an accessory dwelling unit where the dimensions and location of the existing structure will not change.

e.       Two accessory dwelling units located on a lot with an existing or proposed multifamily dwelling.

f.        Portions of a multifamily dwelling structure that is not used as livable space, including, but not limited to, storage rooms, boiler rooms, passageways, attics, basements, or garages may be converted to an accessory dwelling unit if each unit complies with state building standards for dwelling. The number of accessory dwelling units created by converting non-livable space shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the multifamily dwelling units. Where the number of existing dwelling units is seven or less, one accessory dwelling unit by conversion may be created. (Ord. 2053 § 3, 2020)

Chapter 21.05 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONES
21.05.010 Commercial and professional zones.
A.      Purpose. To provide for the development of commercial areas for retail and service establishments, professional and office uses, and related enterprises in a manner that implements the general plan and accommodates the needs of community residents. Specifically, these regulations are designed to provide appropriate locations for retail, service, office and professional uses; promote and encourage convenient access to developments; promote and encourage aesthetically pleasing design; and ensure adequate size, shape and space to meet the needs of development. The commercial and professional zones are as follows:

1.       C-1 (professional);

2.       C-2 (limited retail business);

3.       C-3 (retail commercial);

4.       CM (commercial-manufacturing).

B.      Permitted Uses. Uses permitted are specified in Table C (see appendix).

C.      Permitted Uses Subject to a Conditional Use Permit and Minor Conditional Use Permit. Uses permitted subject to a conditional use permit and minor conditional use permit are specified in Table C (see appendix) and are described by the terms CUP and MCUP.

D.      Development Standards.

1.       General Standards. The maximum lot area, minimum lot width, minimum setbacks, maximum building height, and minimum floor area shall be as specified in Table D (see appendix).

2.       Required Walls. Masonry walls of six feet, measured from the highest adjacent grade, shall be provided on property lines contiguous to residential zones.

3.       Refuse Areas. Refuse areas shall be provided for the storage of refuse containers. All refuse shall be deposited in refuse containers in the refuse areas which shall be screened by walls six feet in height and a solid gate not less than five feet in height. The gate shall be maintained in good working order and shall remain closed except when in use. The refuse containers shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the trash generated.

4.       Adult Businesses. Adult businesses shall not be located closer than one thousand feet to any residential zone, church, school or day care facility.

5.       Service Stations. Service stations shall be permitted subject to conditional use permit approval only in the zones specified in Table C (see appendix). When authorized by a conditional use permit, the following minimum standards shall apply. This subsection shall not replace or reduce any minimum zoning, building or other ordinance requirements; however, when the requirements of this subsection are more restrictive, the requirements of this subsection shall control.

a.       Service stations shall be permitted only at the intersections of arterial and/or collector streets. The total number of service stations permitted at the intersection of two or more through streets shall not exceed two. The total number of service stations permitted at “T” intersections shall not exceed one. Service stations shall not be permitted within two hundred fifty feet of any property used as a school, church, theater or other place of assembly.

 

b.       A minimum of four pumps shall be provided before a convenience store is permitted.

c.       The minimum lot area for a full-service station shall be twenty-two thousand five hundred square feet with minimum street frontage of one hundred fifty feet on each adjacent street.

d.       The minimum building floor area for a full-service station without a convenience store shall be one thousand two hundred square feet. One accessory structure of not less than one hundred fifty square feet may be provided when located beneath a canopy. No other accessory structures except public phone booths and refuse areas shall be permitted.

e.       The minimum building floor area for a full-service station with a convenience store shall be two thousand eight hundred square feet. At least one thousand six hundred square feet of floor area shall be devoted to the operation of a convenience store. At least one thousand two hundred square feet of floor area shall be devoted to repair facilities. No other accessory structures except public phone booths and refuse areas shall be permitted.

f.        The minimum lot area for a self-service station without a convenience store shall be fifteen thousand square feet with a minimum street frontage of one hundred twenty-five feet on each adjacent street.

g.       The minimum lot area for a self-service station with a convenience store shall be twenty-two thousand square feet with a minimum street frontage of one hundred fifty feet on each adjacent street.

h.       The minimum building floor area for a self-service station without a convenience store shall be one hundred fifty square feet when beneath a canopy or in a building of not less than six hundred square feet. No other accessory structures except public phone booths and refuse areas shall be permitted.

i.        The minimum building floor area for a self-service station with a convenience store shall be one thousand six hundred square feet. No other accessory structures except public phone booths and refuse areas shall be permitted.

j.        No service station shall have more than two access ways on any one street frontage.

k.       Public restrooms shall be provided at full-service stations and at self-service stations when a building is provided exclusive of canopies. Restroom entrances shall be screened from view of adjacent property and public rights-of-way.

l.        Air and water facilities shall be made available for public use.

m.      Landscaping, in addition to that otherwise required by this title, shall include two hundred square feet of planting area, raised by curbs six inches in height, at the intersection of street property lines and planters three feet wide, raised by curbs six inches in height, along interior property lines except where building placement prevents the placement of such planters.

n.       Exterior lighting shall be arranged and shielded to prevent spill over on adjoining property and the public right-of-way.

o.       Each pump island may include computerized payment stations. Such stations shall be situated in a manner that will not cause interference with circulation or the sale of motor fuels.

p.       Merchandise, wares and crates, in the form of storage or displays, shall be within the confines of the building provided that outside placement of soft drink dispensers when associated with a water cooling system may be approved by the director.

q.       A convenience store’s display area shall be divided between the display of beverage and food items and nonfood items such that nonfood items shall account for at least sixty-five percent of the display area.

r.        Hours of operation for the sale of motor fuels, lubricating oils, brake and cooling fluids, and such services and replacements as are permitted without the confines of a building are unlimited. Automobile repair operations required to be within a building shall be conducted between the hours of seven a.m. to seven p.m. Delivery of products, excluding automobile fuels, are limited to the hours between seven a.m. to ten p.m.

s.       For each twenty lineal feet of pump island fascia that is served by a nozzle, one-half of one parking stall shall be deducted from the required parking for a convenience store. No more than three parking stalls may be deducted in this manner.

6.       Convenience Stores.

a.       The site shall have frontage along an arterial or collector street. The site shall not have direct access to a local residential street.

b.       One access drive shall be permitted on each street frontage. The design and location of access drives shall be subject to the approval of the director.

c.       A bicycle rack designed to accommodate a minimum of three bicycles shall be installed in a convenient location visible from the inside of the store.

d.       Restrooms shall be provided within the store.

e.       Public pay telephones provided on-site shall be featured with call-out service only.

f.        Video games shall not be installed or operated on the premises.

7.       Hotels and Motels. Hotels and motels shall be permitted subject to conditional use permit approval only in the zones specified in Table C (see appendix). When authorized by a conditional use permit, the following minimum standards shall apply:

a.       The minimum floor area for a guest room shall be two hundred seventy-five square feet, except that a guest room with a kitchenette shall have a minimum floor area of three hundred square feet.

b.       The minimum floor area for a manager’s unit shall meet the dwelling unit floor area requirements of the R-3, multiple-family residence zone.

c.       The minimum lot area to develop a hotel or motel shall be three acres.

d.       The maximum number of vending machines shall be limited to a ratio of one machine for every five guest rooms. All outdoor vending machines are to be enclosed on three sides and located so as not to be visible from a public street.

8.       Public Storage Facilities. Public storage facilities shall be permitted subject to conditional use permit approval only in the zones specified in Table C (see appendix). When authorized by a conditional use permit, the following minimum standards shall apply:

a.       The use shall be limited to the lease or rental of separate storage spaces. On-site, twenty-four hour management shall be provided. Outdoor storage, sale, washing, repair or maintenance of boats, vehicles or other equipment or materials shall not be permitted.

b.       The use shall only be permitted along arterial streets.

c.       The minimum lot area shall be forty thousand square feet and the minimum street frontage shall be two hundred feet.

d.       The maximum building height shall be twenty-five feet, but not exceeding two stories, except that any building or portion of a building within twenty-five feet of the front or street side setback shall have a maximum height of ten feet, but not exceeding one story.

9.       Swap Meets, Indoor. Indoor swap meets shall be permitted subject to conditional use permit approval only in the zones specified in Table C (see appendix). When authorized by a conditional use permit, the following minimum standards shall apply:

a.       The use shall not be located on any parcel within two hundred fifty feet of a residential zone;

b.       The minimum building size shall be thirty thousand square feet;

c.       Each business tenant shall conduct the sale of new or used goods and merchandise from a tenant enclosure;

d.       Each tenant enclosure shall have a minimum area of nine hundred square feet with a minimum dimension of thirty feet;

e.       Each tenant enclosure shall be surrounded on three sides by an eight-foot-high wall, which shall be constructed out of material approved by the Uniform Building Code;

f.        Each tenant enclosure shall have a wall covering of one-half-inch drywall, which shall be fire taped and painted and four-inch base molding within one-fourth-inch of the finish floor of the enclosure. Other material may be used as approved by the director;

g.       Each tenant enclosure wall shall be appropriately secured to a building wall or foundation;

h.       Each business tenant shall have a seller’s permit from the State Board of Equalization;

i.        A building manager, over the age of twenty-one years, must be present during all business operating hours;

j.        A minimum one thousand square feet of storage area shall be provided for each ten thousand square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof.

10.     Beauty/Health Spa or Ancillary Massage Therapy Use in Conjunction with a Beauty/Health Spa or Gym.

a.       An ancillary massage therapy use in conjunction with a beauty/health spa or gym shall not occupy more than thirty percent of the gross floor area of the primary use.

b.       A beauty/health spa or ancillary massage therapy use shall be located only on the ground-floor of a building.

c.       Curtains or blackened windows that obscure retail storefronts or retail windows containing beauty/health spa or ancillary massage therapy uses shall not be allowed.

11.     Pawn Shops and Gold and Silver Dealers.

a.       The purpose of this subsection is to regulate the locations and general operation and maintenance standards for pawn shops and gold and silver dealers within the city to ensure security and compatibility with surrounding uses and properties and to avoid any impacts associated with such uses.

b.       Site Location, Operation and Development Standards. The standards set forth in this subsection shall apply to pawn shops and gold and silver dealers unless otherwise specified in this subsection.

i.        Site Location Standards.

(A)    Pawn shops and gold and silver dealers shall be limited to CM, commercial manufacturing zones.

(B)    A minimum separation distance of five hundred feet is required between each commercial manufacturing zoned parcel containing a pawn shop or gold and silver dealer use, and no more than one pawn shop or gold and silver dealer is allowed per parcel.

(C)    No pawn shops or gold and silver dealers are allowed on commercial manufacturing zoned parcels that abut residentially zoned parcels. No pawn shops or gold and silver dealer uses are allowed on commercial manufacturing zoned parcels that are located within fifty-nine feet of a residentially zoned parcel.

(D)    No ingress or egress is allowed onto a residential street from a commercial manufacturing zoned parcel containing a pawn shop or gold and silver dealer.

ii.       Operation and Development Standards.

(A)    The business shall have lighting to provide illumination for security and safety of parking and access areas. On-site lighting plans shall be submitted to the city for review and approval prior to issuance of a business license.

(B)    A security plan shall be provided to the Glendora police department and planning department for review and approval prior to issuance of a business license.

(C)    The business windows shall not be tinted or obscured in any way, including by temporary or painted window signs, and the interior lighting of the business from the exterior of the business shall remain at adequate levels to clearly see into the business from the exterior of the business.

(D)    A sign shall be posted in the front of the business indicating that no loitering is permitted per the Glendora Municipal Code.

(E)     Prior to occupancy of the business, the business owner shall sign a trespass authority letter authorizing the Glendora police department to enforce trespass law. A copy of this letter shall be provided to the planning department.

(F)     Hours of operation shall be limited to nine a.m. to seven p.m., Monday through Sunday.

E.       Design Standards. The provisions of this section shall apply to work requiring a building permit within any commercial zone except the civic center district, which is regulated by the civic center district overlay development standards.

1.       Site Planning. Placement of buildings shall consider the existing context of the commercial area, the location of incompatible land uses, the location of major traffic generators as well as an analysis of a site’s characteristics and particular influences.

a.       Buildings shall be sited in a manner that will complement adjacent buildings. Building sites shall be developed in a coordinated manner to provide order and diversity and avoid a jumbled, confused development.

b.       New buildings shall be clustered to create plazas and pedestrian malls and to prevent long rows of buildings. When clustering is impractical, a visual link shall be established between separate buildings. This link shall be accomplished through the use of an arcade system, trellis or other open structure.

c.       Outdoor spaces between buildings shall have clear, recognizable shapes that reflect careful planning and not simply “left over” areas between buildings. Such spaces shall provide pedestrian amenities such as shade, benches, fountains, etc.

d.       Freestanding, singular commercial buildings shall be oriented with their major façade and entry toward the street.

e.       Outdoor spaces shall be clustered into large, predominant landscape areas rather than distributed into areas of low impact such as at building peripheries, behind buildings, or in areas of low visibility when not required as a buffer or setback.

2.       Landscaping.

a.       Landscaping shall be used to define specific areas such as entrances to buildings and parking areas, transitions between land uses, and screening for loading and equipment areas.

b.       Landscaping shall be in scale with adjacent buildings at maturity.

c.       Landscaping shall be provided around the base of buildings to reduce building mass and height.

d.       Trees shall be located throughout the parking area and not simply at the ends of parking aisles.

e.       Landscaping shall be protected with raised planting surfaces, depressed walks, or curbs. Mowing strips shall be provided between turf and shrub areas.

f.        Vines and climbing plants shall be provided on building walls, trellises, and garden walls.

g.       Boxed and tubbed plants in clay or wood containers shall be provided, especially along pedestrian walks.

h.       Landscaping shall be maintained to provide adequate visibility.

3.       Walls and Fences.

a.       Walls and fences shall not be used, unless needed or required for screening, security, or buffering land uses. Walls and fences shall be as low as possible while performing these functions.

 

b.       Walls shall be compatible with building architecture and site design. Landscaping shall be used in combination with such walls when possible.

c.       Chain link fences shall not be visible from public rights-of-way.

d.       Long expanses of fence or wall surfaces shall be architecturally designed to prevent monotony. Landscape pockets shall be provided.

4.       Screening. Screening shall be compatible with building architecture and site design.

5.       Architectural Design Standards.

a.       Buildings shall relate to open spaces to allow adequate sun and ventilation, provide protection from prevailing winds, create views of mountains and hills, and minimize obstruction of views of mountains and hills.

b.       Buildings shall be compatible with the height and scale of surrounding buildings. The height of new buildings shall transition from the height of adjacent buildings to the maximum height of the proposed buildings.

c.       Planes of exterior walls shall be varied in depth and/or direction. Wall planes shall not exceed fifty feet in length without an offset.

d.       The height of a building shall be varied to give the appearance of divided, distinct massing elements.

e.       Different parts of a building façade shall be articulated by the use of color, the arrangement of elements, or a change in materials.

f.        Building scale shall be reduced through window patterns, structural bays, roof overhangs, siding, awnings, moldings, fixtures and other details.

g.       Building scale shall be related to pedestrian areas such as plazas and courtyards.

h.       Large buildings shall be broken up by creating horizontal emphasis through the use of trim; adding awnings, eaves, windows or other architectural ornamentation; using combinations of complementary colors; and using landscape materials.

i.        Large areas of intense white or dark colors shall be avoided. Subdued colors shall be used as dominant overall colors. Bright colors shall only be used for trim.

j.        Colors shall be compatible with that of adjacent buildings, unless colors of adjacent buildings strongly diverge from these standards.

k.       The number of colors on building exteriors shall not exceed three.

l.        Primary colors shall only be used to accent building elements, such as door and window frames and architectural details.

m.      Architectural detailing shall be painted to complement the façade and adjacent buildings.

n.       Wall materials shall be chosen that will withstand abuse by vandals or accidental damage from machinery and equipment.

o.       Roller shutter doors shall be located on the inside of buildings.

6.       Roofs:

a.       Roof lines shall not exceed fifty feet in length without an offset or jog.

b.       Nearly vertical roofs shall not be permitted. Mansard roofs shall wrap around the entire building perimeter.

c.       Corrugated metal, high contrast surfaces, brightly colored surfaces, highly reflective surfaces and illuminated roofing shall not be permitted.

7.       Awnings:

a.       Awnings used along a row of contiguous buildings shall be of the same form and uniformly located with a minimum vertical clearance of eight feet.

 

b.       Awnings shall be of canvas, treated canvas, matte finish vinyl or fabric.

c.       Internally lit awnings shall not be permitted.

8.       Lighting:

a.       Adequate lighting shall be provided for the security and safety of areas such as parking areas, loading areas, vehicle and pedestrian circulation areas, building entrances and working areas.

b.       Light fixtures and supports shall be compatible with building architecture and site design. Illuminators shall be integrated within the architectural design of buildings.

c.       Lighting shall be shielded to prevent spillover. (Ord. 1984 § 3, 2014; Ord. 1962 § 3, 2012; Ord. 1924 § 11, 2009; Ord. 1827 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1648 § 1, 1996: Ord. 1618 § 1 Exh. A, 1993)

 

21.05.020 Medical services zone.
A.      Purpose. The purpose of this zone is to provide for the development of hospitals, health care and other medical related facilities in a manner that implements the policies and programs of the general plan. These regulations are designed to ensure that adequate land area is provided and that the facilities are aesthetically pleasing.

B.      Permitted Uses.

1.       Medical offices and laboratories;

2.       Pharmacies, limited to the sale of drugs and supplies only, associated with a hospital, medical office or care facility.

C.      Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permit.

1.       Community care, convalescent and nursing facilities;

2.       Hospitals;

3.       Senior housing;

4.       Accessory buildings and dormitories.

D.      Development Standards.

1.       Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be sixty thousand square feet.

2.       Lot Width. The minimum lot width shall be one hundred feet.

3.       Lot Depth. The minimum lot depth shall be two hundred feet.

4.       Front Yard. The minimum front yard shall be twenty-five feet.

5.       Side Yards. The minimum side yard shall be twenty feet.

6.       Rear Yard. The minimum rear yard shall be twenty-five feet.

7.       Height. The maximum height shall be thirty-five feet, but not exceeding two stories.

8.       Building Area. The minimum gross floor area for each building shall be one thousand six hundred square feet.

9.       Refuse Areas. Refuse areas shall be provided for the storage of refuse containers. All refuse shall be deposited in refuse containers in the refuse area, which shall be screened by a wall six feet in height and a solid gate not less than five feet in height. The gate shall be maintained in good working order and shall remain closed except when in use. The refuse containers shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the trash generated.

10.     Population Density. The total number of patient and dormitory beds shall not exceed one bed for each eight hundred square feet of lot area.

11.     Outdoor Recreation Area. For all uses with patient or dormitory beds, a minimum of fifty square feet of outdoor recreation or patio area shall be provided for each bed.

 

E.       Design Standards. The design standards governing the medical services zone shall be the same as those delineated for the commercial and professional zones, Section 21.05.010(E).

F.       Development Plan Review Required. Development shall be subject to development plan review prior to the issuance of permits in accordance with Section 21.02.040. (Ord. 2017 § 2, 2017)

 

21.05.030 Manufacturing and industrial zones.
A.      Purpose. These zones provide for the development of manufacturing and industrial areas in a manner that implements the general plan and ensures that uses are compatible with other uses in the community. These regulations are designed to provide appropriate areas for manufacturing and industrial uses; encourage convenient access to developments; promote aesthetically pleasing design; and ensure minimal adverse impacts on adjoining properties and the community. The manufacturing and industrial zones are as follows:

1.       M-1 (light manufacture);

2.       M-1A (limited industrial);

3.       IP (industrial park).

B.      Permitted Uses. Uses permitted by right are specified in Table C (see appendix).

C.      Permitted Uses Subject to Conditional Use Permit. Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit are specified in Table C (see appendix).

D.      Development Standards.

1.       General Standards. The minimum lot area, minimum lot width, minimum lot depth, maximum lot coverage, minimum setbacks and maximum building height shall be as specified in Table D (see appendix).

2.       Refuse Areas. Refuse areas shall be provided for the storage of refuse containers. All refuse shall be deposited in refuse containers in the refuse area, which shall be screened by walls six feet in height and a solid gate not less than five feet in height. The gate shall be maintained in good working order and shall remain closed except when in use. The refuse containers shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the trash generated.

E.       Design Standards. The provisions of this section shall apply to work requiring a building permit within any manufacturing and industrial zone.

1.       Site Planning.

a.       Building setbacks shall be provided proportionate to the scale of buildings and in consideration of adjacent development.

b.       Building placement shall create patios, plazas, courts or gardens.

c.       Adequate buffering shall be provided to minimize impacts on adjacent land uses.

d.       The site shall be designed to preserve existing stands of trees when possible.

 

2.       Landscaping.

a.       Landscaping shall be used to define specific areas such as entrances to buildings and parking areas, transitions between land uses and screening for loading and equipment areas.

b.       Landscaping shall be in scale with adjacent buildings at maturity.

c.       Landscaping shall be provided around the base of buildings to reduce building mass and height.

d.       Trees shall be located throughout the parking area and not simply at the ends of parking aisles.

e.       Landscaping shall be protected with raised planting surfaces, depressed walks, or curbs. Mowing strips shall be provided between turf and shrub areas.

f.        Vines and climbing plants shall be provided on building walls, trellises and garden walls.

g.       Boxed and tubbed plants in clay or wood containers shall be provided, especially along pedestrian walks.

h.       Landscaping shall be maintained to provide adequate visibility.

i.        A minimum five-foot landscape strip shall be provided between parking areas and the office portion of a structure.

3.       Walls and Fences.

a.       Walls and fences shall not be used, unless needed or required for screening, security or buffering land uses. Walls and fences shall be as low as possible while performing these functions.

b.       Walls shall be compatible with building architecture and site design. Landscaping shall be used in combination with such walls when possible.

c.       Chain link fences shall not be visible from public rights-of-way.

d.       Long expanses of fence or wall surfaces shall be architecturally designed to prevent monotony. Landscape pockets shall be provided.

4.       Screening. Screening shall be compatible with building architecture and site design.

5.       Architectural Design Standards.

a.       Buildings shall relate to open spaces to allow adequate sun and ventilation, provide protection from prevailing winds, create views of mountains and hills and minimize obstruction of views of mountains and hills.

b.       Buildings shall be compatible with the height and scale of surrounding buildings. The height of new buildings shall transition from the height of adjacent buildings to the maximum height of the proposed buildings.

c.       Planes of exterior walls shall be varied in depth and/or direction. Wall planes shall not exceed fifty feet in length without an offset.

d.       The height of a building shall be varied to give the appearance of divided, distinct massing elements.

e.       Different parts of a building façade shall be articulated by the use of color, the arrangement of elements or a change in materials.

f.        Building scale shall be reduced through window patterns, structural bays, roof overhangs, siding, awnings, moldings, fixtures and other details.

g.       Building scale shall be related to pedestrian areas such as plazas and courtyards.

h.       Large building shall be broken up by created horizontal emphasis through the use of trim; adding awnings, eaves, windows or other architectural ornamentation; using combinations of complementary colors; and using landscape materials.

i.        Large areas of intense white or dark colors shall be avoided. Subdued colors shall be used as dominant overall colors. Bright colors shall only be used for trim.

 

j.        Colors shall be compatible with that of adjacent buildings, unless colors of adjacent buildings strongly diverge from these standards.

k.       The number of colors on building exteriors shall not exceed three.

l.        Primary colors shall only be used to accent building elements, such as door and window frames and architectural details.

m.      Architectural detailing shall be painted to complement the façade and adjacent buildings.

n.       Wall materials shall be chosen that will withstand abuse by vandals or accidental damage from machinery and equipment.

o.       Rolling shutter doors shall be located on the inside of buildings.

6.       Roofs.

a.       Roof lines shall not exceed fifty feet in length without an offset or job.

b.       Nearly vertical roofs shall not be permitted. Mansard roofs shall wrap around the entire building perimeter.

c.       Corrugated metal, high contrast surfaces, brightly colored surfaces, highly reflective surfaces and illuminated roofing shall not be permitted.

7.       Lighting.

a.       Adequate lighting shall be provided for the security and safety of areas such as parking areas, loading areas, vehicle and pedestrian circulation areas, building entrances and working areas.

b.       Light fixtures and supports shall be compatible with building architecture and site design. Illuminators shall be integrated within the architectural design of buildings.

c.       Lighting shall be shielded to prevent spillover.

F.       Development Plan Review Required. Development shall be subject to development plan review prior to the issuance of permits in accordance with Section 21.02.040. (Ord. 1618 § 1 Exh. A, 1993)

Chapter 21.06 SPECIAL USE ZONES
21.06.010 Cemetery zone (B).
A.      Purpose. The purpose of the cemetery zone is to provide for cemetery uses in accordance with state of California regulations.

B.      Permitted Uses. Cemeteries, mausoleums, crematories, mortuaries, florists and agricultural uses, including a caretaker’s house.

C.      Development Standards.

1.       The minimum setback shall be twenty-five feet.

2.       The maximum fence or wall height shall be eight feet.

3.       The maximum building height shall be thirty-five feet, but not exceeding two stories. (Ord. 1618 § 1 Exh. A, 1993)

 

21.06.020 Planned redevelopment zone (PR).
A.      Purpose. The purpose of the planned redevelopment zone is to provide for development on a comprehensive basis by using site planning techniques not permitted through the literal application of zoning and subdivision regulations and to produce an environment of stable, desirable character in harmony with existing and potential development in the surrounding area. The planned redevelopment zone is intended to achieve the following:

1.       To protect the public health, safety and welfare;

2.       To implement the policies and programs of the general plan and applicable specific plans;

3.       To preserve the environmental and natural resources;

4.       To attain the physical, social and economic advantages of comprehensively planned land uses;

5.       To ensure aesthetic development;

6.       To provide for adequate amenities, facilities, infrastructure and services;

7.       To promote the efficient use of the land.

B.      Development Requirements. Development standards, covenants, conditions, restrictions and other requirements shall be established by council.

C.      Permitted Uses. Permitted uses and uses permitted, subject to a conditional use permit, shall be established by the council.

D.      Development Plan Review Required. Development or modification of an approved plan shall be subject to development plan review in accordance with Section 21.02.040 of this title. (Ord. 1618 § 1 Exh. A, 1993)

 

21.06.030 Planned development zone (PD).
A.      Purpose. The purpose of the planned development zone is to provide for residential development on a comprehensive basis by using site planning techniques not permitted through the literal application of zoning and subdivision regulations and to produce an environment of stable, desirable character in harmony with existing and potential development in the surrounding area. The planned development zone is intended to achieve the following:

1.       To protect the public health, safety and welfare;

2.       To implement the policies and programs of the general plan and applicable specific plans;

3.       To preserve the environment and natural resources;

4.       To attain the physical, social and economic advantages of comprehensively planned land uses;

5.       To ensure aesthetic development;

6.       To provide for adequate amenities, facilities, infrastructure and services;

7.       To promote the efficient use of the land.

B.      Development Requirements. Development standards, covenants, conditions, restrictions and other requirements shall be established by the council.

C.      Permitted Uses. Permitted uses and uses permitted, subject to a conditional use permit, shall be established by the council.

D.      Development Plan Review Required. Development or modification of an approved plan shall be subject to development plan review in accordance with Section 21.02.040. (Ord. 1618 § 1 Exh. A, 1993)

 

21.06.040 Railroad zone (R-4).
A.      Purpose. The purpose of the railroad zone is to provide for railroad uses within the railroad rights-of-way.

B.      Permitted Uses. All property located in an R-4 zone shall be used for railroad purposes and passenger and freight facilities only. (Ord. 1618 § 1 Exh. A, 1993)

 

21.06.050 Open space—Natural zone (OSN).
A.      Purpose. The purpose of the open space—natural zone is to: (1) conserve and manage natural resources which may include biological resources, watercourses, hills, canyons, major rock outcroppings, etc.; (2) protect the public health and safety by including areas requiring management due to hazardous or special conditions such as fire, flood and earthquake fault; and (3) provide outdoor recreation including areas of scenic, historic or cultural value. The OSN zoning designation shall only be applied to public and quasi-public property; provided, however, that a private property owner may request and be considered for a change of zone to OSN.

B.      Permitted Uses. All property located in an OSN zone shall be left in its natural, wilderness state except for the following uses: riding and hiking trails, picnic and playground areas, flood control structures and facilities, and utility substations and related equipment and structures.

C.      Development Requirements. Development standards for the OSN zone shall be determined on a site-by-site basis. Consideration shall be given to surrounding properties and developments in order to blend the development with, and to keep it consistent with, the surrounding area. Factors to be considered for determination of standards shall be topography, water drainage, circulation, use of site, and any other environmental factors related to the site.

D.      Development Plan Review Required. Development or modification of an approved plan shall be subject to development plan review in accordance with Section 21.02.040. (Ord. 1637 § 3, 1995)

 

21.06.060 Specific plan zone (SP).
A.      Purpose. The purpose of the specific plan (SP) zone is to provide for the development and administration of specific plans, prepared in accordance with the Government Code and consistent with the city’s general plan. The specific plan (SP) zone is intended to achieve the following:

1.       To protect the public health, safety and welfare;

2.       To implement the goals, objectives, policies and programs of the general plan;

3.       To preserve the environmental and natural resources;

4.       To attain the physical, social and economic advantages of comprehensively planned land uses;

5.       To ensure aesthetic development;

6.       To provide for appropriate amenities, facilities, infrastructure and services; and

7.       To provide a process for initiation, review and regulation of large-scale comprehensively planned developments that affords the maximum flexibility in site planning within the context of an over-all development program and specific, phased development plans coordinated with the provision of necessary public services and facilities.

B.      General Requirements.

1.       The specific plan zone designation shall not be applied to any one or more contiguous parcels that are less than fifteen net acres in area.

2.       Permitted uses shall be as established by the approved specific plan.

3.       Conditionally permitted uses shall be as established by the approved specific plan.

4.       The minimum lot width, lot depth, lot area, floor area ratio, floor area, setbacks, building height, and other site development standards shall be as established by the approved specific plan.

5.       Existing uses within the area covered by a specific plan at the time of its adoption shall be deemed allowable and incorporated in the specific plan, unless terminated, discontinued or changed pursuant to a specific time schedule incorporated in the specific plan.

6.       No specific plan application shall be accepted for processing unless the area proposed to be included in the specific plan has a specific plan (SP) zoning designation or is accompanied by an application for a zone change to the specific plan (SP) district.

7.       Any specific plan established pursuant to this section shall be consistent with any zoning standards or restrictions enacted by a vote of the people pursuant to the initiative or referendum process.

C.      Submittal Requirements. A specific plan application shall be filed with the department of planning and redevelopment accompanied by the appropriate fee as established by city council resolution.

D.      Content Requirements of the Specific Plan. The specific plan shall include text and a diagram or diagrams, drawn to scale, which specify all of the following in detail:

1.       A map which indicates the total acreage of property governed by the specific plan and which shows the proposed specific plan boundaries and the relationship of the proposed specific plan to existing and/or planned land uses and structures within a three hundred foot radius of the proposed specific plan;

2.       A map and aerial photograph of the proposed district, and property within a three hundred foot radius of the proposed district boundaries, which shows the locations of existing development;

3.       The distribution, location and extent of the uses of land, including open space, within the area covered by the plan;

4.       The location and width of proposed streets, points of ingress and egress, and their points of intersection with roads and other major highways outside of the project boundaries;

5.       The location of areas subject to geologic, seismic, flood, and other natural hazards;

6.       A preliminary grading plan showing sufficient topographic data to indicate the character of the terrain and the type, location and condition of trees and other natural vegetation;

7.       The proposed distribution, location and extent and intensity of major components of public and private transportation, sewage, water, drainage, solid waste disposal, energy, and other essential facilities proposed to be located within the area covered by the plan and needed to support the land uses described in the plan;

8.       Standards and criteria by which development will proceed;

9.       Standards and criteria for the conservation, development and utilization of natural resources, where applicable;

10.     A program of implementation measures including regulations, programs, public works projects and financing measures necessary to carry out the plan;

11.     A statement of the plan’s relationship to and consistency with the city’s general plan;

12.     Any other subject(s) that in the judgment of the department of planning and redevelopment are necessary or desirable for the implementation of the specific plan or the city’s general plan.

E.       Application Processing.

1.       After receiving a specific plan application, the department of planning and redevelopment shall conduct an environmental review in accordance with all applicable laws.

2.       After completion of environmental review, the specific plan application shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation to the city council in accordance with all applicable laws. The planning commission shall hold at least one noticed public hearing to consider the specific plan. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(E) of the Glendora Municipal Code. Any public hearing may be continued from time to time.

3.       Upon recommendation by the planning commission, the city council shall review and make a final decision on the specific plan application. The city council shall hold at least one noticed public hearing to consider the specific plan. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(E) of the Glendora Municipal Code. Any public hearing may be continued from time to time.

F.       Adoption of a Specific Plan. The adoption of a specific plan shall be by ordinance in accordance with all applicable laws. Each adopted specific plan shall be indicated on the official zoning map by the letters (SP) followed by a reference number identifying the plan.

G.      Administration. A specific plan adopted by ordinance of the city council of the city shall be administered as prescribed by the adopted specific plan, consistent with the Government Code, Section 65450 et seq.

H.      Review of Plans. Application for building permits for projects in an area which is zoned specific plan (SP) shall only be accepted if the project plans are consistent with a valid specific plan.

I.        Amendment of a Specific Plan. Amendments to an approved specific plan shall follow the same procedures for adopting a specific plan. (Ord. 1679 § 3, 1998)

 

21.06.070 CCAP zoning development standards.
A.      Purpose and Intent.

1.       The Civic Center Area Plan zone (CCAP) encompasses the area of the village from Foothill Boulevard north to Bennett Avenue and from Pennsylvania Avenue to Wabash Avenue. The village is the historic center of the city, and it remains an important symbol of the community. Several buildings in the area date back to the late 1800’s and early 1900’s. The overall character of the area is one of charm and small scale village ambiance.

2.       The purpose of the CCAP development standards is to provide guidance to property owners and developers who wish to make changes, additions or new construction that complement the scale and ambiance of the existing village community. The CCAP development standards also establish the types of uses allowed by right or with approval of an entitlement for the CCAP zone. The CCAP zone is designed to reflect the evolving attitudes and expectations of the community and to encourage a vibrant pedestrian scale district that incorporates a compatible mix of retail and residential uses.

 

B.      CCAP Zone Subdistricts.



 

C.      T-4, Village Edge—Intent and Description.



Village Edge neighborhood future development concept

 

The T-4 Village Edge subdistrict is a residential area including single and multifamily residential uses. The character of the area is a neighborhood of pre-war bungalows and cottages and multifamily infill development constructed from the 1950’s onward. Wide front setbacks, one- and two-story homes and apartments fronting narrow, tree-lined streets create a wonderful pedestrian experience. The historic character and pedestrian scale provide important context for the adjacent T-5 Village Core subdistrict. The T-4 standards are intended to preserve the pedestrian scale and character of the residential neighborhood while allowing additional density as provided by the general plan.



D.      T-4, Village Edge Standards.

1.       Lot Configuration.

a.       Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet.

b.       Minimum lot width: 80 feet.

c.       Minimum lot depth: 125 feet.

d.       Nonconforming lots: refer to Section 21.03.030(B) of this title.

2.       Multifamily Residential Unit Density. Up to thirty dwelling units per acre.

3.       Single-Family Standards. If a single-family residence exists or is proposed on a lot, follow the R-1 standards in Section 21.04.010 and Section 21.A.A, Table A, Development standards, single-family residence zones, of this title.

4.       Minimum Multifamily Unit Size. Follow the minimum floor area standards listed in Section 21.A.B, Table B, Development standards, multiple family residence zones.

5.       Building Placement. The development goal for the T-4, Village Edge subdistrict is to preserve the existing character of the small scale residential neighborhood to the greatest extent possible. Therefore, on properties with an existing single-family cottage in front, new development is encouraged to be located behind the existing cottage. If the cottage is to be removed, new development is encouraged to present a one-story front profile to the street. New development should consider single-story front porch designs that address the street and provide the desired neighborhood scale.

 



 

 

Examples of preferred new multifamily development behind existing cottages at 316 and 310 E. Foothill Boulevard

a.       Front setback first story: 20 feet.

b.       First story front porch or stoop: 15 feet.

c.       Front setback second story: 25 feet (if no front porch).

d.       Rear setback: 20 feet.

e.       Side setback first story: 5 feet.

f.        Side setback second story: 10 feet.

g.       Street side setback (corner lot): 20 feet.

6.       Building Form.

a.       Maximum height: 25 feet plus an additional 5 feet for architectural features.

b.       Maximum stories: 2 stories.

c.       Unless the selected architectural style indicates otherwise, all building wall planes shall provide thoughtful articulation using variations in wall planes, window fenestration and entry openings to break up wall planes. Large expanses of blank walls are strongly discouraged.

d.       Maximum floor area ratio for single-family development: refer to Section 21.A.A, Table A, Development standards, single-family residence zones, of this title.

e.       Maximum second floor to first floor area ratio for single-family development: refer to Section 21.A.A, Table A, Development standards, single-family residence zones, of this title.

f.        Multifamily unit sizes: refer to Section 21.A.B, Table B, Development standards, multiple family residence zones, of this title.

E.       T-5, Village Core—Intent and Description.



 

Future Village Core two- and three-story development concept

 

The T-5 Village Core subdistrict is the city’s oldest commercial district and heart of the community. The character of the area is a pedestrian-scale village street with one- to three-story buildings that reflect the predominant period of development in the area. A number of distinctive buildings from the early 1900’s are still a part of the Village. These buildings contribute to the historic ambiance of the place. The T-5 standards provide guidance to allow additional development which also preserves and enhances the village as both a destination and a unique place to live, work and shop. Allowable uses include multifamily development and general commercial and retail businesses. Residential uses are allowed on upper floors fronting Glendora Avenue. Ground floor units fronting Glendora Avenue are reserved for commercial, retail and personal services that enhance the pedestrian experience. Sidewalk café dining standards are designed to encourage a vibrant community atmosphere while ensuring adequate pedestrian safety and access.



 

F.       T-5 Village Core Standards.

1.       Lot Configuration.

a.       Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet.

b.       Minimum lot width: 75 feet.

c.       Nonconforming lots: refer to Section 21.03.030(B) of this title.

2.       Multifamily Residential Unit Density. Up to thirty dwelling units per acre.

3.       Mixed Use Definition. The term “mixed use” is defined for the CCAP zone development standards to mean a mix of residential and commercial/retail uses on the same property.

4.       Building Placement.

a.       Properties fronting on Glendora Avenue:

i.        Front setback: 0.

ii.       Rear setback: 0.

iii.     Side setback: 0.

iv.      Street side setback: 0.

b.       Properties not fronting on Glendora Avenue:

i.        Front setback: 5 feet.

ii.       Rear setback: 0

iii.     Side setback: 0.

iv.      Street side setback: 5 feet.

5.       Building Form.

a.       Maximum height: 45 feet plus an additional five feet for architectural features.

b.       Maximum stories: 3 stories.

c.       Arcades, balconies and gallery spaces shall have a minimum depth of six feet.

d.       Unless the selected architectural style indicates otherwise, all building wall planes shall provide thoughtful articulation using variations in wall planes, window fenestration and entry openings to break up wall planes. Large expanses of blank walls are strongly discouraged.

G.      T-5A Village Transition—Intent and Description.



Mixed use ground floor commercial with residential above development concept

 

The T-5A Village Transition subdistrict is an eclectic mix of residential and commercial/retail/office uses. The area is characterized by historic folk cottage architecture, craftsman and Spanish colonial bungalows, post-war multifamily development and various commercial buildings. The T-5A standards provide guidance to enhance the quality of the area as a mixed use extension of the village with its own identity, mixing residential uses and compatible commercial/retail/office uses. The goal is to provide guidance for future quality mixed use development that will bring a unifying, identifiable theme to the subdistrict, its own “sense of place.” Permitted uses include a broad mix of residential, commercial and office uses.



 

H.      T-5A, Village Transition Development Standards.

1.       Lot Configuration.

a.       Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet.

b.       Minimum lot width: 100 feet.

c.       Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.

2.       Residential Unit Density. Up to thirty dwelling units per acre.

3.       Building Placement.

a.       Commercial and Mixed Use Multifamily.

i.        Front setback first story: 5 feet.

ii.       Side setback: 0 when adjacent to commercial.

iii.     Side setback: 5 feet when adjacent to exclusively residential uses.

iv.      Street side setback: 5 feet.

v.       Rear setback: 0 when adjacent to commercial.

vi.      Rear setback: 15 feet when adjacent to exclusively residential uses.

b.       Exclusively Residential.

i.        Front setback first story: 10 feet.

 

ii.       Front setback second/third story: 15 feet.

iii.     First story front porch or stoop: 5 feet.

iv.      Side setback: 5 feet.

v.       Side setback second/third stories: 10 feet.

vi.      Street side setback: 5 feet.

vii.    Rear setback: 15 feet.

4.       Building Form.

a.       Maximum height: 45 feet plus an additional five feet for architectural features.

b.       Maximum stories: 3 stories.

c.       Arcades, balconies and gallery spaces shall have a minimum depth of six feet.

d.       Unless the selected architectural style indicates otherwise, all building wall planes shall provide thoughtful articulation using variations in wall planes, window fenestration and entry openings to break up wall planes. Large expanses of blank walls are strongly discouraged.

I.        CCAP Parking Standards.

1.       General Standards.

a.       Single-Family Residential. Refer to Section 21.03.020(D).

b.       T-4 Multifamily Residential. Refer to Section 21.03.020(E).

c.       Guest parking spaces in multifamily development in the T-4 subdistrict shall be labeled “Guest Parking” in eight-inch block letters.

d.       Parking Location. All access to parking garages, parking lots, parking structures including podium structures shall be provided from alleys if available. No curb cuts or direct access to parking structures or podium style parking structures shall be allowed from Glendora Avenue with the exception of city-owned public parking lots.

e.       Parking clear back-out distance from face of garage doors: 25 feet back-out distance may include the width of alley if needed.

f.        Residential multifamily mixed use or stand alone residential parking in the parking exemption district: one space per bedroom.

g.       Residential multifamily mixed use or stand alone residential parking in the parking reduction district: one space per bedroom and 0.1 space per bedroom for guest parking.

2.       Parking Structures.

a.       Multifamily residential parking is recommended to be located in subterranean or podium parking structures.

b.       Street adjacent portions of parking structures, including podium-style parking structures, shall be located and designed to be screened from view from the public street.

c.       Parking structures shall be designed to blend harmoniously and architecturally with the surrounding village context.

3.       Parking Exemption District. The parking exemption district exempts all commercial development within the boundaries of the district from the requirement to provide on-site parking as part of new commercial development. This is based on the fact that there is public parking available in city parking lots, private parking lots and street parking. (See map in subsection J of this section.)

4.       Parking Reduction District. The parking reduction district exempts one thousand square feet of new commercial/retail development from the requirements for on-site parking as described in Section 21.03.020, Off-street parking and loading. New commercial/retail development in excess of the one-thousand-square-foot exemption shall comply with Section 21.03.020 of this title. (See map in subsection J of this section.)

 

5.       Village Parking District. The purpose of the Village Parking District is to ensure an adequate supply of public parking for existing and future land uses and development within the CCAP. To maintain a supply of public parking, permitted land uses within the Village Parking District shall be limited to free public parking. New development or rehabilitation of public parking shall comply with Section 21.03.020 of this title. (See map in subsection J of this section.)

J.       Parking Exemption/Reduction/Village Parking Districts.



K.      CCAP Design Standards.

 











 

1.       Introduction and Table of Contents.

a.       This section establishes the design standards, which are intended to enhance the existing character and provide guidance for future development. All projects for new or remodeled or expanded development will be reviewed based on these design standards.

b.       The typical characteristics and photographs provided are not intended to be the exclusive design characteristics allowed. They are intended to inspire discussion and dialogue toward development of designs that reflect the applicable architectural style. The intent of these regulations is to guide the range of architectural expression within the subdistricts and to promote architectural harmony so that the outdoor public spaces framed by the buildings will be well defined and conducive to the goals envisioned by the general plan for the zone.

 

2.       CCAP Design Standards Table of Contents.

a.       Subsection L, Table of Recommended Frontage Types (refer to Appendix Section 21.B.A for descriptions).

b.       Subsection M, Table of Recommended Architectural Styles (refer to Appendix Section 21.B.B for descriptions and examples).

c.       Subsection N, Table of Landscape Standards.

L.       Table of Frontage Types Allowed (Shaded) in Each Subdistrict.

 

Frontage Type

Illustration

T4

Village Edge

T5

Village Core with frontage on Glendora Avenue

T5

Village Core without frontage on Glendora Avenue

T5A

Village Transition

Residential Front Yard



 

 

 

 

Porch

 

 

 

 

 

Forecourt

 

 

 

 

 

Stoop



 

 

 

 

Shop Front



 

 

 

 

Gallery



 

 

 

 

Arcade



 

 

 

 

 

M.     Table of Architecture Styles Allowed (Shaded) in Each Subdistrict.

 

 

Architectural Style

T-4

T-5

T-5A

Architectural Style

T-4

T-5

T-5A

Romanesque Revival



 

 

 

Mission Revival



 

 

 

Victorian/Queen Anne



 

 

 

Craftsman Bungalow



 

 

 

Neoclassical Revival



 

 

 

Prairie / Foursquare



 

 

 

Main Street



 

 

 

Art Deco



 

 

 

Spanish Revival



 

 

 

New Urbanism



 

 

 

 

N.      Open Space and Landscape Standards.

 

Standard (shaded cells indicate applicability to specific subdistrict)

Subdistrict

T-4

T-5

T-5A

All front and street side setback areas shall be landscaped with drought tolerant (low water use) plant material*

 

 

 

A minimum of at least one shade tree (36-inch box size) as approved by the city shall be provided within the front setback area for each 50 feet of lot width.

 

 

 

Maximum hardscape or paved area for front setback not to exceed 25% of actual front setback area from the main structure.

 

 

 

Minimum open space per unit for multifamily development excluding required setback areas shall be 400 square feet per unit (may be a combination of private and common areas).

 

 

 

Open space minimum length and width in any direction shall be not less than 10 feet and a minimum area not less than 150 square feet.

 

 

 

All ground floor residential front and street side setbacks and courtyards shall be designed and landscaped to enhance the interface between the public and private realm by providing visual and/or physical accessibility from the public areas into the landscaped setback areas.

 

 

 

Residential ground floor development front setback areas shall include landscaping with drought tolerant (low water use) plant material** and decorative paving.

 

 

 

Ground floor commercial/retail/office development with front and street side setbacks, recessed entries and forecourts, shared walkways and courtyards shall incorporate pedestrian amenities including shaded seating, decorative paving and landscaped planter areas to enhance the pedestrian experience.

 

 

 

All street corner development shall provide a minimum public landscaped plaza space of 500 square feet including seating, decorative paving, and lush planter landscaping to enhance the pedestrian experience.

 

 

 

Mixed use residential development on second and third stories shall provide a minimum of one 150 square foot balcony (minimum 10 foot by 15 foot) per unit. The architectural style of balconies shall be consistent with the architectural style of the proposed development.

 

 

 

Parking Lot Screening and Shading. All parking lots shall provide landscape screening along public rights-of-way. Shade trees (minimum 24-inch box size) shall be planted throughout the parking lot at a minimum of one tree for every three parking spaces.

 

 

 

*       For lists of drought tolerant or low water use plants, refer to A Guide to Estimating Irrigation Water Needs of Landscape Plantings in California by the University of California Cooperative Extension and the California Department of Water Resources - Low and Very Low water use designated plants, or  Landscape Plants for Western Regions by Bob Perry.

**          Ibid.

 

O.      Sidewalk Dining.

1.       Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to provide regulations for sidewalk dining operated in conjunction with a “dining” or “fast food restaurant,” as defined in Section 21.01.020 of this title.

2.       The provisions of this section are applicable to sidewalk dining located on public sidewalks in the CCAP zone.

3.       Site Plan Review and Encroachment Permit Required. Any dining or fast food restaurant desiring to utilize adjacent public sidewalks for sidewalk dining shall submit an application for sidewalk dining site plan review and encroachment permits. The planning director and public works director shall review, approve with conditions, or deny all applications for sidewalk dining site plan reviews and encroachment permits. The planning commission shall review, approve with conditions, or deny all applications for serving alcoholic beverages in conjunction with sidewalk dining. Sidewalk dining encroachment permits shall be valid until and unless revoked as provided in this chapter. Businesses with approved sidewalk dining encroachment permits shall provide annual general liability renewal certificates to the city as provided in this section.

4.       Sidewalk Dining Requirements.

a.       Sidewalk Dining—No Alcoholic Beverages Permitted. Sidewalk dining without the sale or service of alcoholic beverages is permitted by this section and shall be subject to the following standards:

i.        Only dining or fast food restaurants as defined in Section 21.01.020 of this title (Restaurant, Dining and Restaurant, Fast Food) may be issued a permit.

ii.       The restaurant shall provide clean, attractive, serviceable and sturdy furniture.

iii.     Decorative umbrellas and tablecloths are encouraged.

iv.      A minimum, unobstructed pedestrian path of at least forty-eight inches in width shall be maintained along the entire length of the sidewalk. The city may require more clearance area based on the location of sidewalk obstructions, pedestrian traffic and other circumstances.

v.       The restaurant owner shall keep the sidewalk dining area clean and clear of trash or other debris. Power washing shall be required a minimum of one time per month. Per the current Municipal NPDES Permit Section (C)(2)(a)(1) Restaurants, water used in the power washing process shall be collected and disposed as required by the city. No runoff from the sidewalk washing or other restaurant activity shall be allowed to run into the city gutter/storm drainage system. Any modification to this standard shall be reviewed and approved by the director of public works.

vi.      The business owner shall maintain insurance policies and requirements, including general liability insurance, as required by the city. Current certificates of required insurance shall be submitted to the city annually for the duration of the sidewalk dining use.

vii.    All sidewalk dining furniture, delineation devices, potted plants, etc. shall be placed to maintain a minimum clearance of twelve inches from the edge of street curb for streets with diagonal parking.

viii.   Chairs and tables shall be arranged parallel to the sidewalk, in order to prevent chairs from encroaching into the required pedestrian path.

ix.      Sidewalk dining shall not be allowed closer than three feet to a street curb where parallel parking of vehicles is permitted. This three-foot distance shall be delineated with a barrier to ensure the maintenance of the safe distance from vehicle doors. Where street parking is angled, sufficient access from the parking to the sidewalk shall be provided, as determined by the planning director and public works director.

b.       Sidewalk Dining—Alcoholic Beverages Permitted. In addition to the requirements contained in this section, dining and fast-food restaurants may apply for the service and consumption of alcoholic beverages in conjunction with a sidewalk dining permit, and shall comply with the following:

i.        Only dining or fast food restaurants, as defined in Section 21.01.020, Definitions, of this title (Restaurant, Dining and Restaurant, Fast Food) may be issued a permit.

ii.       A conditional use permit has been approved for alcoholic beverage service in conjunction with operation of a restaurant, including the provision for sidewalk dining.

 

iii.     Attractive portable barrier delineation of sidewalk dining areas serving alcoholic beverages, such as theater-style posts and swag roping, decorative fencing, potted plants and similar devices shall be required.

iv.      Alcohol shall not be served later than 11:00 p.m. or as established by the conditional use permit for alcoholic beverage service in conjunction with a restaurant.

v.       Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold or served to anyone not seated, nor during any time when the restaurant kitchen is closed.

c.       Fees Required. Sidewalk dining permit fees as established by the city council shall be paid prior to the issuance of any permit.

d.       Calls for Review. The city manager, planning director, public works director, or police chief may initiate a review of the sidewalk dining permit of any business due to noncompliance with any of the conditions of approval at any time.

e.       Revocation or Modifications of a Sidewalk Dining Permit. The planning director and public works director may revoke or modify any sidewalk dining permit. The planning commission may revoke or modify permits that allow service of alcoholic beverages. Violation of any of the following constitute grounds for revocation or modification:

i.        When continuation of the permit would be contrary to the public health, safety or welfare.

ii.       The misrepresentation of a material fact by an applicant in their application.

iii.     A public nuisance including, but not limited to, loitering, littering, poor site maintenance, public drunkenness, defacement and damaging of structures, pedestrian obstructions, traffic circulation and parking conflicts, or noise disturbances.

iv.      Violation of any condition of the outdoor dining permit.

v.       Violation of any municipal, state or federal laws.

P.       CCAP Application-Permit Review Process.

1.       Development Plan Review.

a.       Development plan review approval by the planning commission required pursuant to Section 21.02.040(B) of this title for all new development, additions, major façade changes and multifamily development.

b.       Submittal Requirements.

i.        Twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch plans drawn to scale including site plan with all proposed improvements, exterior elevations for all visible elevations, floor plans, conceptual grading/
utility infrastructure plans and conceptual landscape plans for proposed landscape, courtyards, public/private interface areas.

ii.       Colors and materials board.

iii.     Application.

iv.      Fee as adopted by council resolution.

v.       Other information and number of plan sets as required by the planning department.

2.       Sign Design Review.

a.       Sign design review approval by the planning director or designee is required for all new or remodeled signage proposed for the CCAP zone.

b.       Submittal Requirements. The design review process by the planning department shall require submittal of the following (which is in addition to any other submittal requirements for building permits for the sign):

i.        A site plan showing the location of the building and tenant space on the site with indications of proposed sign locations.

 

ii.       A photographic picture or professionally drawn elevation showing the proposed sign with identified setbacks to architectural features or wall edges on all four sides of the sign.

iii.     A scale drawn layout of the proposed sign showing exact colors, lettering and dimensions.

iv.      A detail showing how the sign will be attached to the wall.

v.       If exterior lighting is proposed, provide all details, cut sheets and information on the proposed lights. A light and glare photometric study may be required if the sign is in the vicinity of residential uses.

c.       No fee is required for new sign design review.

d.       All multi-tenant buildings shall submit a sign design review application for approval of a sign program. Sign programs shall include all information identified in this section as part of the development approval for the multiple tenant building. Approval of the sign program shall be by the director. If the project is a multiple tenant new construction or major façade rehabilitation that requires approval of a development plan review by the planning commission, the sign program shall be approved by the planning commission as part of the project.

3.       Sidewalk Dining Permit. Sidewalk dining requires approval of a site plan review by the planning and redevelopment director and encroachment permit by the public works director.

a.       Submittal Requirements. A complete sidewalk dining site plan review application and encroachment permit application in addition to the following submittal attachments:

i.        A dimensioned site plan indicating the location and setbacks to buildings, curbs, etc. of tables and chairs, and required pedestrian path of travel in relation to the sidewalk width, building access and location of seating areas, and any other items associated with the application.

ii.       Information must be provided regarding the proposed sidewalk dining furniture, including visual representations and dimensions of sidewalk dining furniture. Sidewalk dining furniture includes tables, chairs or other seating, shade structures, umbrellas, planters, and barriers.

iii.     Type of portable barrier delineation (i.e., temporary fencing, posts and rope, potted plants, etc.) and visual representations, illustrations, photos or cut sheets of proposed barrier type.

Examples of temporary barriers:

 

 

iv.      Sidewalk dining site plan review application and encroachment application fees as adopted by council resolution.

b.       Appeals. Decisions of the planning director and public works director may be appealed to the planning commission within ten days. Decisions of the planning commission are final unless a conditional use permit is involved, in which case, the final appeal decision is made by the city council pursuant to Section 21.02.020(D) of this title.

4.       Other Permits. Uses and development requiring a conditional use permit or minor conditional use permit are referred to Table 21.A.C, Permitted and Conditionally Permitted Uses, and Chapter 21.02, Permits, of this title. (Ord. 2053 § 2, 2020; Ord. 2015 § 2, 2017; Ord. 1989 § 2, 2014; Ord. 1958 § 3, 2012; Ord. 1858 § 3, 2007)

Chapter 21.07 OVERLAY ZONES
Note
*       Sections 21.07.010, 21.07.020 and 21.07.050 were deleted by Ord. 1958.

 

21.07.030 Special height overlay (H).
A.      Purpose. The purpose of the special height overlay is to accommodate land uses that require a greater building height than is permitted in certain zones. The special height overlay may be applied to the underlying zones of C-2, C-3, CM, MS, M-1, IP and PR.

B.      Development Standards.

1.       Height. A building may exceed the height limitation applicable to the underlying zone, but shall not exceed eight stories or eighty feet in height, as measured from finish grade, whichever is greater.

2.       Front Yard. The minimum front setback shall be twenty-five feet.

3.       Side Yards. The minimum side setback shall be twenty feet plus four feet for each additional story in excess of two stories. (Ord. 1983 § 8, 2014; Ord. 1618 § 1 Exh. A, 1993)

 

21.07.040 Mobilehome park overlay (MHP).
A.      Purpose. The purpose of the mobilehome park overlay is to provide appropriate locations where mobilehome parks may be established and maintained. These regulations are intended to promote an orderly and pleasant residential environment in harmony with surrounding land uses.

B.      Permitted uses: Mobilehome parks.

C.      Development Standards.

1.       Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be twelve acres.

2.       Floor Area Ratio. The floor area of a mobilehome shall not exceed fifty percent of the area of the space upon which it is located.

3.       Space Requirements. Ninety percent of all mobilehome spaces in each mobilehome park shall exceed three thousand square feet in area.

4.       Yard Requirements. Every mobilehome park shall have front, side, and rear yards not less than the front, side and rear yard requirements of the R-3 zone.

5.       Walls. Masonry walls not less than thirty-six inches in height shall be constructed along front and street side yard setback lines, except for openings for access. The required wall along a street side yard may be deleted by maintaining a fifteen-foot side yard.

6.       Landscaping. Front yards and street side yards shall be fully landscaped with drought tolerant plant materials and automatic irrigation and shall be permanently maintained.

7.       Height. The maximum building height shall be twenty-five feet, but not exceeding two stories.

8.       Interior Streets.

a.       Two-way streets shall be not less than twenty-six feet in width.

b.       One-way streets shall be not less than sixteen feet in width.

 

c.       Where on-street parking is provided on the interior road system, an additional eight feet of street width shall be required for each lane of parallel parking provided.

9.       Refuse Areas. Refuse areas shall be provided for the storage of refuse containers. All refuse shall be deposited in refuse containers in the refuse areas, which shall be screened by walls six feet in height and a solid gate not less than five feet in height. The gate shall be maintained in good working order and shall remain closed except when in use. The refuse containers shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the trash generated.

D.      Development Plan Review Required. The development of a mobilehome park or any addition or alteration to a mobilehome park shall be subject to development plan review in accordance with Section 21.02.040. (Ord. 1618 § 1 Exh. A, 1993)

 

21.07.060 Historic preservation overlay (HPOZ).
A.      Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the general welfare, cultural enrichment, and economic prosperity of the people by providing for the identification, protection, preservation, and enhancement of areas of the city having historic, architectural, or cultural significance.

B.      Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words have been defined:

“Contributing resource” means a contributing building, site, structure, object, or landscape feature adds to the historic architectural qualities, historic associations, or archeological values for which the district is significant because it was present during the period of significance, and possesses physical integrity reflecting its character at that time.

“Historic preservation overlay zone” means a geographically definable area which contains buildings, sites, structures, objects, and landscape features, or a combination thereof, that are historically significant to the history of the city, state, or nation.

 

“Noncontributing resource” means a noncontributing building, site, structure, object, or landscape feature does not add to the historic architectural qualities, historic associations, or archeological values for which the area is significant because it was not present during the period of significance or due to alterations, disturbances, additions, or other changes, it no longer possesses physical integrity reflecting its character at that time.

“Period of significance” means the period of time in which the area achieved significance.

C.      Criteria for the Designation of Historic Preservation Overlay Zones. To be designated as an HPOZ, an area must possess a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures, objects, or landscape features united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical development and meet one or more of the following criteria:

1.       Exemplifies or reflects special elements of the city’s cultural, social, economic, political, aesthetic, engineering, or architectural history; or

2.       Is identified with persons or events significant in local, state, or national history; or

3.       Embodies distinctive characteristics of a style, type, period, or method of construction or are valuable examples of the use of indigenous materials or craftsmanship; or

4.       Is the notable work of a master builder, designer, or architect; or

5.       Pertains to features of early Glendora.

D.      Historic Preservation Overlay Zones Designation Procedures. HPOZs shall be established in the following manner:

1.       Any person may request the designation of real properties as an HPOZ by submitting applications for such designation to the city planning department. The planning commission or city council may also initiate such an application on its own motion.

2.       Applications must include a statement of significance explaining how the area meets the criteria set forth in subsection C of this section and establish a period of significance, a physical description of the area, a list of contributing and noncontributing resources, an inventory form for each resource in the area including the address, legal description, date of construction, and black-and-white photograph of the front elevation, map delineating the boundaries of the proposed HPOZ, and a petition with the signatures from owners of fifty-one percent of the properties in favor of the designation of the area as an HPOZ. The application may also identify other significant features in the district including streetlights and street trees.

3.       The department shall make a written report on the application and shall transmit such reports to the planning commission with its recommendation to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the designation of the area as an HPOZ within thirty days of the application being accepted as complete.

4.       The planning commission shall hold a public hearing at the time and place fixed for the hearing, within sixty days of receiving the report from the department. The commission may, when it deems such action necessary or desirable, continue such hearing to a time and place certain. Action upon an application for the designation of an HPOZ shall be taken by resolution of the planning commission. This resolution shall state the findings of facts relied upon in making such determination. If appropriate, the planning commission shall recommend to the city council alternative development standards for the HPOZ. The planning commission’s recommendation(s) shall be forwarded to the city council which shall take action by approving, modifying or denying the recommendation(s) of the planning commission.

5.       No building, alteration, demolition, or relocation permits within the boundaries of the proposed HPOZ shall be issued while the public hearing or any appeal related thereto is pending.

6.       Notice of the date, place, time, and purpose of the planning commission hearing shall be given by advertisement once in a newspaper of general circulation and by first class mail to the applicants and the private owners and private occupants residing or owning property in, or within five hundred feet of the proposed HPOZ at least ten days prior to the date of the public hearing. The names and addresses of such owners shall be obtained from the latest equalized assessment rolls of the Los Angeles County tax assessor’s office.

E.       Amendment and Revocation of Designation. The criteria for amending or revoking an HPOZ are as follows:

1.       The property(s) has ceased to meet the designation criteria for HPOZs as outlined in subsection C of this section because the qualities which caused them to be originally designated have been lost or destroyed.

2.       Additional information indicates that the property(s) does not comply with the designation criteria for HPOZs as outlined in subsection C of this section.

3.       The procedures for the amendment and revocation of an HPOZ shall be the same as that outlined in subsection D of this section.

F.       Permit Procedure. After the designation of the HPOZ no alteration in the exterior appearance of a contributing site, building, structure, object, or landscape feature may be made unless an application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted and approved by the Planning Commission. The following procedures shall be followed in the processing of applications for certificates of appropriateness:

1.       Applications shall include photographs, construction drawings, and other documentation such as samples deemed necessary to consider the application properly and completely.

2.       Applications shall be reviewed based upon the standards set forth in the city of Glendora Historic Preservation Development Handbook. On the basis of written findings of fact, the planning commission shall either approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the application within thirty days following receipt of a completed application. The decision of the planning commission shall become effective at the time the decision is made.

3.       Applications for demolition of contributing resources in an HPOZ may only be approved by the city council upon a showing of economic hardship by the applicant or owner of the subject property pursuant to subsection I of this section.

4.       Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require a certificate of appropriateness for the ordinary maintenance and repair of any exterior architectural feature of a contributing resource of an HPOZ which does not involve a change in design, material, or outward appearance. Nor does this chapter prevent work on contributing resource when the building official certifies to that such action is required for the public safety due to an unsafe or dangerous condition which cannot be rectified through the use of the California Historical Building Code.

5.       Failure to obtain permits or plan review approval to do work, or to do work in compliance with permits or plan review approval obtained, shall result in a misdemeanor offense and shall be subject to the requirements of Section 1.01.110 of this code.

G.      Appeal of the Planning Commission’s Decision to the City Council. The applicant, if aggrieved by the planning commission’s decision, may appeal the decision to the city council within fifteen days following the commission’s decision. Any such appeal shall be taken by filing a letter of appeal with the city clerk. Said letter of appeal shall indicate wherein the planning commission erred, or such other grounds upon which the appeal is based. Within thirty days of the receipt of an appeal, the city council shall hold a public hearing thereon after giving ten days’ notice thereof in the manner provided by subsection (D)(6) of this section. The city council shall take action by resolution either to affirm, reverse, or to modify the decision of the planning commission using the standards listed in subsection E of this section or evidence of hardship as provided in subsection I of this section. The action of the city council shall be final in all respects.

H.      Nonapplicability. Sites, buildings, structures, objects, or landscape features identified as noncontributing are not subject to subsection F of this section.

I.        Showing of Hardship. The city council shall approve or conditionally approve an application for permit to alter, relocate, or demolish a contributing resource in an HPOZ if the application presents clear and convincing evidence of facts demonstrating to the satisfaction of the city council that disapproval will work substantial hardship on the applicant because of conditions peculiar to the applicant, or because of conditions peculiar to the property. The applicant shall submit a letter to the city council indicating the facts upon which the hardship claim is based, together with any relevant competent evidence supporting the basis for the claim as set forth in the letter. The city council may require an applicant to furnish such additional information that is relevant to its determination of substantial hardship. Within thirty days of the receipt of the hardship claim, the city council shall hold a public hearing thereon, after giving ten days’ notice thereon in the manner provided by subsection (D)(6) of this section.

1.       In determining whether substantial hardship exists, the city council shall consider the evidence submitted by the applicant and evidence which demonstrates, but is not limited to, the following:

a.       Bona fide efforts to rent or sell the property have been unsuccessful.

b.       Approval or conditional approval to do work permitted by this chapter will not enable the applicant to rent or sell the property at reasonable rate of return.

c.       It is not economically or technically feasible to renovate or undertake an alternative development compatible with the permit criteria outlined in this chapter.

d.       Personal or economic circumstances exist which preclude the applicant from performing work in compliance with the permit criteria outlined in the chapter.

e.       Land use regulations and development standards, set forth in this title and the Uniform Building Code, preclude necessary renovations or a feasible use of the contributing resource.

2.       The city council may delay decision on the application for a period not to exceed nine months to investigate plans to allow for a reasonable use of or return from the property or other measures to preserve the property.

3.       The city council shall review the evidence presented at the scheduled public hearing, and take action by resolution stating the findings and facts relied upon in making the decision. The applicant and the owner of the subject property shall be notified by mail of the acceptance or denial of the hardship claim. (Ord. 1960 § 3, 2012; Ord. 1699 § 2, 1999)

 

21.07.070 Grand-Foothill multifamily residential overlay.
A.      Purpose. The purpose of the Grand-Foothill multifamily residential overlay is to enact certain unique zoning policies intended to promote well planned, multiple-family development through the logical redevelopment of properties located within the overlay area’s boundaries, and reward development that consolidates property and/or integrates energy conservation and environmental stewardship into project design. The objective of the overlay area is to obtain a comprehensively planned development area with two and three story residential buildings, an efficient internal circulation system, and a visually pleasing landscaped perimeter around the overlay area. The development concept envisioned by the city as a result of the implementation of the zoning policies that are contained in the overlay area is depicted below.

 



 

          To the extent the regulations of the Grand-Foothill multifamily residential overlay are in conflict with the regulations of the underlying zone of the area to which it is applied, the regulations of the Grand-Foothill multifamily residential overlay shall govern.

B.      Overlay Area. Properties subject to the Grand-Foothill multifamily residential overlay are indicated by the following:



 

C.      Uses.

1.       Multiple-family uses, and related accessory buildings, are permitted by right within the overlay area.

2.       Senior housing, community care, convalescent and nursing facilities as defined by the California Health and Safety Code are permitted within the overlay area upon the granting of a conditional use permit in accordance with Section 21.02.020.

D.      Development Standards.

1.       The development of multiple-family residences is subject to the development standards of the overlay area and the underlying zone. Development shall be allowed upon the approval of a development plan review in accordance with Section 21.02.040.

2.       The development of senior housing, community care, convalescent and nursing facilities are subject to the requirements of Section 21.05.020(D) and (E). Development shall be allowed upon the approval of development plan review in accordance with Section 21.02.040.

3.       Minimum Lot Size. Proposed development in the overlay area shall depict a minimum project size of four acres at the time of development application as evidenced through a lot merger, parcel map, subdivision map or development application filed with the department of planning and redevelopment.

4.       Building Height and Stories. Within the overlay area, the development of multiple-family residences may reach a building height of up to thirty-five feet and/or three stories if approved by the planning commission. In granting additional building height the planning commission shall consider the appropriateness of the additional height or story in relation to the proximity to existing residences, building bulk and mass, and the contribution of the additional height to enhancing the overall project design.

5.       Setback Requirements. All buildings shall maintain a minimum twenty-foot setback from any property line abutting Foothill Boulevard and Valencia Avenue. Buildings shall have a minimum separation requirement of fifteen feet. No residential structure may be located closer than twenty-five feet to a railroad right-of-way. Accessory buildings and uses may encroach into the railroad right-of-way setback upon the approval of the planning commission.

6.       Unit Massing. The maximum number of dwelling units in any structure shall be limited to eight.

E.       Density Bonus.

1.       Lot Consolidation Density Bonus. Whenever new residential development is proposed in the overlay where the consolidation of lots is necessary to achieve the required minimum lot size, the applicant may be granted up to an additional five dwelling unit per acre density bonus. The bonus shall be calculated by multiplying the project’s proposed lot acreage in acres by the amount of the lot consolidation density bonus. Fractions shall be rounded up to the next whole number provided the density bonus does not exceed five units per acre. To qualify for the lot consolidation density bonus, an applicant shall demonstrate that it has consolidated at least one or more parcels. The director shall require the applicant to submit any evidence necessary to document the granting of the Lot Consolidation Density Bonus. The planning commission shall verify the evidence during a project’s development plan review process.

2.       Environmental Stewardship and Energy Efficiency Density Bonus. Whenever new residential development is proposed in the overlay where the proposed development obtains LEED Silver certification from the U.S. Green Building Council (or its equivalent), the applicant may be granted an additional five dwelling units per acre density bonus. The bonus shall be calculated by multiplying the project’s proposed lot acreage in acres by the amount of the lot consolidation density bonus. Fractions shall be rounded up to the next whole number provided the density bonus does not exceed five units per acre. The director shall require the applicant to submit any evidence necessary to certify the project will be capable of obtaining a LEED Silver rating, or its equivalent. The planning commission shall verify the evidence during a project’s development plan review process. The applicant shall provide the evidence of the project’s LEED Silver certification by the U.S. Green Building Council, or its equivalent prior to the issuance of occupancy.

3.       In no case shall a density bonus be greater than ten additional dwelling units per acre under any circumstances.

4.       The planning commission shall require that any development proposal seeking a density bonus under subsection (E)(1) of this section shall provide a minimum lot size of four and one-half acres. (Ord. 1995 § 3, 2014; Ord. 1927 § 2, 2009)

Chapter 21.08 GLENDORA COMMERCIAL SPECIFIC PLAN
Note
Editor’s Note: Until the year 2010, Ord. No. 1715, the ordinance codified in this chapter, may be amended or repealed only by a majority of the voters voting in an election thereon.

 

21.08.010 Introduction.
A.      Specific Plan Area.

1.       Regional Location. The Glendora commercial specific plan site is located on the northwest corner of Lone Hill Avenue and Gladstone Street in the city of Glendora. The site is near the convergence of the Foothill (I-210) Freeway and State Route 30 (SR-30) (Figure 21.08.010-1). The city of San Dimas is located to the south across Gladstone Street. The approximately fifty-acre project is centrally located within Southern California, approximately twenty-one miles east of downtown Los Angeles, thirty-two miles west of downtown San Bernardino, and twenty-seven miles north of central Orange County.

2.       Project Site Location. The Glendora commercial specific plan site is located west of the Foothill Freeway/Auto Center Drive interchange and northwest of the convergence of the Foothill and San Bernardino freeways. The project site is configured in an approximate rectangular shape (Figure 21.08.010-2). The site is bounded by Lone Hill Avenue to the east, Gladstone Street to the south, the AT & SF railroad tracks/right-of-way to the northeast, and by the Glendora Sports Park and Los Angeles County Flood Control District (LACFCD) facilities to the north/northwest. The Foothill Freeway runs east-west north of the site and north-south east of the site. The western boundary of the site is parallel to Valley Center Avenue to the west. Adjacent to the site’s western boundary lies thirty acres of vacant property. The project location is shown on Figure 1 hereto.

B.      Purpose of the Specific Plan. A specific plan is a combination policy statement and implementation tool that can be used to address a single project such as infill development. As a result, emphasis is on concrete standards and development criteria for use in the review of subsequent site plans. The California Government Code permits the use of specific plans to regulate site development, including permitted uses such as density, and building size and placement. Specific plans also govern the type and extent of open space, landscaping, and roadways, as well as the provision of infrastructure and utilities. Since the development guidelines established in a specific plan focus on the unique needs of a specific area, specific plans allow for greater flexibility than is possible with conventional zoning.

The purpose of the Glendora commercial specific plan is to assist in the development of the site in a manner that will benefit local shoppers, the general public, and the city of Glendora. The specific plan accomplishes these purposes by providing for the efficient use of land, and ensuring compatibility between existing and proposed land uses. The customized development regulations contained in the specific plan address the unique characteristics of the site and surrounding properties, as well as the needs of the commercial land uses proposed for the site. These efforts are intended to foster greater economic development and design opportunities than could be achieved through the use of conventional zoning and development standards. In addition to defining appropriate land uses for the project site, the Glendora commercial specific plan provides a cohesive process for the review of individual development site plan proposals.

 

C.      Project Objectives. The objectives of the Glendora commercial specific plan are as follows:

1.       Augment the city’s economic base by providing a variety of tax-generating uses.

2.       Allow for the development of the site in a manner that will provide a productive mix of commercial opportunities.

3.       Provide guidelines and procedures to govern development and the installation of the infrastructure that supports it.

4.       Ensure the consistent and rational development of the site in accordance with established functional and aesthetic standards.

5.       Establish a well-balanced and carefully planned collection of specialized and general retail outlets that can take advantage of the site’s established accessibility.

6.       Create employment generating opportunities for the citizens of Glendora and surrounding communities.

7.       Expand the retail and service options for local consumers by providing daytime and nighttime shopping opportunities in a safe and secure environment.

8.       Recognize the location of school and residential uses along the south side of Gladstone Street, and provide appropriate project access and design to minimize impacts on these uses.

9.       Implement the Glendora general plan.

D.      Authority. The Glendora commercial specific plan has been prepared in accordance with California Government Code Sections 65450 and 66450 et al., and the applicable ordinances of the city of Glendora, and will constitute the zoning for the project site. Land use standards and regulations contained within this document shall govern future development within the boundaries of this specific plan.

E.       Plan Organization. The Glendora commercial specific plan provides a framework for development of the specific plan area. The plan provides guidance for the review of specific development proposals at the parcel map and site plan approval stages, and is the reference for determining permitted uses, intensity of use, and development standards and requirements. The specific plan defines project objectives, as well as regulations and requirements for development of Glendora commercial specific plan.

F.       General Requirements.

1.       General Plan Consistency. Implementation of the Glendora commercial specific plan is intended to carry out the goals and policies contained in the city of Glendora general plan, as amended, in an orderly and attractive fashion. Development within the Glendora commercial specific plan area shall, therefore, be consistent with the provisions of the city of Glendora general plan.

2.       Relationship Between Specific Plan Development Standards/Criteria and the City of Glendora Development Code. Development regulations and requirements contained in this document will supplement or replace those of the city of Glendora development code as they might otherwise apply to lands within the Glendora commercial specific plan area. Any regulations or requirements not specifically covered herein shall be subject to the regulations and requirements of the city of Glendora development code.

Unless otherwise specifically approved as part of this specific plan, all off-site improvements under the control of the city shall be subject to the city of Glendora regulations and requirements in effect at the time improvement plans are submitted. Other improvements not under the control of the city (e.g., storm drains, sewers) shall be subject to the regulations and requirements of the responsible agency.

If any provision of this document conflicts with the regulations or requirements of the city of Glendora development code, the provisions of this document shall take precedence.

3.       Conformance with Uniform Building and Fire Codes. All construction within Glendora commercial specific plan shall be in compliance with the city of Glendora building code and all other ordinances adopted by the city pertaining to construction and safety features.

4.       Mitigation Measures. All mitigation measures which are set forth in the mitigation monitoring plan at Section 21.08.070 herein shall be required for the Glendora commercial center specific plan and shall, as appropriate, be conditions of approval on all development within the specific plan area as determined by the city of Glendora. Environmental assessments shall be prepared for individual projects within the specific plan area, and shall focus on the subjects identified for such requirements in the mitigation monitoring plan, and as further set forth herein.

To further ensure that the project is constructed and operated in a manner which minimizes its environmental impacts, the following mitigation measures shall be additional conditions of approval on all development within the specific plan area, and are hereby adopted as a condition of voter approval of the project:

a.       Irrevocable Dedication of the Rail Platform Parcel to the City—Sale of Rainbird Way by the City. Within fifteen days following the effective date of the specific plan the city will cause the real property commonly referred to as the “Rail Platform Parcel,” consisting of approximately 1.33 acres of land designated in the Glendora commercial specific plan master development plan, attached as Figure 2 hereto as “car storage area” and the real property commonly referred to as the “Rainbird Way Parcel” (shown on Figure 3 hereto) to be appraised by a reputable, experienced MAI appraiser, selected by the city’s director of public works. Such appraisal shall be performed at the sole cost and expense of the owner of the property. Within thirty days following delivery of duplicate appraisal reports covering the Rail Platform Parcel and the Rainbird Way Parcel to the city and the owner of the land subject to the specific plan, and prior to the recordation of any parcel map or other development of the property consistent with the specific plan, the owner will irrevocably dedicate all of its right, title and interest in the Rail Platform Parcel to the city to be used for any public purpose, and the city will convey all of its right, title and interest in the Rainbird Way Parcel to the owner, free and clear of monetary encumbrances. If the appraisal shows that the Rail Platform Parcel has a greater value than the Rainbird Way Parcel, then no money will change hands between the city and the owner of the land. If the appraisal shows that the Rainbird Way Parcel has a greater value than the Rail Platform Parcel, then the owner will pay the difference to the city; provided, however, that in no event will the owner be required to pay the city more than one hundred fifty thousand dollars.

b.       Parkland Enhancement/Acquisition/Development. In order to mitigate the aesthetic impacts of the project which is the subject of the specific plan, no later than the date the owner of the land subject to the specific plan obtains a grading permit from the city for grading at the project, the owner of the property will pay to the city the sum of two hundred thousand dollars, which sum will be held by the city for the limited purpose of enhancement of existing parks and/or acquisition or development of new parks within the area of the city south of the I-210 Freeway.

c.       Gladstone School Mitigation. In order to address the concerns of the Bonita Unified School District, the owner of the property will (a) provide for a wall along the kindergarten portion of the Gladstone Street frontage of the Gladstone School and/or (b) provide for replacement or repair of all windows at the side of the School fronting on Gladstone Street and/or (c) provide for a “school dropoff”/”school pickup” location for the school which is not on Gladstone Street; provided, however, that the owner may by agreement with the school district, either (i) construct some or all of the above-mentioned improvements or (ii) pay money to the school district, to enable the school district to itself construct some or all of the above-mentioned improvements and, provided further, that in no event will the owner be required to expend more than one hundred fifty thousand dollars in connection with all of the above-mentioned improvements.

d.       The owner of planning area B shall pay a park mitigation fee of twenty-eight thousand five hundred forty dollars calculated as follows: $0.422 per square foot (70,000 square feet) = $28,540.00. The owner of planning area B shall pay its fair share costs for traffic improvements needed to mitigate traffic impacts proportionally to the number of peak hour trips the project adds to the local street system.

5.       Traffic, Water, Sewer, and Drainage. Specific requirements for infrastructure improvements are determined by the technical studies prepared for the Glendora commercial specific plan area. The conclusions of these studies have been included as part of this specific plan. Technical studies and infrastructure plans may be amended over time to ensure the availability of adequate infrastructure and services to the project site, subject to approval of the city engineer, without the need to amend this specific plan.

6.       Severability. If any term, provision, condition, requirement, or portion thereof of this specific plan is for any reason held invalid, unenforceable, or unconstitutional, the remainder of this specific plan or the application of such tem, provision, condition, requirement, or portion thereof to circumstances other than those in which it is held to be invalid, unenforceable, or unconstitutional, shall not be affected thereby; and each other term, provision, condition, requirement, or portion thereof shall be held valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law.

7.       Costs. The property owner shall pay the costs of any code enforcement activities, including attorneys’ fees, resulting for the violation of any conditions of approval or any provisions of the Glendora Municipal Code, including the Glendora commercial specific plan. The developer shall pay the entire cost of mitigation monitoring required in Section 21.08.070.

8.       Violations. Any violation of the Glendora Municipal Code or zoning ordinance, including the Glendora commercial specific plan, or any entitlement granted is considered a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars and/or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months. Each day or portion of a day within which any violation of the zoning ordinance occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be punishable as provided.

9.       Consent to Hold Harmless. The applicant shall agree to indemnify, protect, defend and hold harmless the city and its elected and appointed officials, officers, employees and agents from and against and all liabilities, claims, actions, proceedings, suits, damages, judgments, liens, levies, costs, and expenses of whatever nature, including attorney’s fees and disbursements (collectively “claims”) arising out of or in any way relating to the issuance of this entitlement, actions taken by the city relating to this entitlement, including any future actions taken by the city in furtherance of the specific plan.

10.     Day Worker Facilities. The city reserves the right to review day worker issues related to the operation of the project. Within three years of the opening of any commercial establishment(s) within the project, the city council shall have the authority to require such commercial establishment(s) to provide appropriate mitigation acceptable to the city council for the congregation of day workers. Such measures may include the use of a security guard, and shall include such minimum improvements as (1) a pay phone (outgoing calls only); and (2) permanent or temporary facilities with a minimum occupancy load for forty persons (or as deemed appropriate by the city council), with restrooms, air conditioning and drinking faucet, with such facility limited to operating between the hours of seven a.m. and two p.m., Monday through Friday. In the event the city council deems that a facility for day workers is necessary, such commercial enterprise shall commence operation of such a facility within thirty days of the city council’s action. This condition shall also be recorded with the project CC&Rs and may not be removed without the city of Glendora’s prior written consent.

11.     Security Plan. The applicant shall provide a security plan for review and approval of the city of Glendora police department at each increment of development. The plan shall include, at minimum, adequate parking lot lighting.

12.     Construction Routes. For each increment of building construction, the applicant shall submit a map detailing the route to be followed by vehicles making deliveries of equipment, materials, and soils to and from the site to the department of planning and redevelopment for review and approval prior to the issuance of grading permits. Gladstone Street may not be included in any such route.

13.     Repair of Damages to Public Facilities. For each increment of building construction, the applicant shall be responsible for the repair of all damages to public improvements in the public right-of-way resulting from construction-related activities, including but not limited to, the movement and/or delivery of equipment, materials, and soils to and/or from the site.

14.     Recycling Plan. A recycling plan shall be submitted to the department of planning and redevelopment for review and approval prior to the issuance of grading permits for the first project tenant.

15.     Right of Inspection/Verification. The city shall have the right of entry to inspect the premises to verify compliance with the Glendora Municipal Code, including the Glendora commercial specific plan.

16.     Archaeologist On-Site During Grading Activities. An archeologist shall be retained on-site (as appropriate) during grading activities for the retail A, retail B and the initial parking lot improvements.

17.     Compliance with CMP Deficiency Plan. At each increment of development, the applicant shall make the improvements necessary to ensure that the city is in compliance with the congestion management plan (CMP) deficiency plan. In ensuring compliance, the applicant must provide improvements as described in the countywide deficiency plan toolbox of strategies or other means approved by the metropolitan transit authority (MTA), and as approved by the departments of public works and planning and redevelopment. In implementing this condition, the applicant is not permitted to rely on credits generated by improvements not provided by the applicant.

18.     Compliance with the City’s Transportation Demand Management Provisions. The applicant shall comply with the city’s transportation demand management provision. (Ord. 1921 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1715 § 2, 2000)

 

21.08.020 Existing setting.
A.      Site Conditions and Existing Land Uses.

1.       Historical and Existing Land Uses.

a.       Previous Land Use. Until approximately 1992, the project site was used for agricultural purposes, most recently for growing strawberries. The only structure on the site, a weathered loading dock, is a remnant from previous agricultural uses.

b.       Existing On-Site Land Use and Zoning. Currently the site is fenced, and is generally not accessible to the public. The only improvements on the property are Rainbird Way, an improved, vacated right-of-way running north-south from Gladstone Street which essentially bisects the site, an east-west running asphalt roadway which runs perpendicular to Rainbird Way, and the aforementioned covered loading dock, situated in the northwestern corner of the property. The site is otherwise undeveloped. Existing land uses are shown on Exhibit 3 hereto.

The project site is currently zoned “C-3” (retail and commercial) under the city of Glendora Zoning Code. The C-3 zone permits a wide range of commercial uses, and is intended to provide a flexible method to develop land as a unit. This designation allows the use of site planning techniques that are not possible through the literal interpretation of zoning and subdivision regulations. The land use element of the city’s general plan recognizes the project site as “regional shopping center.” The zoning for the proposed project is intended to achieve the following:

i.        Promote the efficient use of the land.

ii.       Implement the policies and programs of the general plan and applicable specific plans.

iii.     Ensure an aesthetically pleasing and compatible development.

iv.      Attain the physical, social and economic advantages of comprehensively planned land uses.

v.       Provide for adequate amenities, facilities, infrastructure, and services.

vi.      Protect the public health, safety, and welfare.

Uses allowed in the C-3 zone include commercial industrial, and mixed uses. Although previous development plans have been tendered, no such uses have been developed to date.

The site is located within the boundaries of the Glendora redevelopment agency project area No. 1.

c.       Surrounding Land Use. Land uses surrounding the Glendora commercial specific plan site are characterized by single-family residential development located to the south and west of the site with commercial and light industrial located to the east. The properties located along the south side of Gladstone Street are within the city of San Dimas. Gladstone Elementary School is located between Shellman and Bolton avenues southwest of the project site. The majority of the properties fronting the south side of Gladstone Street have been developed as single-family residences. These homes are separated from Gladstone Street by long expanses of concrete block walls. A Chevron service station is located at the southwest corner of Gladstone Street and Lone Hill Avenue. Land uses along the sites eastern boundary are typified by commercial and/or light industrial uses. Specific uses located east of Lone Hill Avenue include an auto body shop and low-rise office space.

Properties farther east and north of the site are more intensely developed with a wider range of commercial uses. Three car dealerships are located at, and to the east of, the northeast corner of Auto Center Drive and Lone Hill Avenue. A Wal-Mart retail outlet is located southeast of this intersection. Directly west of the site lay approximately thirty acres of vacant land of similar character to the project site. Development beyond this acreage, located along Valley Center Avenue, is typified by single-family residences. Public recreational facilities (the Glendora Sports Park) and flood control structures abut the site’s northern boundary. Residential uses extend north beyond the Foothill Freeway. A mix of residential, commercial, and light industrial uses may be found in areas east of the Foothill Freeway.

B.      Existing Circulation.

1.       Regional Circulation. The project site has excellent regional access. Primary regional access to the site is provided by the Foothill Freeway, located approximately one-quarter mile to the north and east of the site. In addition, the site is reasonably accessible to the San Bernardino (I-10), Orange (SR-57), and Corona (SR-71) freeways. These three freeways, located within four miles of the Glendora commercial specific plan site, provide access to/from the greater Los Angeles metropolitan area, the Inland Empire, and Orange County.

2.       Local Circulation. An extensive road network is available in and around the project site. Important north-south roadways in the area include (from east to west) San Dimas Avenue, Lone Hill Avenue, Glendora Avenue, and Grand Avenue. Lone Hill Avenue, immediately adjacent to and providing the major north-south access to the site, is classified as a divided arterial. The aforementioned roadways, with the exception of San Dimas Avenue, intersect with I-210, I-10 or both.

Important east-west arterials in the project area include (from south to north) Badillo Street/Covina Boulevard, Arrow Highway, Gladstone Street, Baseline Road, Alosta Avenue and Foothill Boulevard. Badillo Street/Covina Boulevard, Arrow Highway, Baseline Road, Alosta Avenue, and Foothill Boulevard are classified as primary roads, acting as regional arteries that run through developed residential and commercial areas. Badillo Street/Covina Boulevard and Arrow Highway provide access to I-210.

Directly south of the Foothill Freeway, located adjacent to Lone Hill Avenue, is a park and ride facility operated by the California Department of Transportation.

3.       Rail Service. The AT & SF railroad right-of-way abuts the northeastern corner of the Glendora commercial specific plan site. This railway runs in a northwesterly-southeasterly direction away from the site. Rail access to the project site is not planned.

C.      Existing Physical Condition.

1.       Topography. The Glendora commercial specific plan site is essentially flat, sloping to the southwest. Minimum elevation on the site is eight hundred forty-eight feet above mean sea level (amsl) in the southwestern corner of the property. The northeastern corner of the site reaches a maximum height of eight hundred seventy-seven feet amsl.

2.       Hydrology. The water table in the main Glendora groundwater basin has been lowered over the years through domestic water production to where it is now one hundred to three hundred feet below the surface. Neither natural watercourses nor open bodies of water exist on the project site. Runoff from the site will be conveyed via manmade drainage structures.

3.       Soils. Soils present in a majority of Glendora’s valley area (and thus the project site) fall within the Hanford association of soils. The soils of this association occur on gently sloping alluvial fans between elevations from near sea level to three thousand five hundred feet. Hanford soils are over sixty inches deep, are well drained, and have moderately rapid subsoil permeability. They have pale-brown coarse sandy loam surface layers about eight inches thick underlain by light yellowish-brown coarse sandy-loam and gravelly loamy coarse sand substratum. Excavation limitations of soils in the majority of the city (and thus the project site) are considered “slight,” meaning there is a general absence of cobbles, stones or a water table that could significantly affect excavation and construction activities. Subsidence and/or expansive soils are not known geologic hazards that may affect the project site.

4.       Seismicity. Generally, it can be anticipated that any development in Southern California will have the potential to be adversely impacted by seismic activity. The degree to which the development is impacted is dependent on numerous variables, such as (but not limited to) distance to the nearest active fault, bedrock structure, water content in the soil, and type and quality of construction materials. It is anticipated that the site has the potential to be impacted by seismic events throughout the life of the project.

Overall, Southern California is part of the most seismically active region in the United States. Seismic activity associated with regional fault zones has been the source of large historic earthquakes, and is likely to be the source of future earthquakes that will affect development in the city. The San Andreas, Elsinore, Newport-Inglewood, and San Fernando faults generated M6+ earthquakes in 1907, 1910, 1933, and 1971. Notable historic earthquakes in the region include: M8.25 Fort Tejon earthquake (1857); M6.3 Long Beach earthquake (1933); M5.9 Whittier Narrows earthquake (1987); M5.8 Sierra Madre earthquake (1991); M6.1 Joshua Tree (1992), M7.5 Landers (1992); M6.0 Big Bear earthquake (1992), and M6.7 Northridge earthquake (1994).

Glendora is located at the foot of the San Gabriel Mountains on an upper alluvial fan of the San Gabriel Valley. The dominant geologic feature in the city is the Sierra Madre fault zone that branches along the foot of the San Gabriel Mountains. The San Fernando fault, a branch of the Sierra Madre fault system, ruptured on February 9, 1971, causing the San Fernando-Sylmar earthquake. Subsequent seismic activity on the this fault zone resulted in the 1991 Sierra Madre earthquake (M5.8). The Sierra Madre fault zone is now considered potentially active, meaning that ground rupture could occur along the system’s surface traces. The Glendora commercial specific plan site would be exposed to seismic activity during any future seismic event on the Sierra Madre fault system.

Lower groundwater level, caused by domestic water production, has reduced the potential for seismically induced liquefaction and subsidence in the area.

5.       Wildlife/Vegetation. The original natural state of the site has been modified by agricultural uses. The project site consists of undeveloped fallow fields covered with low-lying non-native vegetation consisting primarily of perennial weeds, grasses, and shrubs, A few mature trees are scattered about the site. The site does not harbor any rare or threatened plant species. Because of the disturbed nature of the site, the majority of the animal species expected to reside on the site are mammals and birds that can tolerate close human contact. No notable or threatened species of animal has been identified on the site.

6.       Climate. The project site area has a Mediterranean climate with warm to hot summers and generally mild winters. The strength and location of a semipermanent, subtropical high-pressure cell over the Pacific Ocean strongly influences the area’s climate. Climate is also affected by the moderating effects of differential heating between the land area of California and the adjacent Pacific Ocean. Warm-to-hot summers, mild winters, limited precipitation, moderate daytime on-shore breezes, and moderate humidities characterize local climatic conditions. Although annual and seasonal fluctuations are common, the climate of the project area is generally pleasant. The annual average daily maximum temperature is seventy-six degrees while the average minimum is forty-seven degrees.

Precipitation is seasonally variable. Summers are often completely dry, with frequent periods of up to four or five months with no rain. In winter, an occasional storm from high latitudes may sweep across the coast bringing rain. Annual rainfall is lowest in the coastal plain and inland valleys, higher in the foothills, and higher in the mountains. Annual precipitation averages approximately eleven inches, ninety-five percent of which occurs November through April.

Wind patterns in Glendora are similar to those in the remainder of the basin. During the day, the on-shore flow reaches inland across the coastal plain. Winds are generally from the west and have average speeds of thirteen miles per hour. During the night, surface radiation cools the air in the surrounding mountains and hills. The air then flows into the valleys and meanders to the coast producing a gentle land breeze. During summer, the nighttime land breeze nearly disappears. Conversely, the daytime sea breeze is weaker and of shorter duration in the winter. Santa Ana winds are occasional winds blowing from the northeast between the months of October and March.

D.      Existing Utilities.

1.       Water. Water service for the Glendora commercial specific plan site will be provided by the city of Glendora’s water division. The water division obtains sixty-five percent of its water from three local, underground basins, the Upper San Gabriel Basin, the Main San Gabriel Basin, and the Glendora Basin. This groundwater withdraw is supplemented by water purchases from the Metropolitan Water District through its local retailer, the Three Valleys Municipal Water District.

Water lines available laid in adjacent streets include a fourteen-inch water main in Gladstone Street; a fourteen-inch and a twelve-inch water main in Lone Hill Avenue; and a twelve-inch water line in Rainbird Way (to be abandoned).

2.       Wastewater. Los Angeles County Sanitation District No. 22 serves the entire eastern San Gabriel Valley area. This agency is responsible for transporting sewage to treatment plants in Carson and Whittier that are part of a regional treatment system. Some local sewer mains are the responsibility of the city, others are under county jurisdiction. In new developments, the developer pays for the cost to install sewer lines.

Wastewater facilities on or adjacent to the site include a fifteen-inch trunk sewer line in Gladstone Street which has a peak capacity of five million two hundred thousand gallons a day (mgd) and conveyed a peak flow of eight tenths mgd when last measured in 1996. Additional sewer structures include a twelve-inch sewer line in Lone Hill Avenue and an eight-inch sewer line extending in Rainbird Way (to be abandoned).

3.       Drainage. Maintenance of storm drains within public rights-of-way is the responsibility of the Los Angeles County Flood Control District. A sixty-six inch reinforced concrete pipe storm drain is located adjacent to the site in Gladstone Street.

4.       Solid Waste Disposal. The city contracts with a private company, Athens Disposal Service, for refuse collection and household recycling. There are no sanitary dumps or landfills in the city of Glendora. The nearest solid waste disposal facilities are located in Azusa, Irwindale, and the city of Industry.

5.       Natural Gas. Natural gas service to the Glendora commercial specific plan site will be provided by The Gas Company.

6.       Electricity. Edison International will provide electrical service to the project site.

7.       Telephone. Telephone service to the Glendora commercial specific plan site will be provided by GTE. (Ord. 1715 § 2, 2000)

 

21.08.030 Land use plan.
A.      Land Use Concept. The overall land use concept for the Glendora commercial specific plan site is to create an integrated retail-shopping complex which can take advantage of the site’s excellent highway access and potential visibility. The project will dramatically improve the aesthetic and commercial landscape of the surrounding area by allowing for the transformation of vacant acreage into an attractive and productive blend of retail and service establishments. The development concept for the project site involves a single story regional retail center, subdivided into approximately fifteen parcels or building areas, with a build out potential of approximately five hundred forty-four thousand square feet of building space, including major retail tenants, divisible retail space, free standing uses, automobile dealerships and other compatible uses permitted by the following land use regulations. These uses will generate both local revenue and employment opportunities for the surrounding community.

Figures 2 and 4 illustrate proposed building areas and the maximum anticipated square footage of uses within planning area A. Figure 5 illustrates proposed building areas the maximum anticipated square footage of uses within planning area B. Figure 5 supersedes Figure 2 and Figure 4 for planning area B. The southern half of the project site is primarily intended for two major anchor retailers occupying up to a total of two hundred seventy thousand square feet of retail space. Smaller commercial/retail enterprises will occupy land to the north and east of these major tenants. General retail areas, including those for major anchors and smaller retailers are designated in Figure 4 as “planning area A.” Automobile-related sales and services, including automobile dealerships, and certain other retail uses are planned for the northeastern portion of the specific plan, and are designated “planning area B” in Figure 4.

1.       Permitted Uses. The following Table 21.08.030-A establishes the uses which are permitted, subject to CUP, subject to design review approval or prohibited (not permitted) within the Glendora commercial specific plan site:

P        Permitted use

C       Permitted, subject to a conditional use permit

D       Permitted, subject to design review

●       Prohibited use (not permitted)

2.       Ancillary and accessory uses will be reviewed concurrently with each land use proposal. Ancillary and accessory uses that are not specifically listed as permitted may be approved subject to a determination of substantial conformance.

Uses that are not specifically listed as permitted, permitted subject to a conditional use permit, permission subject to design review, or permitted pursuant to determination of substantial conformance, are expressly prohibited.

 

Table 21.08.030-A

Permitted Uses

 

 

 

Area

Land Use Types

A

B

COMMERCIAL USE TYPES

 

 

Administrative and Professional Offices. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, executive management, administrative, or clerical uses of private and public utility firms. Additional activities include the provision of advice design, information or consultation of a professional nature. Uses typically include, but are not limited to, corporate headquarters; branch offices; data storage, financial records, and auditing centers; architect’s, lawyer’s, doctor’s, dentist’s, insurance sales and claims offices; financial planners; and accountant’s offices.

P

●

Agricultural Supplies and Services. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, the retail sales from the premises of feed and grain, fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and similar goods. Uses typically include, but are not limited to, feed and grain stores, well drilling and tree service firms. Also included are showrooms and sales of farm equipment.

P

●

Alcohol Sales. On-Site (On Sale). Activities typically include the sale, subject to required license, of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. Uses typically include restaurants that serve alcohol as part of their menu. Bars (taverns, pubs, etc.) that serve alcohol as a primary use are not permitted.

P

P

Alcohol Sales. On-Site (Off Sale). Activities typically include the sale, subject to required license, of alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises as an incidental use. Typical uses may include alcohol sales “big box” retail stores.

P

P

Alcohol Sales. On-site (Off Sale) (Primary Use). Activities include the sale of alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption as a primary use (75 percent or more of gross floor area devoted to alcohol sales) in retail outlets measuring less than 5,000 square feet. Typical uses may include wine merchants, liquor stores, and other retail liquor outlets.

●

●

Alcohol Sales. On-Site (Off Sale) (Incidental Use). Activities include the sale of alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption incidental to an otherwise permitted use measuring less than 5,000 square feet. Typical uses include the sale of alcoholic beverages within convenience stores and mini-markets.

C

●

Animal Care Facility. Activities typically include the care and treatment of domesticated animals. Typical uses may include veterinarian, animal hospital and animal grooming salons.

P

●

Automotive Cleaning. Activities typically include the washing and polishing of automobiles. Uses typically include automobile laundries: car washes, excluding self service washes; and automotive detailing.

P

P

Automotive and Light Truck Repair—Minor. Activities include, but are not limited to automotive and light truck repair, retail sales of goods and services for automobiles and light tucks, and the cleaning and washing of automobiles and light tucks. Uses typically include, but are not limited to general auto repair shops, brake and muffler shops, and car washes.

P

P

Automobile and Light Truck Repair—General. In addition to the types of repair operations included as part of Automobile and Light Truck Repair—Light, activities typically include, but are not limited to, automotive bodywork, painting, installation of major accessories, automobile customizing, and towing facilities.

●

P

Automotive Rental Agencies. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, the rental from the premises of motor vehicles, with provision for incidental maintenance services.

P

P

Automotive Sales. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, the retail sale of predominantly new, used, or vintage vehicles together with their incidental maintenance. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, automobile and recreational vehicles sales agencies. Typical accessory uses include, but are not necessarily limited to, storage, washing, detailing, preparation, painting and repair of vehicles; administrative and finance offices; retail sales of parts and accessories; and automobile rental.

●

P

Automotive Service Station. Activities typically include, but are not limited to the sale from the premises of goods and the provision of services normally required in the daily operation of motor vehicles, including the principal sale of petroleum products, the incidental sale of replacement items, and the performance of minor repairs. Also included is the washing of automobiles and light trucks. All such uses shall be limited to the southeast portion of planning area “A,” adjacent to the intersection of Gladstone Street and Lone Hill Avenue.

C

●

Building Maintenance Services. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, maintenance and custodial services, window-cleaning services, disinfecting and exterminating services, and janitorial services.

P

●

Building Supplies and Sales. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, the retail sale or rental from the premises of goods and equipment, including, but not limited to, tools and equipment, paint, glass, hardware, fixtures, electrical supplies, yard and garden supplies, swimming pool supplies, and lumber and hardware sales. Also included are sales and rental of household and yard tools and equipment, nursery stock and garden supplies, as well as sales of building materials, such as brick, block, sand, and gravel. Outdoor storage of such goods may be permitted subject to screening requirements.

P

●

 

 

 

Business Supply Retail and Services. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, retail sales; rental or repair from the premises of office equipment, office supplies; stationery and similar office goods.

P

●

Business Support Services. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, firms rather than individuals of a clerical, employment, or minor processing nature, including multi-copy and blue-print services. The printing of books, other than pamphlets and reports for another firm is excluded from this use type.

P

●

Communication Services. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, broadcasting and other information relay services for individual commercial uses accomplished primarily through use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms. Rooftop dishes for the business use of commercial tenants are permitted; however, rooftop displays of dishes for sale or rent are not permitted.

P

●

Convenience Sales. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, the retail sales of frequently needed small personal convenience items and professional services which are frequently used. Uses typically include, but are not limited to, convenience markets, drug stores, beauty and barber shops, self-service laundries, and dry cleaning establishments.

P

●

Day Care. Activities typically include, but are not limited to the daytime, temporary care of pre-school children and the daytime, after-school care of elementary school aged children. Uses typically include, but are not limited to, pre-schools and day care facilities.

D

D

Drive-Through Sales and Services. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, the retail sale from the premises of food or beverages for off-site consumption and the provision of services. Uses typically include, but are not limited to, drive-through restaurants, quick service food windows and service stations, pharmacies, remote tellers and ATM machines at financial institutions and photographic processing.

D

●

Durable Goods Sales/Big Box Retail/Department Stores. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, the retail sales from premises. Uses typically include, but are not limited to, furniture, piano and organ, major appliance (e.g., refrigerator and carpet and flooring stores). Also included is large-scale discount retailing commonly identified as “big box retail” and department stores.

P

P

Eating and Drinking Establishments. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, the retail sale from the premises of food or beverages prepared for on-premises consumption. Uses typically include, but are not limited to, restaurants fast food facilities, including drive-through services, candy and confectionaries shops, delicatessens, donut shops, and coffee sales.

P

P

Financial Institutions. Uses typically include, but are not limited to, banks, savings and loans, and credit unions.

P

●

Food and Beverage Sales. Activities typically include, but are not limited to retail sale from the premises of food and beverages for off-premises consumption. Uses typically include markets, mini-markets, catering services and retail bakeries. Liquor stores, wine merchants and retail liquor outlets, which sell alcohol as a primary use, and which have a gross leasable area of less than 5,000 square feet, are not permitted.

P

P

General Retail. Activities typically include, but are limited to retail sale of a variety of household and personal goods. Uses typically include, drug stores, large-scale discount retailers and department stores.

P

P

 

 

 

Health Clubs and Spas. Activities typically include, but are not limited to sport and health-related activities performed either indoors and outdoors. Users typically include, but are not limited to, health clubs, spas, beauty spas, tanning salons, gyms, racquet clubs and tennis clubs.

P

●

Nurseries. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, sales of indoor and outdoor plants, including, but not limited to, trees, shrubs, ground covers, and grass sod, as well as seeds, pots and potting supplies, and growing supplies. Outdoor storage may be permitted subject to applicable screening requirements.

P

●

Personal Services and Sales. Activities typically include, but are not limited to retail sales of small personal convenience items and professional services that are used frequently by the business community. Uses typically include, beauty and barbershops, florist shops, photography studios, private postal service, travel agencies, tailors, shoe repairs, video sales and/or rental, apparel laundering and dry cleaning agencies.

P

●

Specialized Retail. Activities typically include, but are limited to the retail sale of specialized goods. Such specialized sales may include, but is not limited to: stamps and coins, consumer electronics, hobbies and crafts, antiques, apparel and accessories, books and magazines, firearms, sporting good (sales and rental), pets and pet supply, photography and stationery sales.

P

P

CIVIC USE TYPES

 

 

Civic Administration. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, management, administration, or clerical services performed by public, quasi-public, and utility agencies.

P

●

Community Education. Typical activities include educational services for adults provided by private institutions. Typical uses include vocational and trade schools.

P

●

Cultural Facilities. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, those performed by public and private museums and art galleries, public and private libraries and observatories. Also included are facilities for the performing arts.

P

●

 

B.      Site Development Standards.

1.       General Standards. The following Table 21.08.030-B presents the general development standards for the Glendora commercial specific plan:

 

Table 21.08.030-B

General Development Standards

 

 

Feature

Area A

Area B

Minimum Parcel Size

20,000 s.f.

20,000 s.f.

Maximum Number of Retail Uses in Buildings less than 35,000 s.f.

NA

2 uses

Maximum Total of Building Area

NA

100,000 s.f.

Maximum Building Height (1)

50 ft.

50 ft.

Minimum Parking and Building Setbacks From: (2), (3)

 

 

Rail Line

NA

20 ft.

Public Right-of-Way (for buildings)

 

 

Lone Hill Avenue

30 ft.

30 ft.

Gladstone Street

45 ft.

NA

Public Right-of-Way (for display of new vehicles for sale)

 

 

Lone Hill Avenue

NA

10 ft.

Gladstone Street

NA

NA

Interior Streets

10 ft.

10 ft.

Interior Side Property Lines

0 ft.

0 ft.

 

Notes:

(1)    Building height shall be measured from the finished pad elevation to top of parapet, excluding architectural features.

(2)    Setbacks shall be measured from the edge of rights-of-way.

(3)    The setback area along Gladstone Street shall be landscaped according to applicable requirements of this document.

 

2.       Modifications to General Development Standards. In order to achieve superior development to that which can be achieved through the standards contained above, as part of its review of individual development projects within the specific plan area, the planning agency may modify the following standards:

●       Minimum parcel sizes.

●       Parking and landscape setbacks for interior side and rear parcel lines.

●       Building setbacks for interior side and rear property lines.

●       Parking and landscaping requirements for individual parcels, except for required landscaping along public streets and private drives.

●       Where modified standards are permitted by the planning agency, all required setbacks along public street frontages and the rail line shall be met.

●       Where modified standards are permitted by the planning agency, innovative designs such as “postage stamp lots” may be utilized. Each approved increment of development shall contain the required amount of landscaping and number of parking and loading spaces. Where common parking and/or landscape areas are proposed, appropriate easements and covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC&Rs) shall be established to ensure adequate access throughout the site, and to ensure ongoing maintenance of common facilities.

●       Individual buildings and parcels need not have direct access to a public street; however, sufficient easements and/or reciprocal access agreements shall be recorded to ensure that adequate ingress and egress is available to each lot and building.

The planning agency may also approve transfer of proposed building square footage from building areas within planning A as part of an individual development project. In addition, as part of an individual development project, the planning agency may permit consolidation of the two northwesterly building areas into a single building area to facilitate development of a “big box” retail anchor having over one hundred thousand square feet of retail area.

3.       Specific Use Development Standards.

a.       Automotive Service Stations and Automotive/Light Truck Repair within Planning Area A. When authorized by a conditional use permit, the following minimum standards shall apply. These standards shall not replace or reduce any minimum zoning, building or other ordinance requirement; however, when these standards are more restrictive, the following requirements shall control:

●       Service stations shall be permitted at the intersection of arterial and/or collector streets. The total number of service stations permitted at the intersection of two or more through streets shall not exceed two. The total number of service stations permitted at “T” intersections shall not exceed one. Service stations shall not be permitted within any property of any property used as a school, church, theater or other place of assembly.

●       A minimum of four pumps shall be provided before a convenience store is permitted.

●       The minimum lot area for a full-service station shall be twenty-two thousand five hundred square feet with a minimum street frontage of one hundred fifty feet on each adjacent street.

●       The minimum building floor area for a full-service station without a convenience store shall be one thousand two hundred square feet. One accessory structure of not less than one hundred fifty square feet may be provided when located beneath a canopy. No other accessory structures except public phone booths and refuse areas shall be permitted.

●       The minimum building floor area for a full-service station with a convenience store shall be two thousand eight hundred square feet. At least one thousand six hundred square feet of floor area shall be devoted to the operation of a convenience store. At least one thousand two hundred square feet of floor area shall be devoted to repair facilities. No other accessory structures except public phone booths and refuse areas shall be permitted.

●       The minimum lot area for a self-service station without a convenience store shall be fifteen thousand square feet with a minimum street frontage of one hundred twenty-five feet on each adjacent street.

●       The minimum lot area for a self-service station with a convenience store shall be twenty-two thousand square feet with a minimum street frontage of one hundred fifty feet on each adjacent street.

●       The minimum building area for a self-service station without a convenience store shall be one hundred fifty square feet when beneath a canopy or in a building of not less than six hundred square feet. No other accessory structures except public phone booths and refuse areas shall be permitted.

●       The minimum building floor area for a self-service station with a convenience shall be one thousand six hundred square feet. No other accessory structures except public phone booths and refuse areas shall be permitted.

●       No service station shall have more than two access ways on any one street frontage.

●       Public restrooms shall be provided at full-service stations and at self-service stations when a building is provided exclusive of canopies. Restroom entrances shall be screened from view of adjacent property and public rights-of-way.

●       Air and water facilities shall be made available for public use.

●       Landscaping, in addition to that otherwise required by the Glendora Municipal Code, shall include two hundred square feet of planting area, raised by curbs six inches in height, at the intersection of street property lines and planters three feet wide, raised by curbs six inches in height, along interior property lines except where building placement prevents the placement of such planters.

●       Exterior lighting shall be arranged and shielded to prevent spillover on adjoining property and the public right-of-way.

●       Each pump island may include computerized payment stations. Such stations shall be situated in a manner that will not cause interference with circulation or the sale of motor fuels.

 

●       Merchandise, wares and crates, in the form of storage or displays, shall be within the confines of the building provided that outside placement of soft drink dispensers when associated with a water cooling system may be approved by the director of planning and redevelopment.

●       A convenience store’s display area shall be divided between the display of food and beverages and non-food items such that non-food items shall account for at least sixty-five percent of the display area.

●       Hours of operation for the sale of motor fuels, lubricating oils, brakes and cooling fluids, and such services and replacements as are permitted without the confines of a building are unlimited. Automobile repair operations required to be within a building shall be conducted between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m. Delivery of products, excluding automobile fuels are limited to the hours between seven a.m. and ten p.m.

●       For each twenty lineal feet of pump island fascia that is served by a nozzle, one-half of one parking stall shall be deducted from the required parking for a convenience store. No more than three parking stalls shall be deducted in this manner.

In addition, automotive service stations shall comply with the following standards and other applicable provisions of this specific plan:

●       Hours of Operation. The automotive uses in planning area “A” are restricted to the hours between seven a.m. and nine p.m., excluding activities related to the sale of gasoline.

●       Location of Uses. Any automotive service station and/or automotive and light truck repair facility within planning area “A” shall be located in the southeast portion of the specific plan area, adjacent to the intersection of Gladstone Street and Lone Hill Avenue.

●       General Maintenance. The premises shall be kept in a neat and orderly condition at all times, and all improvements shall be maintained in a condition of good repair and appearance.

No used or discarded automotive or truck parts or equipment or permanently disabled, junked, or wrecked vehicles may be stored outside of an enclosed building or stored within an enclosed building so as to be visible from public view.

Vehicles retained on-site for service and/or repair shall be parked in an enclosed structure or within a clearly marked staging area. Outside staging areas shall be sufficiently screened from public view and be located in a manner which does not interfere with normal flow of on-site traffic. Parking spaces within any such staging area shall not count towards the number of spaces required by Glendora Municipal Code. Staging area(s) shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner.

●       Location of Activities. All repair and service activities shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed service building, except as follows:

The dispensing of petroleum products, water, oil, and air from pump islands.

Trash areas, enclosed by walls, to be integrated with the design of the service station.

Public telephones, provided that they are well lighted, are in a location that is visible from a public street, and are accessible on a twenty-four hour basis.

●       Orientation of Buildings. Buildings housing automotive service facilities and ancillary services (e.g., car washes, quick service food drive-up windows) shall be oriented so that openings do not face public streets or are screened by a solid opaque wall which is architecturally compatible with the other buildings on the site.

●       Pump Placement. Gasoline and diesel pumps shall be placed a minimum of thirty feet from any property line.

●       Canopies. Canopies over gasoline and diesel pumps shall be placed a minimum of twenty feet from any property line.

●       Access and Circulation. No more than one driveway with a minimum width of thirty-five feet and a maximum width of forty-eight feet shall be permitted on any one street frontage. Driveways shall not be located closer than fifty feet from a street intersection (measured from the beginning and end of the curb return), or ten feet from an interior side property line. Under no circumstance shall a driveway be permitted to interfere with the movement and safety of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.

●       Rest Rooms. Service stations shall provide a men’s and a women’s public rest room which are accessible to the general public, including physically disabled persons, during all hours which the station is open to the public.

●       Air Pump and Water Supply. At least one air pump and water supply area shall be provided at each automotive service station, and shall be located such that its use will not conflict with on-site vehicular movement.

●       Ancillary Uses. Automobile service stations may include ancillary food services and retail sales within an enclosed building, including, but not limited to, the sale of precooked or prepared food and beverages, the sale of packaged food and beverages (including alcoholic beverages), convenience items and other sundries. The operation of such uses shall conform to Sections 21.05.010(D)(5) and 21.05.010(D)(6) of the Glendora Municipal Code.

●       Noise. Outdoor public address systems are not permitted.

●       Signs. In addition to the signs otherwise permitted pursuant to this specific plan, one sign with a maximum of ten square feet shall be permitted on each canopy over gasoline islands facing each frontage.

In addition to canopy signs and the signs otherwise permitted pursuant to this specific plan, each service station shall be permitted to meet the minimum requirements of the state of California regarding signage display of gasoline prices.

●       Operating Standards. Video games shall be prohibited.

Adult magazines shall be kept in racks providing for the shielding of cover pages and be individually wrapped in plastic shrink-wrap or bags. Adult magazines shall only be accessible to store employees.

The sale of alcoholic beverages at automobile service stations shall conform to provisions of this specific plan and the Glendora Municipal Code.

b.       Drive-Through Facilities and Drive-Up Windows. Drive-through facilities and drive-up windows shall conform to the following standards in addition to the other provisions of this specific plan.

General Standards.

●       The design of drive-through facilities shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission (as set forth in Section 21.08.050(E)). Such a review/approval shall not require a public hearing.

●       The design and locations of the facility and queuing lane shall not contribute to increased congestion on public streets or private property adjacent to the facility.

●       The design and location of the facility and queuing lane shall not impede access to or exit from project area parking facilities.

●       A maximum of five fast food restaurants with drive-through facilities may be permitted. The maximum floor area of fast food restaurants having drive-through facilities shall be fifteen thousand seven hundred square feet, exclusive of play areas.

Specific Design Requirements.

●       Drive-up windows and remote tellers shall provide at least one hundred twenty feet of reservoir space for the stacking of vehicles as measured from the service window or unit to the entry point into the drive-up lane.

●       Drive-up windows and remote tellers shall be at least twenty-five feet from driveways entering a public street.

●       Drive-up windows and remote tellers shall not be considered as justification for reducing the number of parking spaces that are otherwise required.

●       Pedestrian paths shall be maintained in such manner to allow the safe and convenient passage of persons across drive aisles. Pedestrian pathways shall be clearly marked with paint and/or enhanced paving materials and designated with adequate and appropriate signage. Pedestrian pathways adjacent to drive aisles shall be separated by a raised curb, planter, berm, or other device to ensure a safe and adequate separation between pedestrians and motor vehicles.

●       Order board speakers shall be installed and maintained in a manner that diminishes and/or directs noise away from adjacent retail uses and public rights-of-way.

Operating Standards.

●       Drive aisles, landscaped areas, play areas, and parking facilities associated with drive-through facilities shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner.

●       Drive-through facilities shall not constitute a nuisance to the specific plan area and/or adjacent uses due to noise, litter, loitering, smoke or odor.

●       Order board speakers shall be operated in a manner that does not exceed standards stated in the city’s noise ordinance or applicable sections of the Glendora commercial specific plan. Operation of order board speakers shall be restricted to the hours between six a.m. and ten p.m. Modification of this standard may be approved by the director of planning and redevelopment.

4.       General Design Concepts. Within the Glendora commercial specific plan, site design should first address the nature and function of the use, building, or feature being considered. Architectural design and details are then, as a rule, expected to be oriented to areas within public view. Landscaping is provided to highlight positive visual features, to screen negative ones, and to provide a cool, pleasant outdoor environment. Design within the Glendora commercial specific plan shall meld function and form, not one to the exclusion of the other. Consequently, each development plan submittal will be reviewed for its overall design, with allowances for individuality and special functional needs.

To facilitate design integrity between the variety of uses within the Glendora commercial specific plan, the following shall be considered:

●       Placement of buildings shall consider the existing context of the commercial area, the location of residential land uses and the location of major traffic generators.

●       The architecture (height, scale, style) of each building within the specific plan area shall be compatible with other structures within the specific plan and surrounding area. Building sites shall be developed in a coordinated manner to provide order and diversity and avoid disorderly development.

●       Buildings within the specific plan site shall be typical of other large-scale retail operations. Developers may incorporate “prototype” architectural standards in the design and development of structures within the specific plan area. Buildings shall maintain simple rectangular forms which may be broken up by creating horizontal emphasis through the use of reveals, trellises, landscaping, trim, windows, eaves, cornices, complementary colors or other architectural and design devices.

●       Large smooth, unarticulated surfaces shall be avoided. A mixture of smooth and textured blocks for concrete walls is encouraged. Exterior materials requiring high maintenance responsibilities such as stained wood, clapboard, or shingles shall be avoided. Large areas of intense white or dark colors shall be avoided. Subdued colors should be used as dominant overall colors. Bright colors shall only be used for trim and/or specialized uses (store identification, etc.).

●       Enhancements that achieve a sense of scale and rhythm, including horizontal and vertical linear elements, score lines, and offsets, shall be installed and maintained on the Gladstone Street façade.

●       Exterior mechanical equipment shall be screened from public view.

●       Backflow devices shall be screened by landscaping and walls.

●       Wall-mounted items such as roof ladders and electrical panels shall not be located adjacent to public rights-of-way, unless secured to prevent public access.

●       Service areas (areas for loading/unloading, unpacking of goods, auto service, tire centers, etc.) shall be simple and efficient, and shall not interfere visually or physically with other building operations.

●       All new gas, telephone lines, and electrical lines of twelve kV or less within the project shall be placed underground.

●       All ground-mounted utility appurtenances shall be located away from public view or adequately screened. Screening should be of a material complementary to the structure and/or heavy landscaping and berming.

●       No utility appurtenances shall be permitted directly within a pedestrian area.

●       The applicant shall comply with all applicable building codes and the requirements of the city, county, state and other responsible agencies.

Figures 21.08.030-2 through 21.08.030-4 of the Glendora commercial specific plan, on file with the city clerk, illustrate elevations for proposed uses within the specific plan area.

5.       Landscaping. The quality environment envisioned for Glendora commercial specific plan site will be established, in large part, by its landscape treatment. Landscaping that will be provided within the specific plan site is intended to give structure and identity to the overall project and shall comply with the following minimum standards:

●       Prior to issuance of construction permits, as applicable, landscape and irrigation construction drawings in conformance with the Glendora commercial specific plan shall be submitted for review and approval by the planning agency.

●       Permanent automatic irrigation systems shall be provided in all landscaped areas. Landscape and irrigation design shall comply with city of Glendora “water-efficient landscape ordinance.”

●       Plant materials within individual landscaped areas shall be of varieties that utilize like amounts of water.

●       Sprinkler heads located immediately adjacent to parking areas should be of the “pop-up” variety instead of risers.

●       The irrigation system shall be designed so that overspray onto structures, streets, sidewalks, windows, walls and fences is minimized.

●       All landscaped areas shall be maintained in a healthy and thriving condition, free from weeds, trash, and debris.

●       Building setbacks that are not used for drive entries, parking, loading, or approved outdoor uses shall be fully landscaped. All unpaved areas within developed portions of the site shall be landscaped.

●       No landscaping shall be required adjacent to the portions of buildings where loading doors and customer pick-up areas are located.

●       A minimum of five percent of the total parking area shall be landscaped. For purposes of this requirement, “parking area” shall not include boundary landscaping. The parking lot landscaping shall include a minimum of one tree for every five parking spaces and appropriate ground cover. Such landscaping shall be located throughout the parking area.

●       Planters shall have a minimum clear landscape width of five feet. Within parking areas, and unless “diamond planters” are used, planters shall also have a minimum length not more than six inches less than the longest abutting parking stall, exclusive of curbing, and shall have sufficient room to accommodate tree growth. Diamond planters will thus have a minimum dimension of five feet by five feet interior clear area (six feet by six feet with curbing).

●       Turf areas shall be limited to thirty percent of total landscaped area.

●       All shrub areas shall be underplanted with groundcover.

●       Tree plantings along Gladstone Street and Lone Hill Avenue shall be designed to break up long building façades along Gladstone Street and Lone Hill Avenue. This shall be achieved by clustering evergreen trees into informal drifts, leaving no more than one hundred feet between such clusters. The area between such clusters shall be planted with a combination of trees, shrubs, turf, and groundcover planted in a clearly perceptible pattern that creates a sense of scale or rhythm along these roadways.

●       Where deciduous trees are planted along the Gladstone Street perimeter, evergreen trees shall also be planted in a number and location to sufficiently screen the southern façade of buildings during periods of seasonal leaf loss.

●       In addition to turf and trees, flowering shrubs and around cover shall be planted along the length of the Gladstone perimeter. Such landscaping shall be designed to complement the pattern established by the tree planting.

●       Enhanced landscape features (e.g., trees with groundcover and/or flowers) shall be installed along the southern berm at the intersection of Gladstone Street and Balton Avenue and (at a minimum) at a point midway between this feature and the project’s western boundary in order to create an enhanced entry to the project area.

●       Landscaping along public rights-of-way shall be designed to aesthetically screen and soften blank walls, parking areas, storage areas, utility boxes, and other non-aesthetic items.

●       The planting of ivy or hedge shrubs along exterior structure and screen walls is encouraged to deter potential graffiti.

●       All landscaped areas shall be delineated with a minimum six-inch high and six-inch wide concrete curb or equivalent.

●       Mulch shall be applied in a two-inch layer in all shrub and groundcover areas.

●       The single existing oak tree located on Gladstone Street west of Lone Hill Avenue shall be inspected by a certified arborist to determine the disposition for future protection, relocation or removal as recommended.

●       Soil testing shall be conducted to acquire an accurate appraisal of fertilizer application and amendment requirements.

●       Landscaping of a variety that would not interfere with routine business operations shall be planted adjacent to structures within planning area “B.”

●       Prior to occupancy of any business within the specific plan area, all perimeter landscaping shall be planted along Gladstone Street and Lone Hill Avenue.

●       Landscaping, of a manner dictated by applicable sections of this document, shall be planted concurrent with individual site development within the specific plan area.

●       All trees used within required landscaped areas, including parking areas, shall have a minimum size of fifteen gallons. A minimum of thirty-five percent of all trees planted shall be a combination of twenty-four, thirty, thirty-six, and forty-eight-inch box trees.

●       All trees within the specific plan area shall be staked or provided with guy wires.

●       Tree species selected for the landscape scheme shall ensure (upon maturity) adequate screening of the southern façade(s) of structures located along the Gladstone Street boundary of the specific plan area.

Figure 21.08.030-5 depicts the conceptual landscape plan for the specific plan area. Figures 21.08.030-6 and 21.08.030-7 illustrate roadway and landscape cross sections at various points along Gladstone Street and Lone Hill Avenue. The proposed project’s rear elevation and how it would appear from Gladstone Street with a screen wall and landscaping is depicted in Figure 21.08.030-8.

6.       On-Site Circulation, Parking, and Loading.

a.       Circulation. The following on-site circulation standards within the Glendora commercial specific plan site shall be implemented to ensure the efficient and safe passage of vehicles and pedestrians to and from the various commercial uses within the specific plan site. In addition, these standards shall provide for the simple and efficient transition from local streets to interior roadways.

●       On-site circulation shall provide for efficient vehicular and pedestrian movement. On-site circulation systems should be logical and easily understood by visitors. For example, where one-way movement is necessary, the design of the circulation system should discourage individuals from entering an exit. In addition, service access routes should not conflict with other on-site circulation routes.

●       The circulation system shall include adequate directional signs for entrances, exits, parking areas, loading areas, and other uses.

●       On-site driveways shall not provide common access between the specific plan area and adjacent properties.

●       Truck access routes shall be established for uses within the specific plan area. Figure 21.08.030-9 depicts proposed specific plan truck routes.

●       With the exception of city operated dial-a-ride services, public transportation shall not circulate through the specific plan area.

●       Site lines required for safe automobile movement should be kept clear. Screens and structures should not be located where they would block such site lines, both entering and leaving the individual developments, and the project site.

●       Features to discourage use of the Gladstone Street driveway such as limited curb cuts, raised driveway medians, “porkchops” prohibiting left turn exits onto Gladstone Street, no project signage permitted along Gladstone Street, and primary project access for all uses via Lone Hill Avenue, have been incorporated into the design of the circulation system.

●       The design and location of entries (curb cuts) for individual development sites should be such that the driver has ample time to perceive them when approaching the site. Intersections and driveway approaches should be kept clear of obstructions such as traffic signal standards and landscaping.

●       Adequate pedestrian amenities such as benches and shade structures (or shade tees) shall be installed at or near building entrance(s) or at the curbside/sidewalk adjacent to buildings within the specific plan area.

●       Pedestrian walkways shall be constructed of enhanced paving materials (such as cobblestone or brick) or otherwise distinguished from the surrounding paved areas.

●       On-site pedestrian walkways should provide direct, safe, and adequate movement paths between parking areas and building entrances.

b.       Parking. Parking configurations within the specific plan area shall include the following guidelines:

●       Parking spaces shall be provided in the number and manner specified in the city of Glendora Zoning Code.

●       Parking spaces and drive aisles shall have the following minimum sizes.

Standard space: 9′ x 20′

Standard space adjacent to wall: 10′ x 20′

Parallel space: 10′ x 25′

Compact space: 8′ x 17′

●       Drive aisles for parking areas with ninety degree parking stalls shall be twenty-six feet.

●       A maximum of twenty percent of the parking stalls may be compact stalls. All such compact stalls shall be clearly marked “COMPACT.”

●       Parking spaces shall be oriented to ensure visibility of pedestrians, bicyclists and other motorists while entering, leaving or circulating within a parking area.

●       All parking visible from any arterial street, except the car display area in planning area B, shall be shielded by berms (maximum 3:1 slope) and planted with trees, shrubs, and turf.

●       Parking areas shall be provided with curbs, bollards, or similar permanent devices where necessary to prevent parked vehicles from bumping buildings, landscaping, or perimeter walls.

●       All aisles, approach lanes, and turning areas shall be clearly marked with directional arrows and lines as necessary to provide for safe traffic movement.

●       Parking areas shall have lighting capable of providing adequate illumination for safety and security. Such lighting shall comply with standards included in this document.

●       Handicapped parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements and standards specified by the state of California.

●       The applicant shall restrict four on-site parking spaces for the exclusive use of public safety vehicles. One space shall be provided near each store entrance for retail A, retail B, retail C/D and retail E/F, as determined by the Glendora police department. Such spaces shall be identified by signage approved by the department of planning and redevelopment. Spaces shall be provided as appropriate at each increment of development.

●       Parking spaces of a number and size specified by this specific plan and applicable city of Glendora regulation shall be installed for each incremental stage of development within the specific plan area (Figure 21.08.030-10).

●       The installation of parking facilities shall occur concurrent with the development of individual parcels within the specific plan area (Figure 21.08.030-10).

Parking provisions do not apply to areas used for the display of vehicles offered for sale at a permitted automobile sales facility.

c.       Loading.

●       Loading areas shall be designed to provide for backing and maneuvering on site and not from or within a public street. Direct loading from a public street shall not be permitted.

●       Loading spaces shall be a minimum of ten feet by sixty feet.

●       Loading and maneuvering areas shall not encroach into parking setback areas.

●       Loading areas may be permitted adjacent to a public street provided they are screened by a combination of screen walls, ornamental landscaping, and/or portions of on-site buildings.

●       Loading areas visible from a public street or parking area shall be screened by solid wing walls (constructed of materials such as concrete, concrete block, masonry, brick) and/or appropriate landscaping so that said loading area is adequately shielded from public view. All such loading areas shall be maintained in a clean and orderly condition.

●       Screen walls and wing walls shall be provided adjacent to loading doors and loading areas and shall be of a compatible material with adjacent buildings, and shall be of sufficient height to provide adequate visual screening.

●       Truck maneuvering areas associated with on-site loading areas and vehicle drop-off areas for the proposed automobile dealerships shall not encroach into required parking stalls and drive aisles.

●       On-site truck maneuvering to and from loading areas shall be provided to accommodate the turning radius of a sixty-six foot extra large semi-trailer (WB-62). With the approval of the planning agency, a greater or lesser turning radius may be required based upon review of a site-specific analysis.

7.       Outdoor Storage.

●       Outdoor storage, including receptacles designed for the aboveground storage of hazardous materials, shall be adequately screened from public view.

●       Refuse storage and disposal areas, other than trash compactors, shall be provided within trash enclosures which are screened on at least three sides from public view by a solid wall which is not less than six feet in height. The fourth side shall consist of a solid metal gate painted to match or coordinate with the building (slatted chain link is not acceptable).

—      Refuse bins shall be provided in sufficient number, and shall be placed in convenient location(s).

—      All trash shall be deposited in the trash enclosure, and the gate leading thereto shall remain closed except when in use, and shall remain in good working order.

—      Trash areas shall not be used for storage. The premises shall be kept in a neat and orderly condition at all times, and all improvement shall be maintained in a condition of good repair and appearance.

●       Adequate shopping cart storage shall be provided within parking areas and adjacent to buildings.

●       A minimum six-foot high chain link fence with oleander shrubs shall be placed along the easterly boundary of the auto storage area in planning area B.

Outdoor storage provisions do not apply to outdoor sales areas, sidewalk sales, and “garden centers.” Sidewalk sales on patios immediately adjacent to commercial buildings (“on-curb”) are permitted. Sales within parking areas (“off-curb”) are subject to the city’s outdoor display and special outdoor display permits. Outdoor sales are not permitted for tenants having less than two thousand square feet gross leasable area.

8.       Walls and Fencing. Walls and fences shall not be used, unless needed or required for screening, security, or buffering land uses. Within the Glendora commercial specific plan site, walls and fences may be used to screen parking areas, loading and storage areas, refuse receptacles, and utility structures. The intent is to keep the walls as low as possible while still performing their screening function. Walls and fences shall be designed to complement the design, color and materials of adjacent buildings. Landscaping shall be used in combination with walls when possible.

a.       Materials.

●       Walls and fencing constructed within the Glendora commercial specific plan site shall be of durable materials, and shall be maintained in good condition at all times.

●       Walls shall be constructed of concrete block, masonry, brick, or other similar materials. Decorative fencing may also be constructed, provided that, where it is located adjacent to a public street or will be visible from a public right-of-way, it is screened with landscaping.

b.       Configuration.

●       Where linear walls or fences in excess of one hundred feet are needed, a combination of wall/fence along a landscaped berm shall be used.

●       Screen walls for loading areas shall be located behind parking setback lines.

●       Screen walls along Gladstone Street shall have a maximum height of fifteen feet (as measured from lowest finished grade). Other screen walls within the specific plan area shall have a maximum height of eight feet.

●       Walls and fencing within the specific plan area shall be designed with variations in plan, such as plane shifts, and the installation of pilasters. Walls and fences shall include such variations no less than every one hundred feet.

●       Wall patterns shall be designed to be consistent with the proposed tree planting geometry.

9.       Signage. Signage and graphics will be an important element within the Glendora commercial specific plan. It is the intent of this sign program to provide individual tenants maximum sign exposure in a manner which that will complement the overall image of the project. Compatibility of sign size and quality is desired, along with a varied palette of style and character. This combination will enhance the individuality and personality of each individual development within the project area. Policies regarding signs within the specific plan area include:

●       Signage shall not be permitted along Gladstone Street.

●       Signage installed along Lone Hill Avenue shall be designed, oriented, installed, and maintained in a manner which enhances this roadway.

●       All signage must be approved by the city, consistent with the guidelines set forth herein.

Figures 21.08.030-11 and 21.08.030-12 illustrate Gladstone Street and Lone Hill Avenue perspectives.

To ensure a continuity of quality and aesthetics, individual development projects within the Glendora commercial specific plan shall be permitted identification signs in accordance with applicable standards of the following sign standards:

●       Each tenant will be responsible for providing one’s own building signs. All tenant identification signs shall be constructed and installed at the tenant’s expense. Each tenant is responsible for obtaining all required sign and building permits from the planning agency. Each tenant shall be responsible for all fees required.

●       Tenant wall signs shall be limited to internally illuminated signs with individual channel letters, a plexiglass face, and sheet metal returns and trim caps. Logos and corporate slogans need not consist of individual letters.

●       The size and number of signs for identification of individual development sites within the specific plan area shall be governed by applicable standards stated in this section of the Glendora commercial specific plan. The criteria in this sign program shall be strictly enforced. Signs as outlined in this program are the only signs allowed.

●       Any requested deviation from the approved sign program shall require the approval of the planning agency. Tenants shall be responsible for compliance with this program and all city codes and requirements.

●       Each tenant sign must be submitted to the planning agency for approval. The drawings to be submitted must clearly indicate sign size, color, construction material, location, message and typeface per specifications identified in this program.

●       Signs should be of materials that are compatible with exterior building colors, materials, and finishes, and shall be of a high quality of fabrication.

●       No animated, flashing or audible signs will be permitted. However, a reader board may be provided as part of the freeway-oriented project identification sign.

●       No exposed lamps will be permitted. Neon signs may be allowed in tenant storefront windows subject to approval of the developer and the planning agency.

●       All signs and their installation shall comply with all local building codes and this program. The name of the business shall be depicted on the sign.

●       Signs are to be free of all labels and fabricator’s advertising except for those required by code.

●       No portable signs will be permitted.

●       All ground-mounted signs must be set back from the ultimate curb face and positioned so as not to create a hazard for either pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Permanent ground signs shall be fabricated of sturdy, quality materials.

●       Monument signs should be incorporated into landscaped berms to minimize visual mass.

●       Billboards are prohibited.

●       Accessory, freestanding price signs for automotive services may be approved by the planning agency.

●       Grand opening and/or promotional signs shall comply with the Glendora sign ordinance and shall be approved by the developer prior to installation. Such signs shall not be permanent and must be removed immediately upon developer’s request.

●       All building-mounted signs shall be constructed so as not to have exposed wiring, raceways, ballasts, conduit, and transformers. Cabinets, conductors and other equipment shall be concealed.

●       All wall-mounted signs must be constructed of sturdy, quality materials. The height of such signs shall not exceed the height of the parapet wall.

●       All signs and their supporting structures shall be constructed of metal, wood or comparable weatherproof material and shall be enclosed as to provide against their infestation by birds and vermin.

●       Traffic control signage shall be installed in a manner that discourages vehicle ingress/egress on Gladstone Street.

●       No sign shall be installed which will impede minimum safe sight stopping distance as per Caltrans Highway Design Manual.

The following discussion identifies the type, dimensions and style of signs allowed within the Glendora commercial specific plan site. Figure 21.08.030-13 identifies the location of these proposed signs.

a.       Project Identification Signs. Signage identifying the project and up to ten tenants will consist of one pylon sign, not to exceed one hundred twenty feet, located at the northeast corner of the site. This location provides visibility from the Foothill Freeway (I-210) and surrounding roadways. Height of sign shall not exceed one hundred twenty feet as measured from the adjacent surface grade, located at the northeast corner of the site. Total sign area shall not exceed nine hundred eighty square feet for each side of the sign (Figure 21.08.030-14).

In addition, one freestanding sign, not to exceed twenty-two feet in height (measured from street level of Lone Hill Avenue), shall be situated adjacent to Lone Hill Avenue, south of the intersection of Lone Hill Avenue and Auto Center Drive. Total sign area shall not exceed two hundred twenty-four square feet per side. No architecturally untreated poles shall be allowed. Bases, poles or other components shall be compatible with the architecture of surrounding buildings (Figure 21.08.030-14).

b.       Monument Signs. Up to six monument signs may be installed by the developer—four on Lone Hill Avenue and two on Marketplace Drive.

Monument signs shall be situated in a manner and location that enhances the streetscape along Lone Hill Avenue.

Four signs will be located along Lone Hill Avenue and will be used to identify the following:

●       Two proposed auto dealerships in the northeastern portion of the specific plan area.

●       The tenant of the building area along Lone Hill Avenue north of the main project entry.

●       The tenants of the building area along Lone Hill Avenue south of the main project entry.

●       The tenants of the building area at the intersection of Lone Hill Avenue and Gladstone Street.

Components of monument signs shall be architecturally compatible with surrounding uses. These signs shall be a maximum of eight feet in height with thirty-two square feet of sign face per side (Figure 21.08.030-14) and shall be incorporated (notched) into the berm.

Two monument signs will be located along Marketplace Drive and will be used to identify the tenants of Planning Area B. Components of monument signs shall be architecturally compatible with surrounding uses. These signs shall be a maximum of eight feet in height with thirty-two square feet of sign face per side (Figure 21.08.030-14).

c.       Major Tenants. Major tenants (auto dealerships and retail uses with twenty-thousand square feet or more) shall be allowed signs with a maximum letter height of six feet and a maximum sign area of five hundred square feet. Major tenants, upon submittal of development plans, shall follow the usual and customary signage programs for their respective operations.

d.       Non-Major Tenants in a Multiple Tenant Building. Signs for non-major tenants in a multiple tenant building shall not exceed seventy percent of the width of the storefront, and must be centered on the width of the storefront. Letters or logos shall be a maximum of three feet in height for signs containing upper case letters. The maximum height for signs containing upper and lower case letters, or with unequal heights (e.g., script) shall not exceed eighteen inches. Tenants with multiple frontages, defined as wall with storefront glass, will be allowed one identification sign along each building face fronting either a parking area or roadway. These signs must conform to this sign program and the city of Glendora sign ordinance for the specific plan area (Figure 21.08.030-15).

e.       Pad Building(s). Pad buildings are defined as those which house only one tenant, and are “freestanding” on the site. Each pad building is allowed three wall-mounted tenant identification signs in accordance with this sign program (Figure 21.08.030-16). “Fast food” pad buildings are allowed an additional menu board of a maximum area of thirty square feet.

This sign is to advertise menu selections only, and not to provide tenant identification. In addition to any other signage provided for in this section, a service station will be allowed two gasoline-pricing signs. Actual locations and designs of signs shall be indicated on the tenants sign application drawings and are subject to approval by the developer and the planning agency.

10.     Noise. The use of outdoor public address systems shall be prohibited within the specific plan area.

11.     Lighting.

a.       Public Area Lighting. Public area lighting refers primarily to streetlights along public streets. Streetlights shall be as approved by the city both in type and location.

b.       Site Lighting. The following section addresses illumination of on-site areas for purposes of safety, security, and nighttime ambience, including lighting for parking areas, pedestrian walkways, graphics and signage, architectural and landscape features, shipping and loading areas, and any additional exterior areas.

●       A comprehensive lighting plan shall be prepared prior to, or in conjunction with, the submittal of building plans to the planning agency. Said plan shall be approved pursuant to area CC&Rs prior to issuance of building permits.

●       Site lighting shall be metal halide.

●       Lighting sources shall be shielded, diffused, or indirect in order to avoid glare to pedestrians and motorists. Lighting fixtures should be selected and located to confine the area of illumination to within the site boundaries. To minimize the total number of freestanding light standards, wall-mounted lights should be utilized where feasible and consistent with building architecture.

●       Parking areas should be provided with a minimum of one-foot candle of illumination. Light standards shall not exceed forty-five feet in height.

●       Shields provided for security lights shall be painted to match the surface to which the fixture is attached. These fixtures shall not project above the fascia or rooflines of the adjacent buildings. Exterior lights should be used to accent entrances and special features. All illumination elements shall have controls to allow their selective use as an energy conservation measure.

●       Wall-mounted illuminators shall be integrated within the architectural design of buildings.

●       Light fixtures on the southern façade of buildings located along Gladstone Street shall be located below the height of the screen wall. These fixtures shall include the use of shielding over the light source that directs light downward and prevents the light source from being visible from Gladstone Street.

C.      Performance Standards.

1.       Applicability. The performance standards contained herein shall be applied to all development and land uses within the Glendora commercial specific plan site. These performance standards do not, however, apply to the operation of motor vehicles.

a.       Air Quality. Any operation or activity which might cause the emission of any smoke, fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, gases, or other forms of air pollution, that can cause damage to human health, vegetation, or other forms of property, or can cause excessive soiling on any other parcel shall conform to the requirements of the SCAQMD.

During grading and construction, soils shall be watered as necessary to minimize dust generation.

b.       Electrical or Electronic Interference. No operation or activity shall cause any source of electrical or electronic disturbance that adversely affects persons or the operation of any equipment on any other parcel, and which is not in conformance with the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission.

c.       Hazardous Materials Management. All uses involving the use, storage, handling, transportation, or disposal of hazardous materials are required to comply with the provisions of the Los Angeles County Hazardous Waste Management Plan; the most current amendments to the California Code of Regulations, Titles 22 and 27; applicable requirements under the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES); applicable requirements of the Los Angeles County Consolidated Fire Districts; and any other applicable city, county, state or federal standard relating to the use, storage, handling, transportation, or disposal of hazardous materials.

The storage of hazardous materials in quantities less than fifty-five gallons shall follow applicable state regulations governing the use, handling, storage and disposal of these substances. Quantities of hazardous materials exceeding fifty-five gallons but less than two thousand gallons (twenty thousand gallons for the storage of gasoline at service stations and automobile sales dealerships), shall require approval of the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works (review of hazardous materials underground storage) and the Los Angeles County Fire Department (review of business plan). Hazardous materials in excess this amount shall require additional environmental review and specific approval by the city.

d.       Light and Glare. With the exception of on-site lighting which is specifically approved by the planning agency to exceed the following standard, and except for project identification signage, no operation, activity, or lighting fixture shall create illumination exceeding one-half-foot candles outside of the specific plan area, whether the illumination is direct or indirect light from the source.

e.       Liquid and Solid Wastes. In order to avoid contaminating water supplies, interfering with bacteriological processes in sewage treatment, or otherwise creating a public health hazard. All discharges of materials into any public or private street or storm drain, shall be in accordance with the adopted standards of the city, the California Department of Health Services, and other governmental agencies having legal jurisdiction.

●       Liquid waste disposal and runoff control shall be conducted within the guidelines of the Los Angeles County Sanitation District.

●       Disposal of liquid waste must also meet the applicable guidelines of the Los Angeles County Department of Environmental Health Services.

●       Hazardous waste handling, transportation, recovery, and disposal shall comply with applicable federal and state laws, as well as with Glendora’s hazardous waste management plan.

●       Solid waste disposal shall comply with applicable federal and state laws, and shall be regulated as per city ordinance.

Other than trash cans located for the convenience of visitors, refuse storage and disposal areas shall be provided within trash enclosures screened on at least three sides from public view, by a solid wall not less than six feet in height. The fourth side shall consist of a solid metal gate, as approved by the planning agency.

●       Refuse bins shall be provided in sufficient number, and shall be placed in convenient locations.

●       Other than trash cans located for the convenience of visitors, all trash shall be deposited in the trash enclosure, and the gate leading thereto shall remain closed except when in use, and shall remain in good working order.

●       Trash areas shall not be used for storage. The premises shall be kept in a neat and orderly condition at all times, and all improvement shall be maintained in a condition of good repair and appearance.

f.        Noise. No operation or activity shall create exterior noise levels in excess of the standard stated in the city of Glendora noise ordinance at the nearest residential dwelling to the specific plan area. Should existing ambient noise exceed this level at the time of development, no operation or activity shall be permitted to create more than a 3.0 decibel increase in CNEL noise levels beyond that level which existed prior to development. The use of outdoor public address systems shall be prohibited within the specific plan area.

The following sources are exempt from the provisions of this section:

●       Safety devices and warning signals;

●       Motor vehicles and trains;

●       Emergency equipment, vehicles, devices, and activities;

●       Temporary construction, maintenance, or demolition activities conducted between the hours of seven a.m. and six p.m.

For each increment of construction, the delivery of materials and equipment and the outdoor use of equipment, hammers, and power tools shall be limited to the hours between seven a.m. and six p.m., Monday through Friday, with no work allowed on Saturdays, Sundays, or federal holidays.

g.       Odors. No operation or activity that emits odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be dangerous, injurious, noxious, or otherwise objectionable to a level that is detectable with or without the aid of instruments at or beyond the property within which the odor is created shall be permitted.

Uses shall conform to the applicable requirements of the SCAQMD.

h.       Thermal Impacts. No operation or activity shall emit heat or cold that would cause a temperature increase or decrease on any adjacent property in excess of ten degrees Fahrenheit.

i.        Vibration. No operation or activity shall be permitted to cause an earth-borne vibration beyond the property within which the vibration was originally created which produces a particle velocity greater than two-tenths inches per second measured at or beyond the property line.

Vibration velocity shall be measured with a seismograph or other instrument capable of measuring and recording displacement and frequency, particle velocity or acceleration. Readings are to be made at points of maximum vibration along any lot line.

Ground vibration caused by moving vehicles, trains, aircraft, or temporary construction or demolition is exempted from this requirement, as is ground vibration caused by emergency equipment, vehicles, devices, and activities, as well as from temporary construction maintenance, or demolition activities conducted between the hours of seven a.m. and six p.m.

 

j.        Water Quality. All runoff from repair areas, fueling islands, and outdoor storage areas shall be drained in a controlled manner so as to prevent groundwater and surface water contamination by fuel, oil, and solvent.

The applicant shall comply with the requirements of the NPDES. (Ord. 2038 § 2, 2019; Ord. 2024 § 2, 2017; Ord. 2009 § 2, 2016; Ord. 1951 §§ 1, 2, 2011; Ord. 1921 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1715 § 2, 2000)

 

21.08.040 Infrastructure and grading.
The Glendora commercial specific plan identifies those facilities that will be required to serve development of the project site. Infrastructure master plans address the potential for development of the various planning areas within the site. The following sections describe the backbone infrastructure systems required to serve the project site:

A.      Utilities.

 

1.       Water Facilities. Water service to the Glendora commercial specific plan site will be provided by the city of Glendora’s water division. The water division obtains sixty-five percent of its water from three local, underground basins: the Upper San Gabriel Basin, the Main San Gabriel Basin, and the Glendora Basin. This groundwater supply is supplemented by water purchases from the metropolitan water district (MWD) through the Three Valleys Municipal Water District.

Water lines within adjacent streets include a fourteen-inch water main in Gladstone Street, a twenty-one inch water line in Lone Hill Avenue, and a twelve-inch water line in Rainbird Way (to be abandoned). Given the size of these existing water mains, adequate capacity and water pressure will be available for the project site including average daily and peak daily use and fire flows.

Based on maximum building area, land use and, water consumption factors, it is estimated that the proposed project will require forty thousand gallons of water per day (gpd) (Table 21.08.040-A).

 

Table 21.08.040-A

Estimated Average Daily Water Use

 

 

Land Use Type

Average Water Demand (gallons per square foot per day)

Daily Water Consumption (gallons per day)

Major Anchor Tenants (270,000 s.f.)

0.05

14,000

Divisible Retail Space (152,000 s.f.)

0.06

9,120

Auto-Related Retail (30,000 s.f.)

0.06

1,800

Freestanding Pads (22,000 s.f.)

0.27

6,000

Landscaping (175,000)

0.05

8,750

Project Total

 

39,670

 

The water system for the project site will be designed to deliver a minimum of four thousand gallons per minute, per Los Angeles County Fire Department (LACFD) fire flow requirements for fully sprinkled buildings. This flow is greater than that which is needed to accommodate the domestic water demands of the land uses proposed within the project site. All buildings within the specific plan area will be provided with fire sprinkler systems. The placement of hydrants and other fire suppression facilities/devices shall conform to LACFD standards.

Water will be provided on site via the looped system shown in Figure 21.08.040-1. The primary loop will connect to an existing twenty-one inch line within Lone Hill Avenue and a fourteen-inch line within Gladstone Street. The existing twelve-inch water line in Rainbird Way shall be abandoned.

The water supply required by the proposed development will be provided by additional purchases from the MWD, as is the case for all new development in the city. MWD has indicated that as long as population increases within the city are within Southern California Association of Governments’ (SCAG) projections, the city will be able to purchase additional water to serve additional development. Because the project site has long been planned and zoned for commercial use, the proposed project’s water requirements will be adequately met by water purchases from MWD.

All on-site water lines will be located within public utility easements, and will be maintained by the city of Glendora water division. All water system improvements needed to serve the project site will be constructed by the developer.

2.       Wastewater Facilities. Los Angeles County Sanitation District (LACSD) No. 22 serves the entire eastern San Gabriel Valley area, including the city of Glendora and the project site. This agency is responsible for conveying sewage to regional treatment plants, providing sewage treatment, and disposing of effluent and solids. The existing sewer mains in Lone Hill Avenue and Gladstone Street are maintained by LACSD No. 22. The project developer will pay for the cost and installation of all sewer lines needed to serve the site.

Wastewater from the proposed project will discharge from an on-site sewer system into LACSD Sunflower Trunk Sewer, Section 3, which is located in Gladstone Street. This fifteen-inch diameter trunk has a peak capacity of five million two hundred thousand gallons a day (mgd) and conveyed a peak flow of 0.8 mgd when last measured in 1996. Additional sewer structures include a twelve-inch sewer line in Lone Hill Avenue and an eight-inch sewer line extending in Rainbird Way.

The wastewater generated by the proposed project will be treated at the San Jose Creek Water Reclamation Plant (WRP), located adjacent to the city of Industry. This facility has a design capacity of one hundred million gallons per day (mgd) and is currently processing ninety mgd. This facility currently has a ten mgd surplus capacity. Wastewater flows which exceed the capacity of the San Jose Creek WRP, and all sludge are diverted to and treated at the Joint Water Pollution Control Plant (JWPCP) located in the city of Carson.

Based on an average generation rate of four thousand one hundred sixty-six gallons per acre, the project site will generate approximately two hundred thousand gallons of wastewater per day. Peak wastewater flows will average five hundred thousand gallons per day, based on a peaking factor of 2.5.

The size of sewer lines required for new development is regulated by Los Angeles County Department of Public Works (LACDPW). LACDPW determines pipe size based on a formula that factors the size and slope of the area to be served. Based on LACDPW standards, eight-inch sewer lines will be constructed. Buildings fronting on Lone Hill Avenue will be connected to the existing twelve-inch line in Lone Hill. Sewer lines for all other buildings, including auto-related retail buildings in the northeasterly portion of the site, will drain, via the new system, to the existing fifteen-inch line in Gladstone Street.

The existing eight-inch sewer line in Rainbird Way shall be abandoned.

3.       Storm Drains. The construction of structures and parking areas within the project site will increase the amount of impermeable surfaces, resulting in reduced absorption rates and increased surface runoff.

Storm flows from the project site have been estimated at one hundred cubic feet per second (cfs) during a ten-year storm event and one hundred eighty-five cfs during a one hundred-year storm event. On-site storm drain facilities will ultimately convey flows to the southwest corner of the project site where it will drain into the existing sixty-six inch RCF in Gladstone Street. There are no off-site contributions to predicted storm runoff. Stormwater flows shall be metered where the on-site storm drain system connects to the sixty-six inch Gladstone Street line to limit peak flows to eighty-five cfs per the 1964 Bond Issue hydraulic design.

As noted above, ten and one hundred-year surface runoff generated by the proposed site will exceed this allocation. Thus, on-site stormwater detention is required. A system of buried sixty-inch reinforced storm drains will be installed to temporarily detain storm flows in excess of the eighty-five cfs allowed. This detention facility will be installed along the western boundary of the project site north of the proposed building area. The capacity of this proposed facility will total approximately one hundred twenty-two thousand cubic feet (cf) or storage. The stormwater detained in this facility will be discharged at a time and in a manner that will not exceed the eighty-five cfs allocated to the project site. Manhole access to this detention facility will be provided to allow for ongoing maintenance. Storm drain facilities within the Gladstone Street right-of-way will be maintained by the LACFCD, while on-site storm drains, detention facilities, and storm drain inlets will be maintained by the project owner.

The utility plan for the proposed project shall be designed in accordance with these guidelines; the conceptual utility plan for the proposed project is illustrated in Figure 21.08.040-1.

4.       Solid Waste Disposal. The city of Glendora contracts with a private company, Athens Disposal Service, for refuse collection and household recycling. There are no sanitary landfills in the city of Glendora. The nearest solid waste disposal facilities are located in Azusa, Irwindale, and the city of Industry.

5.       Natural Gas. Natural gas service to the Glendora commercial specific plan site will be provided by The Gas Company.

6.       Electricity. Edison International will deliver electricity to the project site.

7.       Telephone. Telephone service to the Glendora commercial specific plan site will be provided by GTE.

All wires, conductors, cables, raceways and conduits for electrical, telephone and similar services that provide direct service to any property shall, within the boundary lines of such property, be installed underground. Associated equipment and appurtenances such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes, meters and service cabinets may be placed above ground when screened and located behind the front setback line of said property.

B.      Project Access.

Primary access to the project site will be from Lone Hill Avenue via a signalized intersection to be constructed approximately seven hundred twenty feet north of Gladstone Street. Secondary access will be via a right-turn-only access along Lone Hill, approximately three hundred seventy feet north of Gladstone. Project signage will be designed to emphasize the Lone Hill Avenue access points. One access point, which prohibits left-turn (eastbound) exiting movements will be located along Gladstone Street. Use of Gladstone Street for ingress/egress to the site is discouraged by the limited curb cut of this driveway, as well as its provision at a location that is inconvenient for the majority of patrons accessing the project site.

As noted above, physical configurations of the proposed Gladstone Street driveway immediately west of Lone Hill Avenue allows access limited to right-in, right-out, and left-in turns. This design feature not only discourages general use of this driveway, but also serves to reduce potential turn movement conflicts between traffic utilizing this drive and through traffic utilizing Gladstone Street. Administrative provisions and signage of the specific plan prohibit direct access to the project site from Gladstone Street by heavy trucks and delivery vehicles. Truck traffic shall follow the routes established in Figure 21.08.030-9. With the exception of city sponsored dial-a-ride services, public transportation shall not circulate on site.

Internal circulation will be via a four-lane internal drive through the center of the site, which will provide access to each of the main parking areas. Smaller north/south and east/west drives will provide access within individual building areas.

C.      Grading. The proposed project will result in changes to topography and ground surface features. The current blend of non-native vegetation and perennial weeds will be removed during grading operations for the fifty-acre site. A significant portion of the site will be covered with building pads and/or parking areas. On-site grading will be balanced.

 

21.08.050 Administration.
A.      Master Development Plan. The master development plan for the Glendora commercial specific plan area is set forth in Figure 2 and Figure 5 herein, and in larger scale in Appendix A to the specific plan on file with the city clerk. Development of the entire fifty-acre project area or any portion thereof which is consistent with the provisions of this document and with the master development plan may proceed directly to construction plans and building permit review. Upon adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the master development plan, which is consistent with the specific plan, will be deemed to be consistent with the Glendora development code.

Construction of the first increment of development of the specific plan area shall be commenced within two years of the effective date of this specific plan. If such first development increment encompasses less than the entire project site, each subsequent increment of development shall be commenced within one year of the start of construction of the previous increment. If construction work is not begun within the required time frames and carried diligently to completion, the master development plan shall become void at the option of the planning agency. The reviewing authority shall have the authority to extend the time limit in the case of the unavoidable delay. The applicant must submit a written request to the reviewing body for a time extension before the original time limit expires.

The reviewing authority for subsequent modifications of the master development plan shall be the director of planning and redevelopment.

B.      Substantial Conformance. The purpose of substantial conformance is to provide a mechanism which provides for interpretation of the specific plan, and which would allow flexibility in implementing the specific plan and developing the site pursuant to the master development plan. Substantial conformance allows for determining the appropriateness of land uses not listed in Section 21.08.030 as well as for non-substantial modifications to the approved specific plan and master development plan, which do not modify the effect of the approval on surrounding property. Substantial conformance is not required for uses listed as permitted in Section 21.08.030. Substantial conformance may include, but is not limited to, inclusion of land uses not listed in Section 21.08.030 of the specific plan; modifications that might be necessary to comply with final conditions of approval; or modifications affecting infrastructure, public services and facilities, landscape palette; minor adjustments to the master development plan; and other issues except those affecting compliance with adopted development regulations.

Except as otherwise provided below, substantial conformance shall not include modifications in the basic design of the project, significant changes to the height or bulk of the approved uses, or increases in the density or intensity of the approved uses.

1.       Guidelines for Determination of Substantial Conformance. Determination of substantial conformance shall be made by the director of planning and redevelopment or designee.

2.       Permitted Land Uses. Land uses not listed as permitted in Section 21.08.030 of this specific plan may be permitted, subject to a determination of substantial conformance, provided that:

a.       The proposed use is compatible with the uses permitted described in Section 21.08.030 of this specific plan;

b.       The proposed use will not create any significant environmental impacts which were not previously addressed in the EIR for the Glendora commercial specific plan;

c.       The proposed use will not substantially increase the severity of any significant environmental impacts which were previously addressed in the EIR for the Glendora commercial specific plan; and

d.       The proposed use is similar to, and results in no greater environmental impact than the other permitted uses within the specific plan area.

3.       Master Development Plan. Specific provisions of the master development plan review; architectural details; landscape palette; building size, height, bulk, and orientation; parking lot layout; and other plan details may be revised utilizing substantial conformance provisions. In making such a determination, the director of planning and redevelopment or designee shall be required to find that the revisions requested under substantial conformance are consistent with the provisions of the specific plan, and do not create impacts which were not recognized and addressed in the original approval. Modifications to lot coverage, dimensions or area; setbacks; floor area (other than maximum allowable with the project site); antenna development standards; fence and wall heights; required parking spaces; and provision of open space shall not exceed the limits set forth in Section 21.02.030(K) of this code.

4.       Infrastructure. Modifications to the alignment of interior access roads, parking lot configurations, or adjustments to individual infrastructure facilities such as drainage, sewer, and water shall be subject to substantial conformance determinations. Prior to approval of substantial conformance modifications of specific plan infrastructure, the director of planning and redevelopment or designee shall confer with the public works department, and shall make the finding that the proposed modification will not result in any significant impacts which were not previously addressed and resolved in the processing of the specific plan.

5.       Landscaping. Revisions to the plant palette provided in Section 21.08.030 may be approved by the planning agency as a substantial conformance item.

C.      Amendments to the Master Development Plan.

1.       Purpose. This section provides procedures whereby the master development plans can be modified to ensure orderly development, aesthetic design, safe and harmonious placement, and:

a.       To prevent or minimize adverse impacts on property in the area;

b.       To implement the general plan and the specific plan;

c.       To protect the public health, safety, and welfare;

d.       To site structures and other improvements in a manner that is in harmony with the vicinity’s existing development;

e.       To encourage and promote energy-efficient design.

2.       Projects Requiring Development Plan Review. All proposed development within the specific plan area which is consistent with the provisions of this specific plan, but is not consistent with the master development plan, and for which a finding of substantial conformance cannot be made, shall require an amendment to the master development plan. Such an amendment shall be subject to the following procedures.

3.       Application. Applications to amend the master development plan shall be made on forms provided by the director of planning and redevelopment (“director”) and shall be accompanied by a filing fee, as established by city council resolution. Applications shall be made by the owner of the property for which the approval is sought, or an authorized agent.

4.       Hearing. No public hearing shall be required for amending the master development plan.

5.       Action by Reviewing Authority. The reviewing authority for amending the master development plan, the director of planning and redevelopment or designee, shall take action by providing written notice to the applicant approving, conditionally approving, or denying approval of the amended master development plan. The action of the director shall be final unless appealed as prescribed in subsection 21.01.030(F) of this code.

6.       Findings. In approving an amendment to the master development plan, the reviewing authority (the director of planning and redevelopment or designee) shall first make all of the following findings:

a.       The amended master development plan will comply with all development requirements set forth in the Glendora commercial specific plan, as well as the city of Glendora development code, as modified by this specific plan, and development standards adopted by the city council, as modified by this specific plan.

b.       The physical characteristics of the site have been adequately assessed in the amendment master development plan, and proposed building sites are of adequate size and shape to accommodate proposed uses and all other features of development.

c.       There is supporting infrastructure, existing or available, consistent with the designated improvement level and requirements of the Glendora commercial specific plan, to accommodate the proposed amended master development plan without significantly lowering service levels.

d.       The proposed amendment master development plan, as conditioned, will not have a substantial adverse effect on surrounding property or the permitted use thereof, and will be compatible with the existing and planned land use character of the surrounding area.

e.       The improvements required per the conditions of master development plan, as amended, and the manner of development adequately address all natural and man-made hazards associated with the proposed development and the project site including, but not limited to, flood, seismic, fire, and slope hazards.

7.       Conditions of Approval. The reviewing authority may impose such conditions as it deems necessary to ensure that the amended master development plan will meet the development standards of the specific plan and the purpose and intent of this section.

D.      Specific Plan Amendments. Amendments to the specific plan shall be required for revisions that are beyond the scope of substantial conformance determinations and amendments to the master development plan. Specific plan amendments are governed by the California Government Code, Section 65500 and the city of Glendora development code. Any specific plan amendment proposed for the Glendora commercial specific plan will require review by the city planning commission, and approval by the city council.

E.       Design Review. A design review provides an opportunity to review the design and manner of proposed development, ensuring that such development meets the requirements of the Glendora commercial specific plan and applicable provisions of this code. A design review shall be required to authorize the construction, alteration, or expansion of every use designated with “D” in Table 21.08.030-A of this specific plan. Such a review shall consist of plot plan review by the reviewing body (planning commission). A public hearing of such a review shall not be required. (Ord. 1921 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1715 § 2, 2000)

 

21.08.070 Mitigation monitoring and compliance program.
The city planning commission reviewed the potential environmental impacts of the proposed project and the specific plan, and recommended approval of a final environmental impact report which included all of the mitigation measures set forth herein. The final EIR identified three environmental impacts which were not mitigated: air quality, traffic and aesthetics.

In order to ensure that appropriate mitigation measures established for the project are properly implemented, a monitoring program has been devised. The mitigation monitoring program (MMP) identifies the measures necessary to mitigate potentially significant impacts of the project, the entities responsible for implementation and monitoring of mitigation measures and the appropriate timing for implementation of mitigation measures. The city will have primary responsibility for monitoring and reporting the implementation of the mitigation measures. While many city policies and regulations that serve to mitigate potential adverse impacts will also be applied to the project, only those measures in addition to city policies and regulations are listed in the mitigation monitoring program. Policies and regulations must be enforced as a matter of normal procedure and do not need special monitoring for mitigation purposes. The developer is conditioned to bear the entire cost of mitigation monitoring.

The following table illustrates both the mitigation measures that will be applied to the project, and the monitoring and reporting procedures that will implement those mitigation measures. The listed mitigation measures are in addition to those set forth in Section 21.08.010(F)(4).

 

Glendora Commercial Specific Plan

Mitigation Monitoring Program

 

 

Mitigation Measure

Implementation Entity

Responsible Monitoring Party

Mitigation Timing

Geologic Hazards

GH-1 The project applicant shall comply with all applicable Uniform Building Code (UBC) standards, and with the recommendations and performance standards set forth in the geotechnical investigation prepared for the project. Additionally, prior to issuance of any building permits, the project applicant shall provide verification to the city of Glendora, department of planning and redevelopment that a licensed geotechnical engineer has reviewed foundations plans with respect to site geotechnical conditions to ensure that the foundation plans are designed to specifically address site soil and geotechnical conditions, consistent with the UBC. Recommendations shall be incorporated into the foundation plans prior to issuance of building permits and the commencement of construction. A geotechnical engineer shall be on site to observe grading construction activities and/or test at the following stages of construction.

 

Biweekly field notes and/or monitoring reports shall be submitted to the city of Glendora, department of planning and redevelopment:

 

2. During site clearance and removal any obstruction;

Project Architect and Engineer

City Department of Building and Safety

Prior to issuance of building permits

 

 

 

 

 

 

3. During all over excavations, removal of soft compressible soils, in place processing of soils, importing of soils, and all fill placement and compaction;

● During preparation, moisture conditioning, and compaction of subgrades for slabs on grade and prior to placement of slabs materials;

● During footing excavations and prior to placement of footings materials;

4. During all trench backfills;

● When any unusual conditions are encountered.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

GH-2 Shallow excavations where workmen are to enter shall be properly shored or sloped back at least 1:1 (horizontal and vertical) or flatter.

 

Grading Contractor

 

GH-3 Excavations in compacted fill or dense natural soils may be cut up to 4 feet vertically. Excavations deeper than 4 feet in compacted fill should be shored or sloped back 3/4:1. No surcharge loads should be permitted within a horizontal distance equal to the height of cut from the toe of the excavation or 5 feet from the top of the slopes, whichever is greater, unless the cut is properly shored. Excavations that extend below an imaginary plane, inclined at 45 degrees below the edge of any adjacent existing site facilities, should be properly shored to maintain support of adjacent elements.

 

Grading Contractor

 

GH-4 All excavations and shoring systems shall meet the minimum requirements given in the most current State of California Occupational Safety and Health Standards.

 

Grading Contractor

 

GH-5 Site specific recommendations and performance standards relating to mitigation of geotechnical constraints of the project site are presented in the “Earthwork” section of the “Draft Geotechnical Investigation” prepared for the project site. These recommendations and performance standards are incorporated by reference in this EIR. If proposed, cast iron or ductile pipe used may be used for construction of utility lines. Should the use of buried steel pipe be proposed, a corrosion engineer should be consulted.

 

Project Engineer

 

GH-6 Rocks over 12 inches shall be placed in fills underlying pavement areas, capped with sandy soils, be crushed, or be removed from the site. Alternatively, these materials can be disposed of in pavement areas provided a cap of at least 12 inches of sandy soils (containing gravel size particles or less) is placed over the rock. A maximum particle size of 12 inches may be utilized under buildings. A 2-foot zone of “clean” sandy soil, capping the building pads shall be provided. “Nesting” of rock shall be avoided.

 

Grading Contractor

 

GH-7 Where not removed by cut, all existing undocumented fills should be removed and replaced as properly compacted fill. As a minimum, fill will be compacted to 90 percent of maximum density (ASTM-D-1557).

 

Grading Contractor

 

GH-8 Imported fill material, if required, should be predominately granular, non-expansive and contain no more than 40 percent fines (portion passing No. 200 sieve). The project geotechnical engineer shall be notified at least 72 hours in advance, of the location of any soils proposed for import. Each proposed import source should be sampled, tested and accepted for use prior to delivery of the soils to the site. Soils imported prior to acceptance by the Geotechnical Engineer may be rejected if not suitable.

 

Grading Contractor

 

Land Use

LU-1 Land uses within the Specific Plan area shall be segregated by intensity and type of use. The intent of this separation is to allow for homogenous land uses within each of the planning areas. The northeasterly quadrant of the Specific Plan (Planning Area B) is reserved for development of automobile sales related uses; while the remainder of the Specific Plan (Planning Area A) shall be reserved for development of general retail uses and commercial enterprises, including the two major anchor retail/commercial uses proposed. Please refer to the Specific Plan, Section 3.0.

 

Project Architect

 

LU-2 Traffic and Circulation mitigation measures TC-7 through TC-12 are also applicable to mitigation of potential land use impacts deriving from project-related traffic impacts.

 

See Mitigation Measures TC-7 through TC-12

 

LU-3 Noise mitigation measures N-1 through N-4 are also applicable to mitigation of potential land use impacts deriving from project-related noise impacts.

 

See Mitigation Measures N-1 through N-4

 

LU-4 Aesthetics/Light and Glare impact mitigation measures A/LG-1 through A/LG-6 are also applicable to mitigation of potential land use impacts deriving from project-related aesthetics/light and glare impacts.

 

See Mitigation Measures A/LG-1 through A/LG-6

 

Traffic and Circulation

TC-1 Restripe the northbound approach from Lone Hill Avenue to Auto Centre Drive to provide an exclusive right-turn lane. The southbound approach to Auto Centre Drive would be restriped to include dual left-turn lanes and two through lanes. Parking on the west side of Lone Hill Avenue would be restricted during the morning and afternoon peak hours to accommodate the two through lanes. The westbound approach would be restriped to provide a separate left-turn lane, a shared left-right turn lane, and a separate right-turn lane. The signal phasing would be changed to provide protected southbound left-turn movements and permissive southbound through movements.

 

Project Proponent

 

TC-2 Restripe the northbound approach to the SR 30 eastbound on/off ramps to include three through lanes and a separate right-turn lane. The added through lane would be used as an extended storage lane for the northbound left-turn lane at the Lone Hill Avenue/SR 30 westbound on/off ramp intersection. Signage would be installed to indicate that the through lane closest to the median would be used for freeway access.

 

Project Proponent

 

TC-3 Restripe the northbound and southbound approaches on Lone Hill Avenue to provide exclusive right-turn lanes. Restripe the eastbound approach on Gladstone Street to provide two left-turn lanes, one through lane and a shared through-right lane.

 

Project Proponent

 

TC-4 Restripe the northbound approach from Lone Hill Avenue to Arrow Highway to provide an exclusive right-turn lane.

 

Project Proponent

 

TC-5 Restripe the southbound approach from Lone Hill Avenue to the SR 30 westbound on/off ramps to include three through lanes and a separate right-turn lane. The three Lone Hill Avenue through lanes would extend to Auto Centre Drive where one through lane would become a trapped left-turn lane.

 

Project Proponent

 

TC-6 Restripe the westbound approach from Auto Centre Drive to the I-210 off-ramp to provide two through lanes.

 

Project Proponent

 

TC-6A Restripe the westbound approach and eastbound departure on Alosta Avenue. Restripe the southbound approach on Lone Hill Avenue to include a separate right turn lane. The proposed configuration for the southbound approach on Lone Hill Avenue would be one left-turn lane, two through lanes and a right turn lane.

 

Project Proponent

 

TC-7 The Specific Plan, as reflected in the Master Development Plan, shall be designed to encourage access to the project site from Lone Hill Avenue, and discourage access to the project site from Gladstone Street.

 

Project Architect

 

TC-8 The main project entrance on Lone Hill Avenue shall be identified as such by notable monument signage.

 

Project Architect

 

TC-9 This primary access to the site shall be provided a fully actuated traffic signal with left turn pockets, thereby facilitating general traffic flow through this intersection as well as into and out of the project site.

 

Project Architect

 

TC-10 Use of Gladstone Street for ingress/egress to the site shall be discouraged by limiting curb cut widths to this roadway, and provision of only two access points. Access to Gladstone Street shall be provided in accordance with the project Master Development Plan.

 

Project Architect

 

TC-11 The project access to Gladstone Street, immediately west of Lone Hill Avenue, shall be configured to permit right and left turn movements into the project site. This driveway shall be constructed to permit only right turn movements exiting the project site.

 

Project Architect

 

TC-12 Administrative provisions and signage shall be included in the Specific Plan denying heavy trucks and delivery vehicles access to the site via Gladstone Street. Heavy trucks and delivery vehicles accessing the project site shall travel exclusively along the approved truck route plan depicted in Section 3.0 of the Specific Plan.

 

Project Architect

 

TC-13 As illustrated in the project Master Development Plan (Figure 3.4-3), the proposed Glendora Commercial Center shall provide a minimum of 2,180 parking spaces.

 

Project Architect

 

Air Quality

AQ-1 Trucks hauling dirt, sand, soil or other loose debris off-site, shall be covered and washed prior to leaving the site.

 

Grading Contractor

 

AQ-2 Adequate watering techniques shall be employed to partially mitigate the impact of construction-generated dust particulates. Portions of the project site that are undergoing earth moving operations shall be watered prior to grading such that a crust will be formed on the ground surface and then watered again at the end of the day. (AQMP Control Measure F-4 Control of Fugitive Dust Emissions from Construction of Roads and Buildings).

 

Grading Contractor

 

AQ-3 SCAQMD Rule 402 and Rule 403 shall be adhered to, insuring that dust impacts do not occur off-site and the clean up of construction-related dirt on approach routes to the site (AQMP Control Measure 12.a. Paved Roads). Street sweeping shall be provided on adjacent roadways, as needed to remove dirt dropped by construction vehicles.

 

Grading Contractor

 

AQ-4 Grading operations shall be suspended during first and second stage ozone episodes or when winds exceed 25 mph.

 

Grading Contractor

 

AQ-5 Areas that have been graded but will not be developed immediately should be treated with soil conditioner to stabilize the soil.

 

Grading Contractor

 

AQ-6 As soon as practical following soil disturbance, graded areas shall be paved, coated, seeded or treated to reduce wind erosion.

 

Grading Contractor

 

AQ-7 Any construction equipment using diesel drive internal combustion engines shall use a diesel fuel with a maximum of 0.05 percent sulfur and a four degree retard.

 

Grading Contractor

 

AQ-8 All trucks should maintain at least two feet of freeboard.

 

Grading Contractor

 

AQ-9 Any vegetative ground cover to be utilized on-site shall be planted as soon as possible to reduce the amount of open space subject to wind erosion. Irrigation systems needed to water these plants shall be installed as soon as possible to maintain the ground cover and minimize wind erosion of the soil.

 

Project Proponent

 

AQ-10 SCAQMD Rules 1108 and 1108.1 shall be adhered to, prohibiting the use of rapid and medium cure cutback asphalts as well as organic compounds in emulsified asphalts used during the construction process.

 

General Contractor

 

AQ-11 SCAQMD Rule 1113 shall be adhered to, restricting the VOC content of any architectural coating materials used on-site to a maximum of 2.08 pounds of VOC per gallon.

 

General Contractor

 

AQ-12 Building construction shall comply with the energy use guidelines in Title 24 of the California Administrative Code.

 

Project Architect

 

AQ-13 Any future stationary sources of air pollutants constructed on-site shall adhere to applicable SCAQMD Rules and Regulations.

 

Project Engineer

 

AQ-14 Any future drive-through commercial uses on-site should include separate windows where possible for different functions and temporary parking areas for orders not immediately ready for pickup to improve traffic flow.

 

Project Architect

 

AQ-15 Future uses on-site should include employee services such as restaurants, banks, etc. to reduce the need for off-site travel for these services.

 

Project Architect

 

AQ-16 The project proponent should coordinate with the City of Glendora and local transit providers regarding the need for and proper location and design of transit facilities on-site (such as bus turnouts, passenger benches, transit shelters).

 

Project Architect

 

AQ-17 The project proponent should coordinate with the City of Glendora regarding the need for and proper location and design of bicycle facilities on-site (such as bicycle trails. lockers and bicycle racks).

 

Project Architect

 

AQ-18 The project proponent should install energy efficient parking lot lights.

 

Project Architect

 

Noise

N-1 Structures shall be sited to attenuate noise emanating from the project. The rear façades of the two major anchor uses proposed within the Specific Plan shall back to the southerly property line. Refer to Figure 3.4-3 project Master Development Plan.

 

Project Architect

 

N-2 A 30-foot wide, bermed, landscaped buffer, backed by a twelve-foot high block wall along shall be constructed along the southerly property line. Block wall(s) and landscaping of the project’s Gladstone Street frontage shall be provided in accordance with the approved Specific Plan landscape/streetscape plan.

 

Project Architect

 

N-3 Landscaping of the project’s Lone Hill Avenue frontage shall be provided in accordance with the approved Specific Plan landscape/streetscape plan.

 

Project Architect

 

N-4 Traffic and Circulation mitigation measures TC-7 through TC-12 (see Section 4.5 “Traffic and Circulation”) are also applicable to mitigation of potential noise impacts associated with project-related vehicular traffic.

 

See Mitigation Measures TC-7 through TC-12

 

Aesthetics/Light and Glare

A/LG-1 Within 45 days of the issuance of grading permit(s) a twelve-foot high wall along the southern project boundary shall be erected, visually screening project construction activities from residential and school uses south of the project site. This block wall shall be constructed in accordance with the approved landscape/streetscape plan for the project’s Gladstone Street frontage.

 

General Contractor

 

A/LG-2 The landscape treatment along Gladstone Street shall provide additional landscape/streetscape features including plants and materials of differing scales, colors and textures designed to visually articulate the mass and scale of the project. Landscaping of the project’s Gladstone Street frontage shall comply with the approved Specific Plan landscape/streetscape plan.

 

General Contractor

 

A/LG-3 Consistent with design concepts, development standards, features and performance standards of the Specific Plan, all light sources, including street lights, parking lot lights and security lights with non-glare directional lighting, shall be designed and installed to ensure that there are no adverse fugitive light and/or glare impacts outside the project site. With the exception of on-site lighting that is specifically approved by the Planning Agency to exceed the following standard, and except for project identification signage, no operation, activity, or lighting fixture shall create illumination exceeding 0.5-foot candles outside of the Specific Plan area, whether the illumination is direct or indirect light from the source.

 

Project Architect

 

A/LG-4 Any proposed use of reflective building materials shall conform with the design concepts and development standards presented in Section 3.0 of the Specific Plan.

 

Project Architect

 

A/LG-5 Traffic and Circulation mitigation measures TC-7 through TC-12 (see Section 4.5 “Traffic and Circulation”) which describe project access restriction(s) and improvements are also applicable to mitigation of potential light and glare impacts resulting from night time vehicular traffic.

 

See Mitigation Measures TC-7 through TC-12

 

A/LG-6 Noise mitigation measures N-1 through N-3 (see section 4.7 “Noise”) which describe setbacks, siting of structures, and landscape/streetscape elements are also applicable to mitigation of aesthetic impacts of the project.

 

See Mitigation Measures N-1 through N-3

 

 

The developer of the project shall bear the entire cost of mitigation monitoring. (Ord. 1715 § 2, 2000)

 

21.08.080 Zoning amendment.
The zoning of approximately forty-eight acres of land located at the northwest corner of Lone Hill Avenue and Gladstone Street, in the city of Glendora, bearing Los Angeles County Assessor’s Parcel Nos. 8642-020-005, 8642-020-008 and 8642-020-009, including the land which is currently a vacated public right-of-way known as “Rainbird Way,” which bisects the property in a north-south direction at or near the midpoint of the identified parcels, is changed from C-3 (retail and commercial) to SP-l (specific plan). The city shall, if necessary, amend the official zoning map (as defined in this title) to conform with the zone change. (Ord. 1715 § 2, 2000)

 

21.08.A Appendix—Figures
21.08.A.010 Figure 1—Glendora Marketplace vicinity map.
 



 

21.08.A.020 Figure 2—Glendora commercial specific plan existing land uses (no scale).


 

(Ord. 2038 § 3, 2019; Ord. 2024 § 2, 2017)

 

21.08.A.030 Figure 3—Glendora commercial specific plan existing land uses (no scale).
 



 

21.08.A.040 Figure 4—Glendora commercial specific plan site plan/proposed planning area.
 



 

21.08.A.050 Figure 5—Glendora commercial specific plan area—Master development plan.

Chapter 21.09 THE VILLAGE ON THE GREEN SPECIFIC PLAN
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ord. 1720.

 

21.09.010 Introduction.
A.      Location. The Village on the Green specific plan area (development name “Saratoga”) is located at the northwestern intersection of Amelia Avenue and Route 66 (old Alosta Avenue), in the northeast area of the city. The 20.1-acre site is vacant and surrounded by a variety of urban and recreational development including commercial, industrial, golf course, a church and multi-family residential land uses.

B.      Project Overview. The Village on the Green specific plan provides the city with a set of plans, regulations and guidelines to create a quality planned residential community through the orderly development of the site. The specific plan envisions the creation of an amenity- and family-oriented community that will provide a new mid-range residential housing opportunities in the city of Glendora.

The specific plan provides for a planned residential community of sixty-five single-family homes with a variety of residential products and architectural styles. The development will incorporate design concepts that recall the historic Glendora foothill character, featuring local architectural themes and materials, and the majority of existing oak and palm trees retained, transplanted, or replaced on site. Common park and landscape areas are provided within the site, with heavily planted landscape areas along Amelia Avenue and Route 66 (old Alosta Avenue).

The proposed plan implements the general plan’s planned redevelopment designation by specifying permitted residential use on the site and establishing the allowable density.

C.      Purpose of the Specific Plan. The purpose of the Village on the Green specific plan is to allow comprehensive development of the site while implementing the city of Glendora’s general plan goals as they relate to development of the specific plan area. The specific plan is prepared pursuant to California Government Code Section 65450 et seq., as described in Section 21.09.010(F) of this chapter and the city of Glendora Municipal Code Section 21.06.060.

The specific plan serves as the direct link between the general plan’s policies and the design of the proposed residential development project. The specific plan articulates planning considerations and imposes regulations and/or controls. It provides a comprehensive description of land use, circulation, infrastructure, site development standards, and implementation programs for owners, architects, developers, and builders in the preparation of detailed development proposals for city review and approval.

Specifically, the Village on the Green specific plan is designed to:

1.       Establish specific land use and density under the Glendora general plan planned redevelopment designation;

2.       Provide a comprehensive land use plan that designates the distribution of land uses and roadways within the community;

3.       Provide regulations and standards which allow flexibility for creative site design and development, while assuring quality and value;

4.       Assure a compatible interface with surrounding land uses;

5.       Provide for preservation of natural features including preservation of the majority of existing oak trees and grading which minimizes alteration of existing land forms;

6.       Establish the required infrastructure for development of the proposed residential community, including the completion of the area storm drain system and eliminating annual flooding of the Glendora Country Club 5th fairway and lake; and

7.       Provide development regulations and procedures to control future improvements by individual homeowners.

D.      Relationship to the General Plan. The city of Glendora general plan land use element recognizes the use of specific plans to implement general plan policies.

 

“...Specific plans can relate to site and area conditions which may not be fully addressed by conventional zoning. Specific Plans are especially effective on sites with physical or locational constraints. Whereas zoning regulations must be applied broadly throughout the community, a specific plan can be designated to facilitate the development of a specific site while protecting particular features or conditions on or surrounding the site. The California Government Code allows specific plans to regulate site development including uses permitted, density, building placement and bulk, and the provision of open space, landscaping, streets, and utilities. These provisions allow greater flexibility than is possible with conventional zoning since conditions can be established based on a specific site with unique conditions. Consequently, requirements can vary from one parcel to another to achieve a coordinated development.”*

 

*        City of Glendora General Plan 1991—2010, p. 24.

 

Section 21.06.060 of the Glendora Municipal Code authorizes the development and administration of specific plans in accordance with the California Government Code and the city’s general plan.

The general plan land use designation for the Village on the Green property is planned redevelopment (PR). As described in the general plan land use element:

 

The Planned Redevelopment designation is intended to provide a flexible method to develop land as a unit for various uses in redevelopment areas. This designation allows the use of the site planning techniques that are not possible through the literal interpretation of zoning and subdivision regulations. Uses may include residential, commercial, industrial, and mixed uses. Compatibility must be maintained between proposed uses and adjacent land uses.

 

The Village on the Green specific plan specifies single-family residential land use with a gross density of 3.2 du/acre, including shared parks and community open space. This density is significantly less than the adjacent Glendora Greens condominium project (8.3 du./acre) to the east of the site and the Wild Rose condominium project (11.2 du./acre) southeast of the site in the city of San Dimas.

Specification of residential development on the site is supported by a land use analysis prepared by Alfred Gobar Associates, which concluded that commercial light industrial and/or business office park uses permitted by the planned redevelopment (PR) land use designation are not economically feasible on the project site because of location, existing available space, city emphasis on the development of the Auto Center Drive, Lone Hill, and Gladstone commercial and business properties, and Glendora’s low absorption rate for these uses. Historically, the city’s general plan committee in 1992 recommended that the general plan be changed to allow residential development on the project site at a density of eleven to fifteen units/acre; the planning commission reviewed the committee’s recommendation and in turn recommended a residential density of three to six units/acre. (Subsequently, the city council voted to retain existing zoning.)

Pursuant to California Government Code Section 65454, the Village on the Green specific plan provides regulations, guidelines and standards that are consistent with and implement the goals and policies of the city’s general plan. In particular, the following general plan goals, objectives and policies are addressed:

1.       Land Use Element.

a.       Goal: Compatible adjacent land uses throughout the community.

(i)      Objectives: To buffer residential areas from non-residential land uses.

(ii)     Policies:

(A)    Development should include adequate buffering between adjacent land uses.

(B)    Development shall be consistent with the general plan, zoning, and all other applicable regulations.

The Village on the Green specific plan sets forth regulations for setbacks and conceptual plans and details for walls, fences and landscape buffers for all interfaces with adjacent properties, and provides an enhanced landscape edge along all sides of the development.

b.       Goal: Rational development and redevelopment of parcels throughout the city.

i.        Objectives: To have infill development that is consistent with land use designations.

ii.       Policies: Development and improvement of property shall be consistent with development standards adopted by the city, including but not limited to floor areas, lot coverages, setbacks, heights, dimensions, configurations, open space, parking, loading areas, circulation, landscaping, signage, colors, materials, design, densities, and permitted uses.

General plan programs under this goal include “the use of specific plans in order to attain project benefits that would otherwise not be possible though the normal development process.”

The Village on the Green specific plan refines the general plan planned redevelopment land use designation to describe in detail the permitted single-family land use with the addition of both neighborhood and larger community amenities including parks, landscape buffers, retention of the native oak landscape, and superior architectural design.

c.       Goal: Community design that improves aesthetics, economic value, efficiency, safety, and desirability of the neighborhood as a place of residence.

i.        Objectives:

(A)    To have development that maintains or upgrades the quality of the surrounding area.

(B)    To have community-wide maintenance and improvement of private and public property.

(C)    To minimize the impact of traffic on residential neighborhoods.

ii.       Policies:

(A)    Development shall be of quality architectural design.

(B)    Development shall be compatible with neighborhood conservation and identity.

(C)    Property shall be maintained to the standards of the surrounding neighborhood.

(D)    Development should incorporate improvements that minimize traffic impacts on neighborhoods.

(E)     Development shall be accessible to the disabled and shall meet all applicable codes and standards.

The Village on the Green specific plan includes development plan goals and objectives reflected in detailed concept plans that assure an attractive, high-quality development. Architectural guidelines regulate both initial and future residential design and materials. Enhanced landscape setbacks along Amelia Avenue and Route 66 (old Alosta Avenue) provide an improved eastern entry to the city and a general upgrade to the area. Specific plan standards and regulations address building codes and set forth maintenance responsibilities. Finally, the village entry and exits and surrounding street improvement are designed for efficient and safe traffic and pedestrian circulation.

2.       Circulation Element.

a.       Goal: An efficient circulation system.

i.        Objectives: To maintain a level of service (LOS) “C” or better on roads and intersections.

ii.       Policies:

(A)    Development shall mitigate significant traffic impacts.

(B)    Development shall provide rights-of-way as necessary.

(C)    Development shall bear the cost of necessary improvements to the circulation system.

(D)    Development shall maintain a level of service “C” or better on affected roads and intersections.

(E)     Development shall provide traffic studies as necessary.

Village entry and exits, interior circulation and surrounding street improvement are designed for efficient and safe traffic and pedestrian circulation reflected in traffic studies prepared for the EIR and compliance with city standards. The Village on the Green specific plan includes a conceptual circulation plan and description of improvements to Amelia Avenue and Route 66 (old Alosta Avenue), as well as project access and circulation. All improvements will be funded by the developer.

b.       Goal: Aesthetically pleasing transportation corridors.

i.        Objectives: To facilitate aesthetic improvements to, and maintenance of, the transportation corridors.

ii.       Policies: Development shall be required to underground utility lines.

Amelia Avenue and Route 66 (old Alosta Avenue) will be enhanced with heavily planted landscape lots and attractive community walls as reflected in the conceptual landscape plan. All utility lines within the village will be installed underground. City programs under this goal include continued public works department and redevelopment agency undergrounding of utility lines wherever possible. Overhead utility lines, within public street rights-of-way along Amelia Avenue and Route 66 (old Alosta Avenue) are envisioned to be undergrounded in the future with the adjacent systems.

3.       Open Space Element.

a.       Goal: Adequate open space for the recreational needs of the community.

i.        Objectives: To provide park acreage which meets the standards of the community services department.

ii.       Policies:

(A)    Development shall provide adequate parks and recreational facilities or in lieu fees as governed by the Quimby Act (Government Code Section 66477).

(B)    Development shall include adequate open space.

The Village on the Green conceptual site plan includes common park and open space areas within the development, including the Village Green adjacent to the entry and a pocket open space/tot-lot area which mitigates the impact of the village upon the city’s park system. Additional in-lieu fees and/or improvements will be provided to satisfy Quimby Act requirements.

4.       Conservation Element.

a.       Goal: Conservation of the natural resources of the community.

i.        Objectives: To reduce the impact of development on natural resources.

ii.       Policies: Development shall mitigate potential impacts on natural resources.

The Village on the Green site plan is designed to preserve as many “heritage” oak trees as possible by protecting trees in place and relocating or replacing specimen trees on the site. A tree preservation, relocation and mitigation plan is required for submittal with development plans. Impacts to jurisdictional waters will be mitigated off-site in the general vicinity.

E.       California Environmental Quality Act Compliance. An Environmental Impact Report (EIR) was prepared in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the city environmental reporting guidelines. The EIR will serve as the basis on which the environmental effects of implementing the specific plan can be ascertained. All subsequent approvals necessary to develop any property within the specific plan area must be consistent with the specific plan and be within the scope of the EIR. Additional environmental documentation may be required in the future if significant changes are found to have occurred pursuant to Sections 15162 and 15182 of the CEQA guidelines.

F.       Authority and Scope. The Village on the Green specific plan has been prepared pursuant to the provisions of the California Government Code, Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 3, Article 8, Sections 65450 through 65457, and the city of Glendora Municipal Code.

The city of Glendora adopts and amends specific plans by ordinance per Section 21.06.060 of the city of Glendora Municipal Code. Public hearings by both the planning commission and the city council are required for adoption of the specific plan.

The Village on the Green specific plan is the planning and regulatory for implementing the Glendora general plan on the project site and will thus constitute the zoning for the Village on the Green property. The development standards contained in the specific plan will take precedence over all other provisions in Title 21 of the city of Glendora Municipal Code. (Ord. 1794 § 1, 2004)

 

21.09.020 Existing conditions.
A.      Existing Land Use. The specific plan area consists of the original 17.2-acre Village on the Green specific plan area approved in December, 1999 (eastern portion of the specific plan area) plus the 2.9-acre Amendment area (vacant National Hot Rod Association parcel) added along the western boundary of the original specific plan area.

The 1999 specific plan area was vacant when approved and under construction during processing of the specific plan amendment (“Saratoga” development).

Before the 1999 specific plan approval, Route 66 (old Alosta Avenue) along the southern boundary of the site was improved with pavement and a public walkway, without curb and gutter, within the existing right-of-way. Amelia Avenue along the eastern boundary of the site was improved with pavement only within the existing right-of-way. Improvements to both roadways were completed before processing of the specific plan amendment.

The northern cul-de-sac shown on TTM 52483, the original specific plan area, was constructed prior to processing of the specific plan amendment. The cul-de-sac will be removed and related lot lines adjusted for the street extension.

B.      Surrounding Land Uses. As shown in the annotated aerial photo, Exhibit 21.09.020-1, the project site is bounded by the Glendora Country Club to the north, Los Angeles County Fire Station No. 86 and the Glendora Greens 60-unit condominium development across Amelia Avenue to the east, the Church of the Latter Day Saints and a two-story office building to the west, and commercial development across Route 66 (old Alosta Avenue) to the south. The Wild Rose condominium development exists southeast of the site in the city of San Dimas.

All surrounding properties are developed.

C.      Topography. On the eastern portion of the site, existing site topography (shown in Exhibits 21.09.020-1a and 21.09.020-1b Existing Topography), consists of a gentle slope from the southeast corner of the site at the intersection of Amelia Avenue and Route 66 (old Alosta Avenue) to the northwest, with an approximate ten-foot grade break/slope occurring east-west across the site. An existing storm drain under Amelia Avenue outlets to a natural drainage channel on the site which drains northwesterly to an inlet structure in the Glendora Country Club 5th fairway area. The inlet structure is inadequate to handle the existing storm water flows, thus causing annual flooding. A graded slope on-site along the southwestern property line drains into a planter along the adjacent Church of Later Day Saints parking lot to the west. Elevations ranger from approximately nine hundred ten feet above sea level at the northwest corner of the site to nine hundred fifty feet at the southeast corner of the property.

The western portion of the site (shown on Exhibit 21.09.020-1b) slopes generally from the south to the north with an elevation of nine hundred twenty three feet just inside of the church parking lot/property line to nine hundred two feet at the country club boundary.

D.      Geology/Soils. The site is located between the San Gabriel and Chino Basins and between the San Dimas Wash and the Big Dalton Wash. The San Gabriel Mountains (Glendora Block) lie to the north and the San Jose Hills lie south of the project site. Holocene (within the last eleven thousand years) and Pleistocene (eleven thousand to one million eight hundred thousand years) Age alluvium underlie the site and surrounding developed area and is considered stable. The vegetation across the site is light to heavy and consists of grasses, weeds, and trees.

E.       Seismicity. No faults, fissure or shear zones have been observed on the project site and no previously identified faults have been found to traverse the site. The site does not lie within an Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zone. The South Frontal Fault Zone lies approximately one thousand feet north of the project site. This fault is in part responsible for the uplift of the hills located approximately one thousand feet north of the property. This fault is not considered active since it is not zoned under the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act. The Sierra-Madre Fault is located approximately two miles north of the project site and this fault is considered active.

Since there are no active faults on the site, the probability of hazards due to fault ground rupture is considered low. Due to the overall favorable geologic structure and topography of the area, the potential for earthquake-induced landslides or rockfalls is considered low. Due to a lack of shallow groundwater and the dense nature of the underlying soils, the possibility of hazards due to liquefaction is considered low.

F.       Hydrology and Drainage. The 20.1-acre site drains gradually from southeast to northwest. The existing drainage pattern and flood hazard areas are shown in Exhibits 21.09.020-3a and 21.09.020-3b. A conceptual hydrology and drainage study is contained in Appendix C and Appendix H of this specific plan on file with the city clerk.

A natural drainage course crosses the northeast portion of the site. Surface flows on the site drain in a northerly direction toward the Glendora Country Club.

In addition to surface flows from the project site, the on-site natural drainage course conveys flows from a Los Angeles County maintained rectangular concrete open flood control channel (adjacent to the fire station on the east side of Amelia Avenue), that is a part of miscellaneous transfer drain (MTD) number 778. These flows are conveyed under Amelia Avenue via a concrete culvert box, into the on-site natural drainage course to an existing corrugated steel pipe inlet located on the south side of the fifth fairway of the Glendora Country Club. This inlet also receives some flows from the golf course (see Exhibits 21.09.020-4a and 21.09.020-4b, Conceptual Drainage Plan). This inlet is connected via the existing Inverness drain to an existing eighty-seven-inch diameter storm drain pipe located adjacent to the northwest corner of the specific plan area on the Glendora Country Club property, and known as MTD number 932. It lies within a County of Los Angeles twenty-seven-foot-wide storm drain easement. During low frequency storms, where high rainfall intensities occur, the flows through the on-site natural drainage course are too high to be intercepted by the inlet at the Glendora Country Club, and flooding of the fifth fairway and lake on the golf course occurs.

G.      Natural Features. Live oak trees form the dominant natural site features. Native oaks, citrus and other trees indigenous to the area have been cleared from surrounding sites with development. Existing trees on-site have been mapped and identified, and are shown in Exhibits 21.09.020-5a and 21.09.020-5b, Existing Trees, detailed in Exhibit 21.09.020-6, Existing Trees Statistical Summary.

The San Gabriel Mountains form the scenic backdrop to the site and the dominant northerly view from the site along with views to the adjacent Glendora Country Club Golf Course. (Ord. 1794 § 1, 2004)

 

21.09.030 Project description.
A.      Development Objectives and Goals. The objectives of the Village on the Green development plan are:

1.       To reflect and implement the goals, objectives, policies and programs of the general plan;

2.       To establish a land use plan that sets the framework for implementation of the specific plan;

3.       To present a site plan that summarizes planning and development standards for the property;

4.       To present plans and methods to preserve, relocate or replace the existing oak trees on the site in private and shared open space;

5.       To summarize required infrastructure for development of the proposed residential community;

6.       To provide an architectural theme and a variety of architectural products for a high quality aesthetic residential community, distinctive in design and visual character reflecting the unique character of the city;

7.       To present plans and details that will create a uniquely identifiable neighborhood character through landscaping, open space treatment, and architectural theme and details; and

8.       To provide sixty-five new homes in an infill location where new housing opportunities are in short supply.

The overall goal is to create a neighborhood which will be in harmony with surrounding land uses, and to develop a distinctive sense of community for the Village on the Green residents.

B.      Public Benefits. The specific plan allows for deviations from city standards for single family residential development, in exchange for superior design elements which benefit the city and surrounding community. The proposed project offers the following design amenities:

1.       An enhanced landscaped intersection at Amelia Avenue and Route 66 (old Alosta Avenue) that provides an attractive eastern entry statement for the city of Glendora;

2.       Provision of wide landscape buffers to enhance Amelia Avenue and Route 66 (old Alosta Avenue) streetscapes;

3.       Construction of a ninety-inch RCP storm drain system, which completes the missing portion of the area’s main drainage system and alleviates annual flooding of the Glendora Country Club;

4.       Private maintenance of landscaped rights-of-way along the Amelia Avenue and Route 66 (old Alosta Avenue) project boundaries, without cost to existing residents in Glendora;

5.       Private maintenance of the village streets and parks, alleviating fiscal impacts to the city;

6.       Creation of a high-quality residential product featuring four-sided upgraded elevations, covered porches and balconies reflecting the traditional Glendora/San Gabriel Valley architectural theme;

7.       Additional property tax revenue to the city;

8.       Additional market base for city retailers;

9.       Retention of the native oak landscape by utilization of unique lot configurations and grading design for preservation of trees in place, and relocation or replacement of impacted trees;

10.     An attractive, landscaped residential view from the Glendora Country Club;

11.     Provision of neighborhood parks to serve village residents and reduce demand on local city facilities; and

12.     High quality enhanced project entries/exits and perimeter treatments.

C.      Land Use Plan. The land use plan, Exhibit 21.09.030-1, indicates development of the site into residential lots within a new single-family SF-1 land use designation with standards set forth in Section 21.09.040 of this chapter. Lots are a minimum of ten thousand gross square feet, including private residential street area, and eight thousand net square feet, excluding private street area. In the specific plan amendment area (NHRA property) lots are a minimum of ten thousand gross square feet excluding the private street area. Shared community open space and parks are planned allowable uses within the residential land use area. Exhibit 21.09.030-2 is the statistical summary table for the land use plan.

D.      Conceptual Site Plan. The Village on the Green is envisioned as a cohesive residential development designed with architecture reminiscent of that found historically in Glendora and the San Gabriel Valley foothill area. The project will utilize a variety of product types and sizes to create a unique character within the residential development. Exhibits 21.09.030-3a and 21.09.030-3b shows the conceptual site plan for the Village on the Green.

Gross lot sizes on this plan range from ten thousand square feet to over nineteen thousand square feet including private street area associated with each lot. Gross lot size in the specific plan amendment area (NHRA property) excludes the private street area to back of curb. Net lot sizes, excluding street easements, range from eight thousand three hundred to over fourteen thousand square feet.

The plan incorporates common park and open space areas including a Village Green park (open space lot “A”) near the main project entry off Amelia Avenue, and a “tot lot” (open space lot “B”) along the southern cul-de-sac (Street “E”). Existing oak trees will be preserved in place where possible. Healthy trees that have a six-inch or greater diameter at breast height will be relocated on site or replaced with new oak trees on an inch-by-inch basis in open space areas, landscape lots, interior slopes, and street frontages. Landscape lots will be provided along Amelia Avenue and Route 66 (old Alosta Avenue) behind the landscaped rights-of-way.

E.       Circulation Plan. The conceptual circulation plan is shown in Exhibits 21.09.030-4a and 21.09.030-4b. The development will have its main entrance and exit off Amelia Avenue, with a secondary right-turn only exit onto Route 66 (old Alosta Avenue). Both the main entrance/exit and secondary exit will be secured and gated. Sight distance at each project egress will be reviewed with respect to Caltrans/city of Glendora clear site triangle standards at the time of preparation of final grading, landscape and street improvement plans. Traffic signing/striping will be implemented in conjunction with detailed construction plans for the project site. In addition, the project will participate in the phased construction of off-site traffic signals through the project’s fair share percentage of total traffic.

1.       Amelia Avenue Improvements. Amelia Avenue will be improved from the north project boundary to Route 66 (old Alosta Avenue) to its ultimate half-section width as a collector with curb and gutter in conjunction with development. An additional ten feet of right-of-way within the property boundary will be dedicated to the city to accommodate north- and south-bound turning lanes for the project. All of the existing palm trees along Amelia Avenue will be preserved or relocated with street widening.

A minimum one hundred-foot left-turn pocket on Amelia Avenue will be provided for northbound vehicles turning left into the project site. The Amelia Avenue entry will provide a minimum of sixty feet of stacking distance between the gate and Amelia Avenue, and access will be maintained as a full access driveway, with a stop sign, stop bar and a stop legend provided. A minimum thirty-two-foot turning radius will be provided to allow vehicle U-turns between the gate and Amelia Avenue.

2.       Route 66 (old Alosta Avenue) Improvements. Route 66 (old Alosta Avenue) is the historic US Route 66 traveling east-west through Los Angeles County. Route 66 will be constructed from the west project boundary to Amelia Avenue to its ultimate half-section width as an Arterial Road in conjunction with development. The existing eastbound Route 66 median break south of the site will be closed, curbed and planted. A secondary right-turn only gated exit will be provided at the westerly portion of the site.

3.       Residential Streets. The interior residential streets within the Village on the Green will be private streets maintained by a Homeowner’s Association. The interior streets will be paved to a width of thirty-six feet with an overall street right-of-way easement of forty-eight feet. These residential streets will be fully improved with curbs, gutters, and sidewalks. Street lighting and the sewer system shall be installed in conformance with city of Glendora and Los Angeles County sanitation district code requirements. Cul-de-sacs will be designed in accordance with city and county fire standards.

F.       Grading Concept. The grading concept for the Village on the Green is shown in Exhibits 21.09.030-6a and 21.09.030-6b. The conceptual grading design for this project is intended to:

1.       Be responsive to the existing natural land form;

2.       Minimize the length of time and physical impacts of the grading operation;

3.       Stabilize manufactured slopes;

4.       Preserve oak trees in place wherever possible;

5.       Preserve views on- and off-site; and

6.       Balance the earthwork on-site and avoid off-site import/export to the extent possible.

To achieve these objectives a number of techniques have been incorporated into the grading design of the project. The conceptual grading plan follows the existing site topography creating ten- to fifteen-foot manufactured slope following the existing northwesterly grade break. Oak trees will be preserved and relocated throughout the site during the grading process. Grading around existing oaks to remain in place will be limited to the drip line, or incorporate low retaining walls to avoid impacting root systems. Contouring techniques will be used to soften the visual appearance of manufactured slopes, including rounding of tops and toes of slopes and variation of slope gradient. Landscaping will also be used to provide visual softening of slope areas, and to stabilize manufactured slopes.

Approximately seventy thousand four hundred cubic yards of cut and sixty-one thousand cubic yards of fill will be generated by grading operations. Approximately ten thousand six hundred cubic yards of earth is to be exported off-site.

All grading shall be in conformance with the city of Glendora grading ordinance.

G.      Conceptual Drainage System. On-site storm drain facilities will be designed according to the conceptual hydrology study contained in Appendix C, of this specific plan and discussed further in Appendix D and Appendix H (on file with the city clerk).

The conceptual drainage plan, Exhibit 21.09.030-7 for the proposed project includes interior streets fully improved with curbs, gutters and sidewalks that will be used as mechanisms to convey interior runoff flows to catch basins and pipelines placed at strategic locations. Runoff from the proposed lots will drain to their adjoining local interior streets or to another acceptable drainage device such as a yard drain and pipe. Lateral collectors will connect to the proposed ninety-inch diameter storm drain main line which eventually connects to the Inverness Drain and Big Dalton Wash.

A portion of the back yards of lots adjacent to the golf course will drain under the community perimeter ornamental iron and masonry wall to a concrete swale that will be constructed inside the northerly property line of the project, directly adjacent to the golf course, and will be maintained by the HOA. An access agreement with the Glendora Country Club will be obtained for maintenance activities. The drainage swale will also accommodate minor existing surface flows from the golf course. The swale will convey flows to the existing drain inlet on the golf course property and a new catch basin. A drainage easement over the concrete swale will be prepared for these lots. The catch basin will drain to the ninety inch diameter main storm drain pipe via an eighteen-inch diameter pipe. Lots adjacent to the golf course in the specific plan amendment area (NHRA Property) will drain to a similar swale inside the perimeter wall to a new catch basin at the northwest corner of the property draining to the ninety-inch storm drain pipe.

Optional catch basin and pipe systems are described further in Appendix D on file with the city clerk. In order to preserve certain oak trees on the site, small yard drains will be installed to maintain existing drainage patterns adjacent to the trees.

1.       Drainage Plan. The approximate locations of drainage facilities for the proposed development are shown in Exhibit 21.09.030-7, conceptual drainage plan. The precise facility location and sizing designed in accordance with LACFCD standards will be determined during tract map and improvement plan preparation. The design of all interior storm drain facilities will be in accordance with city of design criteria.

2.       Permit Requirements. Because proposed construction and site fill occur within an existing blue line stream, Army Corps of Engineers’ 401 and 404 permits are required for this project. A State Fish and Game 1603 permit, the “streambed alteration agreement” is also required, which covers the substantial diversion and/or obstruction of the natural flow of a creek, or substantial changes to the bed, channel or bank of a creek. An alteration agreement is required in virtually every project where a stream course will be affected by grading or the construction of improvements. A permit will be required from the regional water control board following project completion under CEQA diversion of runoff.

H.      Conceptual Water and Sewer System. The conceptual water and sewer plan for the specific plan area is depicted in Exhibit 21.09.030-8, and described in the following sections.

1.       Water System. The water supply for the city comes from groundwater sources from the Upper San Gabriel and Glendora Basin Wells and imported water via turnouts on the Metropolitan Water District’s Upper Feeder. The supply can be augmented by other wells in the area. The project site will be served by zone 2 of the city water system which is served by four existing reservoirs. Appendix D contains detailed water system discussions.

A ten-inch diameter ductile iron water main will be constructed to the western boundary of the specific plan area. This ten-inch main will continue easterly through the site and connect to the existing sixteen-inch diameter zone 2 water main located in Amelia Avenue. Other proposed line sizes for the site include eight-inch diameter pipes in main streets, and six-inch and eight-inch diameter pipes in the proposed cul-de-sacs. Another connection is proposed to the existing twelve-inch zone 2 line in Route 66 (old Alosta Avenue). All connections, loops and line sizes will be finalized with the city in the final engineering phase of the project.

The water system for this project will be constructed to city specifications, and ultimately turned over to the city for maintenance. Easements will be provided over private streets and lot areas as needed to allow for water mains and maintenance operations.

2.       Sewer System. Domestic sewage from the project site will be transported to eight-inch diameter sewer mains under interior streets of the project. These lines will carry sewage flows to the northwest portion of the project and connect to the existing sewer line at the western boundary of the site.

The sewer system within the project will be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of Los Angeles County sanitation district No. 22. Easements will be provided across private streets and lots to allow the existence and maintenance of sewer lines.

Sewage flows from the city of Glendora are conveyed by underground pipes to a joint outfall system. This system directs flows to the San Jose Creek wastewater reclamation plant in the city of Industry. This facility is operated by the Los Angeles County sanitation district, and the specific plan area will be annexed into this district No. 22.

I.        Public Facilities and Services.

1.       Water and Sewer Facilities. Proposed water and sewer systems are discussed in Section 21.09.030(H).

2.       Dry Utilities. Provisions for electrical, natural gas, telephone and cable television services will be made prior to development of the project area. All services can be extended by each respective company to meet any future demands. Electrical service will be provided by Southern California Edison Company. Natural gas will be provided by Southern California Gas Company. Telephone service will be provided by General Telephone Electric (GTE).

3.       Trash (solid waste). Trash, recycling, and other solid waste disposal services will be provided by the city.

4.       Public Transportation. The city is serviced by the Foothill Transit Authority and City Mini-bus. Two bus routes service the subject site, both with bus stops at the corner of Route 66 (old Alosta Avenue) and Amelia Avenues. The 187-East line travels east-west from Pasadena to Montclair. The 276-South line travels from Sunny Hills Mall in the city of Industry to Citrus College in the city of Glendora.

5.       Schools. The project site is within the Glendora Unified School District. The project will be served by Sutherland Elementary School, Goddard Middle School, and Glendora High School. Sutherland Elementary School is located on Amelia Avenue south of Route 66 (old Alosta Avenue), and is within sight and walking distance from the site. Goddard Middle School is located on Sierra Madre Avenue approximately three to four miles from the project site. Glendora High School is at the corner of Foothill Boulevard and Valley Center, and is approximately one and one-half miles from the property.

6.       Police, Fire and Hospital. The project site is serviced by the Glendora police department, with the nearest station located in the civic center complex at 150 S. Glendora Avenue, approximately four miles from the site.

Fire station No. 86 is located on Amelia Avenue across from the project site.

Foothill Presbyterian Hospital is a full-service hospital and is located on Grand Avenue north of Route 66 (old Alosta Avenue) approximately five and one-half miles from the project site.

J.       Architectural Design Concept. Architectural design for Village on the Green will emphasize quality, diversity and timelessness. An assemblage of styles consistent with a “Historic Glendora Foothill” architectural theme is intended to develop a classic architectural image compatible with the existing and historic neighborhoods of Glendora. The architectural styles chosen for the specific plan area have evolved in the area since the turn of the century. Their inherent simplicity and sense of elegance has enabled these styles to remain popular over long periods of time, and are applicable in building the desired traditional community character.

Architectural styles including traditional, bungalow, and craftsman will create a diverse and interesting streetscape. Architectural design guidelines are included in Appendix A of this specific plan and present design elements and details of these styles. Quality materials and craftsmanship are a requirement, as well as detailing of all building elevations visible from streets and surrounding properties, including the Glendora Country Club golf course. A variety of floor plans and elevations, including one and two story buildings, will be required to create diversity within the proposed community.

Front and rear covered porches are encouraged. The specific plan regulations allow porch projections into front and rear yard setbacks in order to create a varied residential street frontage and low-profile interface with the streets and the golf course.

K.      Landscape Concept. The community landscape concept for Village on the Green complements the traditional architecture styles chosen for the development, emphasizing a historic and indigenous theme. The conceptual landscape plan and the proposed community plant palette are shown in Exhibits 21.09.030-11a, 21.09.030-11b and 21.09.030-11-2, respectively.

1.       Route 66 (old Alosta Avenue) Streetscape. The existing eight-foot right-of-way along Route 66 (old Alosta Avenue) will be planted and augmented with an additional seventeen-foot landscape setback, for a total of twenty-five feet, including a meandering sidewalk, landscape lighting, mounded turf areas and accent shrub and ground covers in a drought tolerant planting scheme to be maintained by the Homeowner’s Association. Accent plantings of flowering annuals and perennials will be utilized along with contrasting foliage and varying sizes of background and foreground plantings. The trees along Route 66 will represent a cohesive and compatible mix of tree types. Evergreen specimen California Peppers, semi-deciduous Italian Alders, and deciduous Sycamore trees will be planted in groupings along Route 66. In addition, oak trees that have been identified for relocation on the property will be relocated to this area.

2.       Amelia Avenue Streetscape. The existing right-of-way and additional ten-foot right-of-way dedication along Amelia Avenue will be planted with palms, continuing the historic palm tree-lined streetscape augmented with existing and relocated oak trees and accent trees which will also be maintained by the HOA. Three existing palms on Amelia Avenue will be relocated in order to accommodate a new turning lane at the main project entry. Additional palms of similar size will be planted in the landscape lot south of the project entry to the Route 66 (old Alosta Avenue) intersection. The Route 66/Amelia Avenue corner landscape is designed as an attractive east entry to the city of Glendora for west bound travel along historic Route 66.

3.       Project Entry Landscape Treatment. The main project entrance off Amelia Avenue will consist of stone walls and pilasters gated with ornamental iron fencing. A tailored landscape scheme will utilize plantings related to the interior residential scale and planting theme. A large existing oak tree will be retained and balanced by the relocation of another specimen oak from the site to facilitate the main project entry statement. The center median island will be planted with flowering trees.

The concepts for the main entry, secondary exit gate and monument sign at the corner of Amelia Avenue and Route 66 (old Alosta Avenue) are illustrated by Exhibits 21.09.030-11-4 and 21.09.030-11-5.

4.       Interior Street Landscape Treatments. Numerous oak trees will be preserved in place or relocated within the site. Replacement oak trees are incorporated as a major interior streetscape element lining the interior streets. These street trees will act as a unifying landscape elements within a neighborhood of varying front yard landscapes.

5.       Common Area Landscapes. Common park and open space areas, including the Village Green adjacent to the entry, the pocket open space/tot-lot area, and perimeter landscape lots will incorporate relocated or new oak trees, mounded turf, and drought tolerant/low maintenance plantings. Canopy trees will be provided for shade and accent elements.

The developer will incorporate master conditions, covenants, and restrictions (CC&Rs) to enforce guidelines addressing architectural themes, environmental compatibility, orientation, drought tolerant groupings, irrigation requirements, and hardscape elements within common areas of the project. Although variety is encouraged, the CC&Rs will outline limitations of design concepts and elements which may not be compatible with the overall neighborhood theme.

6.       Glendora Country Club Interface. A decorative combination masonry and ornamental iron perimeter fence is proposed along the Glendora Country Club 5th tee and fairway. The developer will work with the country club to replace the overgrown and unsightly existing Cypress trees that currently line their south property boundary in order to create an attractive scenic vista to and from the golf course.

7.       Private Area Landscape. CC&Rs will set forth guidelines and time limits for installation of private yard landscaping and irrigation systems, and will enforce limitations on storage areas and structures, in particular for lots adjacent to the golf course.

L.       Oak Tree Conservation. The Village on the Green site plan is designed to preserve as many “heritage” oak trees as possible by protecting trees in place, and relocating or replacing specimen trees on the site. All trees removed that are six-inch caliper or larger will be replaced on an inch-per-inch basis.

Trees to remain in place, to be relocated, and replacement trees are illustrated by the Tree Disbursement Plan and the Conceptual Tree Preservation, Relocation and Mitigation Plan, Exhibits 21.09.030-12-1a, 21.09.030-12-1b, 21.09.030-12-2a and 21.09.030-12-2b. In summary, approximately thirty-eight trees will remain in place, approximately thirty trees will be relocated on-site, and approximately forty-eight trees will be removed and replaced caliper inch-for-inch. Any trees scheduled to remain in place or to be relocated on site which do not survive to issuance of occupancy permit for the individual lot will also be replaced caliper inch-for-inch.

Guidelines shall be established to preserve oak trees on shared open space and private lots. A maintenance manual of the importance and the “how-to-care” for the oak trees shall be provided to the homeowners of Village on the Green. This oak tree conservation procedures manual is included in Appendix F of this specific plan (on file with the city clerk) and will be provided to the individual homeowners by the developer. (Ord. 1794 § 1, 2004)

 

21.09.040 Development standards and regulations.
A.      Purpose. The purpose of this section is to specify uses for the specific plan area as well as regulations for residential development. These regulations will serve as the primary mechanism for implementation of the land uses for the Village on the Green specific plan. The regulations contained herein provide an appropriate amount of flexibility to anticipate future needs and to achieve compatibility between land uses.

B.      General Provisions. The following site planning standards apply to the entire specific plan area as noted.

1.       Except as provided in this specific plan, the city of Glendora Municipal Code, including the zoning ordinances and other applicable city regulations shall govern site design, development and construction within the Village on the Green specific plan.

2.       All development projects shall be reviewed for consistency with the Village on the Green specific plan architectural design guidelines described in Appendix A of this specific plan on file with the city clerk.

3.       Whenever the regulations contained in this text conflict with the regulations of the Glendora Municipal Code, the regulations of the Village on the Green specific plan shall take precedence.

C.      Residential Development Regulations.

1.       Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the specific plan area:

a.       Single-family detached dwellings;

b.       Common open space lots and parks maintained by a Homeowners’ Association;

c.       Garages, accessory buildings, structures and uses where related and ancillary to the primary residence subject to the provisions of this chapter;

d.       Detached garages which are architecturally connected to the main dwelling; and

e.       Home occupations as an accessory use to a single-family residence.

2.       Residential Site Development Standard.

a.       Single-Family Residences. The minimum lot area, lot width, lot depth, floor area ratio, floor area, setbacks, and building height shall be as specified in Exhibit 4.3-1, and described below.

b.       Accessory Buildings.

i.        There shall be no more than one detached accessory building on any one parcel.

ii.       The totaled floor area of all detached accessory buildings shall not exceed nine hundred square feet.

iii.     The maximum height shall be fifteen feet, but not exceeding one story.

iv.      Detached accessory buildings shall be set back a minimum of five feet from side and rear property lines and located no closer to a street than the residences or the front setback and yard setbacks when adjacent to a street (corner lot).

v.       Attached accessory buildings and detached garages which are architecturally attached to the main dwelling shall be subject to the setback requirements of the SF-1 zone as specified in Exhibit 4.3-1, Residential Development Standards.

c.       Patios. Open patios with trellis or lattice-work overhead structures that are attached to a single-family residence may project into the required rear yard setback, but no closer than ten feet to the rear property line.

d.       Deck Structures. Second story deck structures may project five feet into the rear setback.

e.       Covered Porch Structures.

i.        Covered single-story porch structures that are attached to a single-family residence may project into the required front yard setback, but no closer than fifteen feet from the edge of the private street easement.

ii.       Covered single-story porch structures that are attached to a single-family residence may project into the required rear yard setback, but no closer than fifteen feet from the rear property line.

f.        Balconies. Second floor covered or uncovered balconies may not project beyond the building setbacks and are restricted to one side of the building. Balconies may not exceed two hundred square feet with the maximum dimensions of ten feet in depth and twenty-five feet in length.

D.      Common Open Space Lots and Parks. Common open space lots and parks are to be identified on a site development plan and will be maintained by a homeowner’s association. The following uses are permitted within open space lots:

1.       Park furniture and amenities;

2.       Landscape lots;

3.       Barbecue/picnic areas;

4.       Children’s play area(s);

5.       Access and service roads;

6.       Sidewalks;

7.       Public utilities;* and

8.       Utility easements or rights-of-way.*

*        Public utilities within common open space lots and parks must be installed underground.

E.       Oak Tree Preservation. A tree disbursement plan shall be prepared indicating trees proposed to be preserved, relocated or replaced on the subject site. All oak trees indicated to remain will be preserved in accordance with the procedures set forth in Appendix F (on file with the city clerk) of this specific plan.

Any healthy trees that have six-inch or greater diameter at breast height (dbh) and are not being preserved in place shall be either relocated on-site, or removed and replaced caliper inch-for-inch. Such trees shall be documented on a tree preservation, relocation and mitigation plan, submitted with a site development plan and subject to development plan review.

Any trees scheduled to remain in place or to be relocated on site which do not survive to issuance of occupancy permit for the individual lot will also be replaced caliper inch-for-inch. (Ord. 1794 § 1, 2004)

 

21.09.050 Implementation.
A.      Enforcement of Specific Plan. The Village on the Green specific plan, when adopted as a city ordinance, serves both as a planning and regulatory function. It is the vehicle by which the general plan is implemented on the project site. The specific plan also contains all applicable land use regulations, and will thus constitute the zoning for the Village on the Green property. In addition, general administration rules are specified to properly relate the specific plan to the provisions of the general plan.

Development will be implemented in conformance with the regulations and guidance contained within this specific plan. This section contains the procedures for administration of the provisions contained herein, as well as the conceptual phasing plan for development of the proposed site plan.

Implementation of the plan will be carried out by methods of site development plan review and Subdivision Map Act procedures.

Should future economic or development conditions make it desirable to amend this specific plan, the procedures described in Section 21.09.050(B) shall govern such amendments.

B.      Amendments to Specific Plan.

1.       Requirements and Procedures. This specific plan may be amended at any time in the same manner and by the same process by which the plan was originally adopted. The city’s standard environmental review procedures shall be followed.

2.       Administrative Actions. Minor modifications to provisions in the specific plan may be made administratively by the planning director, subject to appeal to the planning commission, and subsequently the city council. Such amendments do not require additional environmental review. These changes include but are not limited to:

a.       The addition of new information to the specific plan maps or text that does not change the effect of any concepts or regulations.

b.       Changes to the community infrastructure such as drainage, streets, water, and sewer systems which do not increase the development capacity in the specific plan area, decrease the development by more than twenty percent, or alter the major design concepts of the specific plan.

c.       Boundary adjustments, easement locations and minor design feature changes.

d.       Phasing adjustments.

e.       Minor land use district boundary adjustments.

f.        Revisions to the landscape guidelines, Section 21.09.030(5).

g.       Other items determined to be appropriate by the planning director.

3.       Formal Amendments. All specific plan modifications which do not meet the criteria of an administrative action, shall be deemed to require a formal amendment to the approved specific plan. All formal amendments shall be reviewed for approval by the planning commission and city council.

Whether classified as administrative or formal amendments, all such changes to the specific plan shall reflect the same comprehensive analysis which was undertaken in the adoption of the specific plan and may require additional environmental review. The amendment application shall satisfy the following criteria:

a.       Demonstrate that the proposed amendment meets the goals and objectives of the specific plan and general plan.

b.       Ensure that any impacts from the amendment can be satisfactorily mitigated.

 

c.       Provide a strikeout/underline copy of the specific plan text when changes are proposed and update any specific plan exhibits affected by the proposed amendment.

d.       Update any specific plan technical studies and/or provide additional environmental studies deemed necessary by the planning director and/or other city officials.

C.      Methods and Procedures for Implementation. A public hearing on all development plan applications shall be held in accordance with the provisions of this section of the specific plan. The planning commission may approve, modify, conditionally approve or deny said application. If there is a conflict found between this specific plan and the city’s municipal codes, the contents of this specific plan shall prevail.

1.       Permit Applications. Applications for permits shall be made on forms provided by the planning director and shall be accompanied by a fee, as established by council resolution.

a.       Complete Applications. Permit applications pursuant to this title must be accepted as complete for processing by the planning director in order to initiate the official review process. Applications shall include plans, documents, materials and other information as needed to allow complete analysis and evaluation.

b.       Review for Completeness. The director shall review the application and determine if it is complete for processing and shall notify the applicant of such determination. In addition to the standard submittal requirements, the director may request additional information necessary for the complete analysis and evaluation of an application.

c.       Incomplete Applications. If an application is determined not to be complete, written notice shall be provided to the applicant specifying those portions of the application that are incomplete. The notice shall indicate the items necessary to make the application complete. The applicant must supply items within sixty days of the notice or the application may be terminated. Upon receipt of the required items, the director shall review the application for completeness.

2.       Development Plan Review. Development plans will be reviewed by the city planning department and approved by the planning commission.

a.       Application. Applications for development plan review shall be made on forms provided by the director and shall be accompanied by a filing fee, as established by council resolution. Applications shall be made by the owner of the property for which the approval is sought, or an authorized agent.

Applications for development plan review shall include the following information:

i.        Site development plan: drawn to scale and fully dimensioned, containing the following:

(A)    Title block (applicant’s name and date drawn);

(B)    Scale and north arrow;

(C)    Property lines or building site, dimensioned;

(D)    Building footprints and setbacks;

(E)     Streets/corridor—location and width;

(F)     Easements—location, purpose and width;

(G)    Access—existing and proposed;

(H)    Fencing (walls)—type, location and height;

(I)      Landscape and screening areas; and

(J)     Topography, existing and proposed (i.e., conceptual grading plan).

ii.       Architectural floor plans and elevations including:

(A)    Typical exterior building materials;

(B)    Typical exterior colors; and

(C)    Building heights.

iii.     Preliminary landscape plan including general location of all plant materials.

iv.      Perimeter wall and entry elevations.

v.       Tree disbursement plan 910 (as described in Section 21.09.040(E) of this document).

vi.      Tree preservation, relocation and mitigation plan (as described in Section 21.09.040(E) of this document).

b.       Development Plan Review Hearing. The planning commission shall hold a hearing on each application for a development plan review. Notice of the hearing shall be given as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(E), except that no notice shall be required to be published.

c.       Action by Reviewing Body. The planning commission shall take action by resolution either granting or denying approval of the development plan(s). The action of the planning commission shall be final unless appealed as prescribed below. When an application for a development plan review is processed in conjunction with another application for which council action is required, the planning commission shall take action by recommending either approval or denial of the development plan. The city council shall take action by resolution either granting or denying approval of the development plan.

d.       Findings for Approval. The reviewing body shall grant approval of a development plan if all of the following findings are made:

i.        The use is authorized by development plan review pursuant to the specific plan;

ii.       The use is consistent with the general plan;

iii.     The site accommodates the development standards of this specific plan;

iv.      The site is adequately served by streets, utilities and other services, facilities and improvements, as set forth in the specific plan;

v.       The use will not adversely affect the character and integrity of the area, and the health, safety and welfare of the public.

e.       Conditions of Approval. The reviewing body may impose such conditions as it deems necessary to ensure that the project will meet the development standards and the purpose and intent of this specific plan.

3.       Development Plan Review Appeals. All decisions of the planning commission shall be final unless appealed to the city council. All appeals shall be filed in writing with the city clerk within fifteen days of the action of the planning commission. The city clerk shall schedule the matter for consideration at a regularly scheduled meeting of the city council held within thirty days of receiving the written appeal.

4.       Building Permits. No building permits shall be issued for any development on the subject property, or part thereof, until the planning commission or the city council on appeal have approved the development plan.

5.       Expiration of Development Plan Approval. In any case where a development plan approval has been granted and a building permit not issued within eighteen months after the date of granting thereof, the time shall be automatically extended in accordance with the remaining time on the accompanying vesting tentative tract map.

6.       Extensions. Extensions of time for any development plan review shall be determined by the planning commission. Extensions of time for any tentative map shall be determined by the city council.

Extensions shall not be considered unless a letter specifying the following information is received by the planning director before the date on which the approval expires:

a.       A description and documentation of good faith efforts to effectuate the plan;

b.       A description and documentation of acts, conditions or events beyond the permittee’s control which precluded project implementation; and

c.       An estimate of what must occur in order to proceed, along with an estimated time and requested extension period, accordingly.

D.      Subsequent Applications.

1.       Applications. Applications for individual residential modifications conforming to specific plan site development standards and architectural design guidelines will be submitted to the planning director for administrative review and approval. Second-story additions or modifications will be submitted to the planning commission for review and approval.

2.       Appeals. All decisions of the planning director or planning commission shall be final unless appealed to the city council. All appeals shall be filed in writing with the city clerk within fifteen days of the action of the planning director or planning commission. The city clerk shall schedule the matter for consideration at a regularly scheduled meeting of the city council held within thirty days of receiving the written appeal.

3.       Building Permits. No building permits shall be issued until the planning director, planning commission or city council on appeal have approved the application.

E.       Other Permits and Discretionary Actions.

1.       Zone Change Application. A zone change application will be processed concurrently with the specific plan and specific plan amendment applications to rezone the original subject property from E-5 (single family residential) and C-2 (limited retail business) to SP (specific plan), and rezone the specific plan amendment area (NHRA property) from PR (planned redevelopment) to SP.

The zone change shall be processed pursuant to procedures outlined in Section 21.01.050.

2.       Tentative Subdivision Application. This proposed development requires the approval of a vesting tentative tract map(s).

A vesting tentative map confers a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the time the application for the vesting tentative map is approved, as provided in Government Code Section 66498.1. A vesting tentative map shall be processed in a manner pursuant to requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and to the requirements for the tentative maps. The following requirements shall apply to a vesting tentative map:

a.       The word “vesting tentative map” shall be printed conspicuously on the face of the proposed map;

b.       The rights conferred by a vesting tentative map shall last for a period of not less than one year or more than two years beyond recordation of the final map.

3.       Lot Line Adjustments. The northern cul-de-sac shown on TTM 52483, the original specific plan area, was constructed prior to processing of the specific plan amendment. The cul-de-sac will be removed and related lot lines adjusted for the street extension. Proposed lot line adjustments will be submitted to the planning director for administrative review and approval.

F.       Phasing.

1.       Grading. Rough grading of the site will be performed in two phases conforming to TTM 52483 and TTM 53952.

2.       Infrastructure. Internal roads and backbone drainage, water and sewer facilities will be constructed in two phases conforming to TTM 52483 and TTM 53952, following rough grading.

3.       Residential Development. Exhibit 21.09.050-1 shows the conceptual phasing plan for proposed residential development. Six phases plus model homes are shown. The residential development phases illustrated may be combined into fewer development phases due to market considerations.

The three plans with the variety of architectural treatments selected for Village on the Green will be introduced evenly within each phase in order to promote a consistent variety throughout the entire project.

G.      Financing and Maintenance of Improvements.

1.       Infrastructure Financing. City and village improvements will be privately financed and include:

a.       Water and sewer facilities;

b.       Improvements to Amelia Avenue and Route 66 (old Alosta Avenue) including pavement, landscaping, lighting and signs;

c.       Storm drain system; and

d.       Telephone, gas, electric and cable television facilities located within the private rights-of-way.

2.       Maintenance.

a.       Public facility maintenance will be performed by the appropriate entity:

i.        Storm drains will be maintained by the Los Angeles County consolidated maintenance district;

ii.       Water facilities will be maintained by the city water department; and

iii.     Sewer facilities will be maintained by the Los Angeles County sanitation district.

b.       Maintenance of all common areas and private streets shall be the responsibility of an established homeowners’ association (HOA). The HOA will be responsible for the following improvements:

i.        Landscaping located at the project entries, common open space areas and neighborhood parks;

ii.       Landscaping within the Amelia Avenue and Route 66 (old Alosta Avenue) rights-of-way and landscape lots; and

iii.     Private streets within the Village.

The individual private property owners will be responsible for maintenance of areas within the private residential lots of Village on the Green. Each homeowner will be given a manual for maintenance of oak trees. Outdoor storage areas, particularly on lots adjacent to the golf course, will be restricted and regulated by CC&Rs. Enforcement of maintenance will be the responsibility of the HOA. (Ord. 1983 § 9, 2014; Ord. 1794 § 1, 2004)

 

21.09.A Appendix—Exhibits
21.09.A.010 Exhibit 21.09.010-1.
 



 

21.09.A.020 Exhibit 21.09.020-1.
 



 

21.09.A.030 Exhibit 21.09.020-1a.
 



 

21.09.A.040 Exhibit 21.09.020-1b.
 



 

21.09.A.050 Exhibit 21.09.020-2.
 



 

21.09.A.060 Exhibit 21.09.020-3a.
 



 

21.09.A.070 Exhibit 21.09.020-3b.
 



 

21.09.A.080 Exhibit 21.09.020-4a.
 



 

21.09.A.090 Exhibit 21.09.020-4b.
 



 

21.09.A.100 Exhibit 21.09.020-5a.
 



 

21.09.A.110 Exhibit 21.09.020-5b.
 



 

21.09.A.120 Exhibit 21.09.020-6—Existing trees statistical summary.
 

 

Health Categories Legend

 

A = Outstanding

A healthy and vigorous tree characteristic of its species and free of any visible signs of disease or pest infestation.

B = Above Average

A healthy and vigorous tree. However, there are minor visible signs of disease and pest infestation.

C = Average

Although healthy in overall appearance, there is a normal amount of disease and/or pest infestation.

D = Below Average/Poor*

This tree is characterized by exhibiting a greater degree of disease and/or pest infestation or structural instability than normal and appears to be in a state of decline. This tree also exhibits extensive signs of dieback.

E = Dead*

This tree exhibits no signs of life whatsoever at the time of field evaluation.

 

*       A tree rating of “D” and lower is in a low stage of vigor and naturally a meaningful level of recovery is doubtful. Removal should be considered if it is within the proposed project development.

 

 

Tree No.

Tree Name

Trunk Size(s)

Health

24

Coast Live Oak

10″

B

25

Mexican Elderberry

14″

C

26

Almond

3″, 3x4″, 5″, 8″

C

27

Mexican Elderberry

6″, 8″, 16″

C

28

Coast Live Oak

18″, 29′

B

29

Coast Live Oak

9″

B

30

Coast Live Oak

31″

B

31

Coast Live Oak

9″

B

32

Coast Live Oak

10″, 41″

B

33

Coast Live Oak

6″

A

34

Coast Live Oak

13″

B

35

Coast Live Oak

38″

B

36

English Walnut

6″, 4x10″

C

37

Almond

5″, 3x10″

C

38

Coast Live Oak

6″, 10″, 2″ x 14″

B

39

Coast Live Oak

12″, 13″, 19″

B

40

Coast Live Oak

26″

B

41

Coast Live Oak

12″

C

42

Coast Live Oak

24″

B

43

Coast Live Oak

11″

B

44

Coast Live Oak

13″, 22″

B

45

Coast Live Oak

26″

B

46

Coast Live Oak

21″

B

47

Coast Live Oak

23″

B

48

Coast Live Oak

38″

B

49

Coast Live Oak

11″, 16″

B

50

Coast Live Oak

21″

B

51

Coast Live Oak

5″, 6″

B

52

Mexican Elderberry

16″, 17″

D

53

English Walnut

5″ x 14″, 2″ x 10″

C

54

Coast Live Oak

36″

B

55

Coast Live Oak

2″ x 7″, 13″

C

56

Coast Live Oak

19″

B

57

Coast Live Oak

13″

B

58

Coast Live Oak

9″

B

59

Coast Live Oak

20″

B

60

Coast Live Oak

22″

B

61

Coast Live Oak

24″

B

62

Coast Live Oak

5″, 10″, 19″

B

63

Coast Live Oak

8″

B

64

Coast Live Oak

6″

B

65

Coast Live Oak

8″

B

66

Coast Live Oak

6″

B

67

Coast Live Oak

18″

B

68

Coast Live Oak

18″

B

69

Coast Live Oak

17″

B

70

Coast Live Oak

16″, 26″

B

71

Coast Live Oak

45″

B

72

Coast Live Oak

10″

C

73

Coast Live Oak

23″

C

74

Coast Live Oak

6″, 7″, 9″, 12″

B

75

Coast Live Oak

2″, 3″, 6″

B

76

Coast Live Oak

19″

B

77

So. Ca. Black Walnut

12″

B

78

Coast Live Oak

18″

C

79

Coast Live Oak

8″, 9″

C

80

Mexican Elderberry

8″, 2″ x 10″

C

81

Coast Live Oak

8″, 16″, 17″

B

82

Coast Live Oak

16″

B

83

Coast Live Oak

22″

B

84

So. Ca. Black Walnut

7″

C

85

Coast Live Oak

6″

B

86

Mexican Elderberry

7″

D

87

Coast Live Oak

12″

B

88

Coast Live Oak

14″

B

89

Mexican Elderberry

9″

C

90

Coast Live Oak

13″, 15″

B

91

Coast Live Oak

27″

B

92

Coast Live Oak

3″, 6″

B

93

Coast Live Oak

6″

B

94

Mexican Elderberry

8″

D

95

Laurel Sumac

6″, 12″

B

96

Mexican Elderberry

8″

D

97

Mexican Elderberry

14″

D

98

Mexican Elderberry

16″, 18″

D

99

Mexican Elderberry

24″

D

100

Maple

6″ x 12″, 13″, 14″

C

101

Coast Live Oak

13″

A

102

Coast Live Oak

12″, 23″

B

103

Coast Live Oak

6″, 4″, 2″

B

104

Coast Live Oak

16″

A

105

Coast Live Oak

19″

A

106

Coast Live Oak

6″

A

107

Coast Live Oak

8″

A

108

Coast Live Oak

28″

A

109

Coast Live Oak

6″

A

110

Coast Live Oak

24″

A

 

 

21.09.A.130 Exhibit 21.09.030-1.
 



 

21.09.A.140 Exhibit 21.09.030-2—Land use plan statistical summary table.
 

 

LAND USE

ACRES

ESTIMATED DWELLING UNITS

DENSITY/AC.

SF-1—Single-Family Residential

20.1 Ac.

65 units overall (entire development)

3.2 du/ac.

 

 

21.09.A.150 Exhibit 21.09.030-3a.
 



 

21.09.A.160 Exhibit 21.09.030-3b.
 



 

21.09.A.170 Exhibit 21.09.030-4a.
 



 

21.09.A.180 Exhibit 21.09.030-4b.
 



 

21.09.A.190 Exhibit 21.09.030-5a.
 



 

21.09.A.200 Exhibit 21.09.030-5b.
 



 

21.09.A.210 Exhibit 21.09.030-6a.
 



 

21.09.A.220 Exhibit 21.09.030-6b.
 



 

21.09.A.230 Exhibit 21.09.030-7.
 



 

21.09.A.240 Exhibit 21.09.030-8.
 



 

21.09.A.250 Exhibit 21.09.030-11a.
 



 

21.09.A.260 Exhibit 21.09.030-11b.
 



 

21.09.A.270 Exhibit 21.09.030-11-2—Community plant palette.
 

 

Scientific Name

Common Name

Trees

 

Alnus Cordata

Italian Alder

Jacaranda Acutifolia

Jacaranda

Lagerstroemia indica

Crape Myrtle

Nerium oleander-standard

Oleander Tree

Platanus acerifolia

London Plane

Quercus agrifolia

Live Oak

Schinus molle

California Pepper

Washington robusta

Mexican Fan

Shrubs

 

Abelia G ‘Edward Goucher’

Pink Abelia

Agapanthus africanus

Lily-of-the-Nile

Azalea ‘Brilliant’

Southern Indica

Dietes bicolor

Fortnight Lily

Escallonia g. ‘Fradesii’

Escallonia

Hemerocallis Spp.

Day Lily

Impatiens wallerana

Busy Lizzie

Nandina domestica

Heavenly Bamboo

Pittosporum tobira

Mock Orange

Pittosporum t. ‘Wheelerii’

Dwarf Tobira

Raphiolepis i. ‘Clara’

India Hawthorne

Raphiolepis i. ‘Springtime’

India Hawthorne

Rosa species

Rose ‘White’

Trachelospermum jasminoides

Star Jasmine

Xylosma congestum

Shiny Xylosma

Groundcover

 

Ficus repens

 

Gazania ‘Fiesta Red’—From Flats @ 12″ o.c.

 

Lantana Montevidensis—From Flats @ 12″ o.c.

 

Mandevilla ‘Alice du Pont’

 

Seasonal Color—4″ pots

 

Vinca Minor—From Flats @ 12″ o.c.

 

Vines

 

Ficus repens

 

Mandevilla ‘Alice du Pont’

 

 

 

21.09.A.280 Exhibit 21.09.030-11-3.
 



 

21.09.A.290 Exhibit 21.09.030-11-4.
 



 

21.09.A.300 Exhibit 21.09.030-11-5.
 



 

21.09.A.310 Exhibit 21.09.030-12-1a.
 



 

21.09.A.320 Exhibit 21.09.030-12-1b.
 



 

21.09.A.330 Exhibit 21.09.030-12-2a.
 



 

21.09.A.340 Exhibit 21.09.030-12-2b.
 



 

21.09.A.350 Exhibit 21.09.040-1—Residential development standards.
 

 

Specific Plan Designa-tion

Mini-mum Lot Area(1)

Mini-mum Lot Width(2)

Mini-mum Lot Depth(3)

Mini-mum Front Setback From Street Ease-ment(4)

Mini-mum Side Setback

Mini-mum Street Side Setback

Mini-mum Rear Setback(5)

Maxi-mum Floor Area(6)

Maxi-mum Second Floor Area(7)

Maxi-mum Height

SF-1

10,000 sq. ft. gross area, 8,000 sq. ft. net area

70 feet

100 feet

20 feet

5 feet

10 feet

25 feet for 2-story residence, 20 feet for 1-story

35% FAR not including a 400 sq. ft. attached garage based on gross lot area, 45% FAR based on net lot area

100% of first floor excluding a 400 sq. ft. attached garage

Two stories not to exceed 25 feet

 

(1)    Gross lot area includes private street area to the center line of the road. Gross lot area in the specific plan amendment area excludes private street area to back of curb. Net lot area excludes private street area to back of sidewalk.

(2)    For lots fronting on a cul-de-sac and knuckles, minimum width is measured at the front setback line.

(3)    Minimum lot depth to private street easement.

(4)    Minimum front setback for attached single-story covered porch structures is fifteen feet from the private street easement.

(5)    Minimum rear setback for attached single-story covered porch structures is fifteen feet.

(6)    Floor area includes the total enclosed area of a building and open-framed covered porches at ground level. Open patios with or without overhead trellis structures and second-floor balconies are not calculated as floor area.

(7)    Covered balconies are not calculated as second floor area.

 

21.09.A.360 Exhibit 21.09.050-1.
 



 

21.09.A.370 Vesting Tentative Tract No. 53952.
 
Chapter 21.10 ROUTE 66 CORRIDOR SPECIFIC PLAN
Article I. Executive Summary
21.10.010 Executive summary.
The Route 66 Corridor specific plan establishes a comprehensive policy and regulatory guidance document for all properties within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan project area. The specific plan provides the necessary regulatory and design guidance that will ensure future development implements the adopted policy for the project area. The Route 66 Corridor specific plan is a community-based plan, developed with extensive input by policy makers, business owners and property owners. The policy and regulatory elements of the specific plan are reflective of public consultation with business and property owners, developers, appointed and elected officials, staff, and the general public.

The Route 66 Corridor project area is considered the core commercial corridor within the city of Glendora. Recent community analysis of the project area has concluded the corridor is not currently maximizing its potential as a primary business and activity corridor. The community has identified the need to improve the economic vitality and livability of the corridor through the establishment of a comprehensive strategy to retain existing business and attract additional commercial, industrial, office, retail, and residential opportunities. Additionally, the specific plan establishes nine distinct land use zoning subdistricts that provide development design guidelines, streetscape improvements, and development standards that implement the community’s vision for quality development within the project area.

The Route 66 Corridor specific plan incorporates data, and analysis of the Alosta Corridor Committee, in addition to corridor-specific economic, infrastructure, parking, and circulation studies. As part of the technical analysis for this project, the development assumptions for the Route 66 Corridor specific plan consider the economic and fiscal impacts associated with future implementation.

As a public improvement plan, this specific plan anticipates the potential impacts of new development by identifying the full range of infrastructure improvements that would be necessary to meet long-term infrastructure needs. Additionally, the specific plan identifies priorities for land use, economics and urban design to stimulate implementation of the specific plan. Financing options for certain public improvements are also an integral part of the specific plan document.

In October of 2014, the city council initiated a review of the Route 66 specific plan. The review was deemed necessary to address concerns over development projects and a desire to examine whether the transformation of Route 66 as contemplated by the specific plan still met the community’s vision for the corridor.

Initial steps included a discussion of the specific plan at the December 9, 2014 city council meeting, and a “town hall” meeting held on February 18, 2015. Considering community feedback on the Route 66 specific plan and concerns over development, the council directed the planning commission to begin a review of the entire specific plan and prepare a report to the council with recommendations.

The commission held seven public meetings over the 2015 calendar year to review each section of the specific plan. On November 17, 2015, the commission presented their recommendations to the city council at a joint meeting. The recommended revisions incorporated into the specific plan in 2017 represent updated vision and goals for the corridor. The revisions amend the specific plan to improve the quality of development, better reflect Glendora’s historic character while accommodating new growth, provide more coherent development review procedures, and establish higher standards and discretion in granting development approval. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

Article II. Introduction
21.10.020 Introduction.
A.      The Route 66 Corridor specific plan project area, as shown in Exhibit 2-1, Regional Location and Exhibit 2-2, Specific Plan Project Area, is located in the central area of the city. The Route 66 Corridor represents the primary east-west commercial arterial through the city. The plan area contains approximately 287.18 acres generally located along Route 66 from Barranca Avenue on the west to Amelia Avenue on the east.

B.      Existing development within the specific plan area consists of residential, commercial, and light industrial uses. Uses along the Route 66 Corridor are typically characterized by small businesses serving the local community. Due to its access to the 210 Freeway, larger retail businesses are located along Grand Avenue. Development of the Route 66 Corridor at the intersections of Barranca Avenue, Glendora Avenue, and Lone Hill Avenue is generally limited to neighborhood commercial retail development. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.030 Land use descriptions.
The Route 66 Corridor specific plan area incorporates nine land use zoning subdistricts, including: Barranca Gateway, Grand Avenue Commercial Gateway, Town Center Mixed Use, Glendora Avenue Gateway, Route 66 Service Commercial, Central Route 66 Residential, Lone Hill Gateway, Glendora Technology, Commerce and Office, and Grand/Route 66 Gateway. The following is a general summary of the zoning subdistricts. More detailed descriptions of the districts can be found in Article VI.

A.      Barranca Gateway. The Barranca Gateway district is intended to serve as the western gateway into the city. General features of the district include:

1.       Streetscape enhancement;

2.       Street-oriented, pedestrian-focused development;

3.       Mix of uses including residential, commercial and retail development;

4.       Establishment of uses that capitalize on adjacent market potential;

5.       Development that respects adjacent residential development.

B.      Grand Avenue Commercial Gateway. The Grand Avenue commercial gateway district is intended to enhance Grand Avenue’s function as a primary commercial/retail district within the city. General features of the district include:

1.       Streetscape enhancement;

2.       Establishment of a primary local and regional commercial node;

3.       Improvement of the districts function as a southern gateway;

4.       Higher intensity commercial development;

C.      Town Center Mixed Use. The town center mixed use district is intended to provide for a complementary mix of land use and development types that are compatible with and reinforce pedestrian activity and transit utilization. General features of the district include:

1.       Streetscape enhancement;

2.       Encouragement of future transit use;

3.       Mix of uses including residential, commercial and retail development;

4.       Expanded housing opportunities;

5.       Street-oriented, pedestrian-friendly development.

D.      Glendora Avenue Gateway. The Glendora Avenue Gateway is intended to support medical uses around an existing hospital within walking distance of transit. General features of the district include:

1.       Streetscape enhancement;

2.       Encouragement of future transit uses;

3.       Expanded job opportunities;

4.       Medical campus serving the community.

E.       Route 66 Service Commercial. The Route 66 service commercial district is intended to provide for a variety of smaller-scale commercial, office and light industrial/manufacturing uses. General features of the district include:

1.       Streetscape enhancement;

2.       Establishment of locally-serving commercial uses;

3.       Facilitation of site improvements and rehabilitation;

4.       Facilitation of lot consolidation.

F.       Central Route 66 Residential. The Route 66 residential district is intended to contribute to the mix of housing choices offered to Glendora residents and provide consistency with the Glendora general plan 2013-2021 housing element. General features of the district include:

1.       Streetscape enhancement;

2.       Expanded housing opportunities;

3.       Locally-serving retail and commercial use at corner locations.

G.      Lone Hill Gateway. The Lone Hill gateway district is intended to serve as the eastern gateway of Glendora’s Route 66 Corridor. General features of the district include:

1.       Streetscape enhancement;

2.       View preservation;

3.       Enhancement as a locally-serving commercial node;

4.       Capitalize on market potential of adjacent employment.

H.      Glendora Technology, Commerce and Office. The Glendora technology, commerce and office district is intended to serve as a primary employment center within the city. General features of the district include:

1.       Streetscape enhancement;

2.       Expansion of employment base;

3.       Focused development of corporate office and high-tech use.

I.        Grand/Route 66 Gateway. The Grand/Route 66 Gateway district has been established to ensure that this key gateway intersection provides the mass and scale and quality, well-designed architectural features including significant landscaping, courtyards and public plazas to establish a “sense of place” creating a unique Glendora theme of beauty, pedestrian scale, and enriched quality of life. General features of the district include:

1.       Pedestrian-oriented site planning and design;

2.       Provision for public spaces, plazas and courtyards;

3.       Provision for a mix of office/retail uses;

4.       Excellence of architectural design, materials and landscaping creating a sense of place;

5.       Uses specified to enhance the gateway theme for the district. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.040 Purpose and intent.
A.      The Route 66 Corridor specific plan provides a policy and regulatory bridge between the city general plan and individual, project-level development. The Route 66 Corridor specific plan provides area-specific land use regulations and development guidelines. Once adopted, the Route 66 Corridor specific plan will provide the legal development requirements for the project area.

B.      The Route 66 Corridor specific plan provides a comprehensive set of plans, guidelines and regulatory standards in addition to administrative and implementation programs designed to provide for high-quality development within the land use districts, including residential, commercial, office, and light industrial/manufacturing uses.

C.      The Route 66 Corridor specific plan should not be considered an inflexible document. Rather it has been developed to provide as much flexibility as allowed by state law. It should also be noted that this specific plan reflects a vision to be implemented over a twenty-year period, and therefore, may be amended over time to reflect the city’s most current vision for the area. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.050 Organization of the specific plan.
The Route 66 Corridor specific plan is organized into eight articles as follows:

Article I—Executive Summary. The executive summary provides a broad overview of the specific plan and a brief background regarding the impetus to the development of the specific plan program.

Article II—Introduction. This article provides an overview of the Route 66 Corridor specific plan, including a project description, intent and purpose of the plan, and scope and authority of the document.

Article III—Planning Framework. This article provides the policy foundation for the specific plan document. The specific plan planning framework describes public outreach activities, guiding principles, “planning factors” and specific plan objectives related to the development and implementation of the Route 66 Corridor specific plan.

Article IV—Development Plan. This article provides the specific land use, circulation, community design/streetscape and infrastructure improvement plans related to the preferred development concept.

Article V—Design Guidelines. This article identifies specific design guidelines related to the adopted land use districts, in addition to area-wide guidelines for the Route 66 Corridor, including architectural styles, public space amenities, signage, and design tools.

Article VI—Land Use and Development Regulations. This article describes the legal zoning for all properties within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area. This article also establishes the land use and development standards for properties within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area.

Article VII—Implementation and Administration. This article discusses the administrative procedures required for timely review and permitting of land use and development activity within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area.

This article also identifies the anticipated cost of public improvements and potential financing strategies to provide a realistic estimate of the costs of implementing and methods to fund the public improvements identified in the specific plan.

Article VIII—Appendices. This article provides background material related to the specific plan update process, including an analysis of general plan consistency. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.060 California environmental quality act compliance.
A.      The Route 66 Corridor specific plan has been prepared in compliance with the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). Pursuant to state and local CEQA guidelines the city prepared an initial study/environmental checklist. The city determined that the specific plan could result in additional environmental impacts, and therefore, required environmental analysis. As a supplement to this specific plan, an environmental impact report (EIR) has been prepared to respond to the potential impacts as indicated in the initial study.

B.      The Route 66 Corridor specific plan EIR is a program-level EIR and includes an introduction, project description, description of existing environmental conditions, assessment of impacts and mitigation measures as directed by the city, in accordance with CEQA. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.070 Scope and authority of the specific plan.
A.      The Route 66 Corridor specific plan is established through the authority granted to the city of Glendora by California Government Code, Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 3, Article 8, Sections 65450 through 65457 (specific plans).

B.      As expressed in California law, specific plans may be adopted either by ordinance or by resolution. This allows jurisdictions to choose whether their specific plans will be policy driven (adopted by resolution) or regulatory in nature (adopted by ordinance). This specific plan is a regulatory document, adopted by ordinance.

C.      As set forth in the Government Code, Section 65451, a specific plan must contain the following information:

1.       A description of the general distribution, location, and extent of the uses of land within the area covered by the plan.

2.       The proposed distribution, location, extent, and intensity of major components of public and private transportation, sewage, water, drainage, solid waste disposal, energy and other essential facilities proposed to be located within the area covered by the specific plan and needed to support the land uses described in the plan.

3.       Standards and criteria by which development will proceed and standards for the conservation, development, and utilization of natural resources, where applicable.

4.       A program of implementation measures, including regulations, programs, public works projects and financing measures necessary to carry out the above information.

5.       The specific plan shall include a statement of the relationship of the specific plan to the general plan. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

Article III. Planning Framework
21.10.080 General.
This article provides an overview of the public outreach activities and policy framework that have influenced the development of the Route 66 Corridor specific plan. In addition, this article delineates the planning factors, guiding principles, and objectives that form the foundation of the specific plan’s land use plan, development standards, design guidelines, and other provisions. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.090 Public outreach and community input.
A primary objective of the Route 66 Corridor specific plan planning process is to establish a policy and regulatory document grounded in community participation and input. To this end, a number of opportunities for public input were offered to city residents, business and property owners, developers, and other interested parties. The outreach activities experienced consistent attendance by property owners, local businesses, and the community. The various workshops and meetings assisted in the development of the policy framework for the specific plan. The following public outreach activities were held throughout the specific plan development process:

A.      City Council Scoping Session (City Council Workshop #1)—July 9, 2002. An initial public meeting was held to primarily receive input from the Glendora city council. The intent of the session was for the city council to define their expectations pertaining to the Route 66 Corridor specific plan and to review and clarify the Route 66 Corridor specific plan scope of work and schedule.

B.      Property and Business Owners Workshop #1—July 29, 2002. The first of two workshops was held with the property and business owners to accomplish the following objectives: (1) provide an overview of the project; (2) review previous studies along the Route 66 Corridor; and (3) listen to and document issues, goals, priorities for the Route 66 Corridor.

C.      Community Workshop #1—August 1, 2002. The first of two workshops was held for the Glendora community to accomplish a number of objectives, including: (1) provide an overview of the project; (2) discuss previous studies in the corridor; (3) conduct a visual preference survey to determine preferred streetscape amenities and architectural treatments; and (4) listen to and document issues, goals, priorities for the Route 66 Corridor.

D.      City Council Update (City Council Workshop #2)—December 10, 2002. A public meeting was held with the city council to provide an update on the progress of the Route 66 Corridor specific plan process. The meeting was organized into two sections: (1) “What we’ve Done…” (focusing on Public Outreach Activities to date, Land Use Analysis, Urban Design/Streetscape, Design Guidelines, and the Parking Study); and (2) “What is Still Ahead…”

E.       Property and Business Owners Workshop #2—March 20, 2003. The second of two workshops for property and business owners was held to review and elicit comments pertaining to the following: economic/market analysis; draft land use concepts; urban design/streetscape concepts; and design guidelines concept.

F.       Community Workshop #2—March 27, 2003. The second of two workshops for the Glendora community was held to review and elicit comments pertaining to the following: economic/market analysis; draft land use concepts; urban design/streetscape concepts; and design guidelines concept.

G.      City Council Workshop (City Council Workshop #3)—April 29, 2003. A public meeting was held to present and receive comment from the city council and the community on the framework for the Route 66 Corridor specific plan. The direction received from the meeting provided the structure for preparing the public review draft of the Route 66 Corridor specific plan.

H.      Specific Plan Review Committee—July 2003. A specific plan review committee, consisting of members appointed by the city council was formed to review and comment on the initial draft specific plan. The specific plan review committee evaluated all components of the specific plan and compiled a consolidated report for review by the city council.

I.        Planning Commission Public Hearing—December 2, 2003. A public hearing was held with the planning commission to receive recommendations and conditions on the public review draft of the Route 66 Corridor specific plan.

J.       City Council Public Hearing—December 2, 2003. A public hearing was held with the city council to approve the public review draft of the Route 66 Corridor specific plan.

K.      City Council Public Meeting—December 9, 2014. Due to community concerns over the density, height, building setbacks, parking, community character, and other issues created by projects approved under the specific plan, the council held a special meeting to review the Route 66 Specific Plan.

L.       Community “Town Hall” Meeting—February 18, 2015. A public meeting was held where approximately one hundred residents attended and expressed dissatisfaction with development approved by the city under the Route 66 Specific Plan.

M.     Planning Commission Public Meetings—April 21, May 19, June 16, July 21, August 18, September 1 and October 6, 2015. The planning commission held seven public meetings to review each section of the Route 66 specific plan, receive and file public comments, and develop recommendations to revise the Route 66 specific plan so that development along the corridor was more in-line with the Glendora community character.

N.      City Council and Planning Commission Joint Public Meeting—November 15, 2015. A joint meeting of the council and commission was held to review the commission recommendations to revise the Route 66 specific plan.

O.      Presentation of Report by Economic Planning Systems (EPS) regarding economic and marking conditions and land use feasibility analysis. Report presented to the planning commission on December 8, 2016 and to the city council on February 28, 2017.

P.       Planning Commission Meeting—May 2, 2017. Presentation of draft revised Route 66 specific plan.

Q.      City Council and Planning Commission Joint Meeting—May 16, 2017. Presentation of draft revised Route 66 specific plan.

R.      Planning Commission Public Hearing—July 18, 2017.

S.       City Council Public Hearing—August 22, 2017. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.100 Specific plan policy framework.
A.      The Route 66 Corridor specific plan policy framework provides the primary policy guidance for the specific plan. All future development and redevelopment within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area shall be consistent with and take guidance from the principles and objectives as expressed in this article.

B.      The policy framework for the Route 66 Corridor specific plan is organized into the following sections:

1.       Specific Plan Planning Factors. Identifies the opportunities and constraints that influence and contribute to the successful implementation of the Route 66 Corridor specific plan.

2.       Specific Plan Guiding Principles. Provides the broad principles that future development and redevelopment in the specific plan area shall implement.

3.       Specific Plan Objectives. Provides more explicit policy statements that implement the specific plan’s guiding principles. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.110 Specific plan “planning factors.”
A.      A number of opportunities, constraints, issues, concerns, and positive and negative attributes—planning factors—exist that influenced the development of the Route 66 Corridor specific plan. Planning factors that contribute to the ultimate policy actions of this specific plan. The sources of these planning factors include: recommendations made by the Alosta Corridor committee; input received by the community and the city council during workshops on Route 66 (see above); input received by the community, planning commission and city council public meetings that resulted in a substantial revision to the policies and goals of the specific plan in 2017; and observations and analysis made throughout the Route 66 Corridor specific plan process.

B.      These planning factors, although not an exhaustive listing, form the policy foundation of the specific plan, seeking to optimize the consistency between the specific plan’s policy direction and the regulations and standards contained within. Throughout the initial stages of the planning process for Route 66, the following primary planning factors have been identified for the Route 66 Corridor specific plan. The revision of the specific plan, occurring during the period from 2014-2017, substantially altered the original goals of the Route 66 specific plan. The revised vision for the corridor is reflected in the planning factors:

1.       A significant body of work was generated under the guidance of the Alosta Corridor committee—with recommendations on property acquisition, land use, rehabilitation assistance, business attraction, business retention, streetscape, and environment—that forms a strong foundation for the Route 66 Corridor specific plan.

2.       Between 2003 and 2014, the specific plan did not satisfy community expectations or produce anticipated results. Mixed-use development, a primary objective of the specific plan, is weaker than anticipated. Factors contributing to weak mixed-use demand include the auto-oriented nature of Route 66, and an ample supply of existing commercial space. Additionally, development incentives and bonuses resulted in comparatively large buildings leading to significant community opposition to the specific plan. Insufficient parking requirements, on-street parking credits, and parking reductions have contributed to operational problems and persisting vacant mixed-use commercial spaces.

3.       Accelerated outsourcing of American manufacturing, the Great Recession, and the end of redevelopment in California are primary reasons that the Route 66 specific plan has not fulfilled expectations for commercial, industrial and hi-tech office development. Without redevelopment to assist in the assembly of viable commercial development sites, the economics do not support substantial private investment in these areas.

4.       Many distinctive character areas exist within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan that require tailored land use and urban design treatments to optimize their potential and most effectively respect the existing character unique to Glendora.

5.       Since Glendora is a community that is largely “built-out” and the Route 66 Corridor specific plan is an area that includes many small, shallow parcels, economic development and revitalization must be achieved through creative approaches that seek to optimize the potential of already “urbanized” land.

6.       Slow expected population and job growth in Glendora and the surrounding area suggests a slow future pace of economic development and associated new real estate development, but favorable socio-economic and demographic characteristics in Glendora may allow capture of a greater share of regional growth.

7.       The residents of Glendora strongly desire increased dining and family entertainment opportunities within the city; creating the market to support these amenities is a key challenge within the Route 66 Corridor.

8.       Glendora serves, and will likely continue to serve, as a bedroom community for out-commuters who work across a broad region between Los Angeles, Pasadena, Orange County, and the Inland Empire.

9.       Future plans of the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority will include the eastward extension of the Gold Line light rail transit system with a transit station in Glendora, (at the former railroad station site) providing unique development opportunities in the vicinity of the potential station.

10.     Public and private development within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area must be respectful of existing adjacent neighborhoods to ensure compatibility and minimize negative impacts to residential stability.

11.     Notable opportunities to improve the aesthetics of the architecture and streetscape within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area exist, which may contribute to enhanced economic development potential, improved sense of place, heightened community pride, and a more inviting environment for visitors.

12.     Recognizing that public resources must be distributed for optimal cost-benefit to the community, public investment in a renewed streetscape environment must leverage an image that supports the traditional character of Glendora while promoting a positive identity and serving as a catalyst for private reinvestment.

13.     The Glendora residential market has rebounded strongly from the Great Recession, which should lead to new residential development. Contributing to the demand for residential development is Glendora’s centralized location for commuters, high-quality schools, and a general shortage of housing in the southern California region. With the growing need for a variety of housing choices to accommodate a diverse range of income groups within the community, the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area should offer opportunities for new housing (to meet goals in the housing element and to comply with state mandates) and enhancing the condition of existing affordable housing (such as mobile home parks located along Route 66).

14.     The infrastructure system within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area must be adequate to support future development and, therefore, the Route 66 Corridor specific plan land use buildout assumptions must take into account the need for corresponding infrastructure to support future development.

15.     Grand Avenue and Glendora Avenue, two key corridors between Highway 210 and Route 66, serve as economic nodes connecting regional and local markets and to provide north-south gateways for the city.

16.     Traffic speed is a greater concern than traffic congestion with the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area; therefore traffic calming and enhancing the pedestrian-orientation and safety of streets in the area is important to the community.

17.     The area around the future Gold Line station is evolving into two functionally distinct areas. A barrier is created by the existing street layout and residential development north of the railroad track creates a natural transition from higher intensity development along Route 66 to the historic lower scale areas near to the Village.

18.     The development review and approval process employed in the city could benefit from adopted design guidelines to provide applicants with a reference for the quality of development expected by the city. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.120 Specific plan guiding principles.
The following guiding principles provide the foundation for Article IV and Article VI of the Route 66 specific plan, and are intended to serve as a benchmark for the analysis of future proposals and design concepts to determine if they are supportive of the spirit and intent of this plan.

A.      Guiding Principle 1.0. Increase and maintain an increased daytime employment and residential population.

B.      Guiding Principle 2.0. Coordinated land use, urban design, transportation, and infrastructure planning.

C.      Guiding Principle 3.0. Embracing flexible and diverse land uses that foster economic development opportunities for the Glendora community and contribute to a growing presence in the regional marketplace.

D.      Guiding Principle 4.0. Retention and expansion of existing businesses while accommodating the recruitment of new businesses.

E.       Guiding Principle 5.0. Improved pedestrian accessibility, vehicular access, and parking to establish safety and comfort throughout the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area.

F.       Guiding Principle 6.0. Enhanced streetscape and public amenities throughout the Route 66 specific plan area.

G.      Guiding Principle 7.0. Tailored land use regulations and design guidelines to encourage high quality development and rehabilitation.

H.      Guiding Principle 8.0. Improved visual and functional linkages between Route 66 and the Village, Grand Avenue and Glendora Avenue.

I.        Guiding Principle 10.0. Coordinated and focused change rather than “remove and replace” transformation to enhance sense of place and promote aesthetic improvements.

J.       Guiding Principle 11.0. Planning policy for future development that is respectful of the historic character of and community vision for Glendora. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.130 Specific plan objectives.
The following specific plan objectives are intended to support the goals and policies of the Glendora general plan, implement the guiding principles identified above in this article, and further the overall spirit and intent of the Route 66 specific plan:

A.      Land Use Objectives.

1.       Specific Plan Objective LU-1. Encourage private investment in the Route 66 Corridor.

2.       Specific Plan Objective LU-2. Establish land use districts that create unique character areas within the Route 66 Corridor.

3.       Specific Plan Objective LU-3. Establish land use districts that encourage high quality development responsive to market demands and Glendora community objectives.

4.       Specific Plan Objective LU-4. Establish land use regulations that support increased pedestrian activity in key focus areas.

5.       Specific Plan Objective LU-5. Coordinate land use planning with transportation and infrastructure planning.

6.       Specific Plan Objective LU-6. Develop incentives to encourage the consolidation of smaller parcels for reuse of underutilized land.

7.       Specific Plan Objective LU-7. Provide specific requirements that enhance public amenities for new development, rehabilitation, and redevelopment.

8.       Specific Plan Objective LU-8. Maximize neighborhood retail development opportunities to capture demand and compliment other land uses.

9.       Specific Plan Objective LU-9. Allow a mix of residential land uses.

10.     Specific Plan Objective LU-10. Allow for mixed-use, residential, and commercial development.

11.     Specific Plan Objective LU-11. Allow a mix of land uses to capitalize on the market potential from neighboring college and university.

12.     Specific Plan Objective LU-12. Encourage office and business park development.

B.      Circulation, Parking and Transportation Objectives.

1.       Specific Plan Objective CIR-1. Ensure improved pedestrian mobility, safety, and comfort.

2.       Specific Plan Objective CIR-2. Ensure potential transportation impacts of the Route 66 Corridor specific plan are identified and mitigated to the greatest extent feasible.

3.       Specific Plan Objective CIR-3. Ensure vehicular traffic level of service (LOS) within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area does not exceed adopted citywide standards.

4.       Specific Plan Objective CIR-4. Establish a correlation between development in high activity locations and access to existing and planned transportation modes.

5.       Specific Plan Objective CIR-5. Introduce traffic calming techniques to improve pedestrian-orientation, aesthetics, and safety.

C.      Infrastructure Objectives. Specific Plan Objective INF-1. Ensure infrastructure capacity within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area meets future demands.

D.      Environmental Objectives.

1.       Specific Plan Objective ENV-1. Ensure potential environmental effects of the specific plan are mitigated to a less than significant level where feasible.

2.       Specific Plan Objective ENV-2. Adopt a program-level environmental clearance document to utilize in subsequent development within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area.

3.       Specific Plan Objective ENV-3. Establish methods and strategies for the conservation of resources, including water use and drought tolerant landscaping.

E.       Urban Design Objectives.

1.       Specific Plan Objective UD-1. Establish a “sense of place” through quality site design, architectural design and public improvements.

2.       Specific Plan Objective UD-2. Encourage the development of a design context for private development that reflects 40’s and 50’s nostalgia, art deco design, craftsman design and the citrus industry heritage of the community.

3.       Specific Plan Objective UD-3. Ensure new development is designed in the context of the historic character of Glendora.

4.       Specific Plan Objective UD-4. Establish a streetscape program using signage, street furniture, entry statements, and other visual amenities that conveys the traditional character of Glendora, withstands the test of time, is cost-effective, and achieves a stronger community image and identity.

5.       Specific Plan Objective UD-5. Create gateway design treatments that establish entry statements at key high activity locations.

6.       Specific Plan Objective UD-6. Adopt design guidelines that are applicable to new development, rehabilitation, and redevelopment.

F.       Implementation and Administration Objectives.

1.       Specific Plan Objective IMP-1. Establish a review process for discretionary development application.

2.       Specific Plan Objective IMP-2. Utilize Environmental Impact Report as the primary tiering clearance document to streamline additional project-level environmental reviews.

3.       Specific Plan Objective IMP-3. Integrate design guidelines within the design review process to streamline discretionary review. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

Article IV. Development Plan
21.10.140 General.
This article provides a summary of the preferred land use plan, streetscape/community design and the associated infrastructure improvements necessary to accommodate the future build-out of the specific plan. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.150 Land use plan.
The land use plan for the Route 66 Corridor specific plan provides for the development of nine distinct planning subdistricts, including the land uses described below. The Route 66 Corridor specific plan land use map depicts the boundaries for each land use subdistrict with the specific plan project area. Exhibit 4-1—Land Use Plan provides a graphic depiction of the specific plan area. The following is a brief description of the land use subdistricts for the Route 66 Corridor specific plan. Detailed descriptions of the land uses are provided in Article VI.

A.      Barranca Gateway. The Barranca Gateway district is intended to serve as the western gateway into the city. General features of the district include:

1.       Streetscape enhancement;

2.       Street-oriented, pedestrian-focused development;

3.       Mix of uses including residential, commercial and retail development;

4.       Establishment of uses that capitalize on adjacent market potential;

5.       Development that respects adjacent residential development.

B.      Grand Avenue Commercial Gateway. The Grand Avenue commercial gateway district is intended to enhance Grand Avenue’s function as a primary commercial/retail district within the city. General features of the district include:

1.       Streetscape enhancement;

2.       Establishment of a primary local and regional commercial node;

3.       Improvement of the districts function as a southern gateway;

4.       Higher intensity commercial development.

C.      Town Center Mixed Use. The town center mixed use district is intended to provide for a complementary mix of land use and development types that are compatible with and reinforce pedestrian activity and transit utilization. General features of the district include:

1.       Streetscape enhancement;

2.       Encouragement of future transit use;

3.       Mix of uses including residential, commercial and retail development;

4.       Expanded housing opportunities;

5.       Street-oriented, pedestrian-friendly development.

D.      Glendora Avenue Gateway. The Glendora Avenue Gateway is intended to support medical uses around a hospital and medical building within walking distance of transit. General features of the district include:

1.       Streetscape enhancement;

2.       Encouragement of future transit uses;

3.       Expanded job opportunities;

4.       Medical campus serving the community.

E.       Route 66 Service Commercial. The Route 66 service commercial district is intended to provide for a variety of smaller-scale commercial, office and light industrial/manufacturing uses. General features of the district include:

1.       Streetscape enhancement;

2.       Establishment of locally-serving commercial uses;

3.       Facilitation of site improvements and rehabilitation;

4.       Facilitation of lot consolidation.

F.       Central Route 66 Residential. The Route 66 residential district is intended to contribute to the mix of housing choices offered to Glendora residents and provide consistency with the Glendora general plan 2013-2021 housing element. General features of the district include:

1.       Streetscape enhancement;

2.       Expanded housing opportunities;

3.       Locally-serving retail and commercial use at corner locations.

G.      Lone Hill Gateway. The Lone Hill Gateway district is intended to serve as the eastern gateway of Glendora’s Route 66 Corridor. General features of the district include:

1.       Streetscape enhancement;

2.       View preservation;

3.       Enhancement as a locally-serving commercial node;

4.       Capitalize on market potential of adjacent employment.

H.      Glendora Technology, Commerce and Office. The Glendora technology, commerce and office district is intended to serve as a primary employment center within the city. General features of the district include:

1.       Streetscape enhancement;

2.       Expansion of employment base;

3.       Focused development of corporate office and high-tech use.

I.        The Grand/Route 66 Gateway. The Grand/Route 66 Gateway district has been established to ensure that this key gateway intersection provides the mass and scale and quality, well-designed architectural features including significant landscaping, courtyards and public plazas to establish a “sense of place” creating a unique Glendora theme of beauty, pedestrian scale, and enriched quality of life. General features of the district include:

1.       Pedestrian-oriented site planning and design;

2.       Provision for public spaces, plazas and courtyards;

3.       Minimum height, mass and scale standards to highlight the importance of the intersection;

4.       Provision for a mix of office/retail uses;

5.       Excellence of architectural design, materials and landscaping creating a sense of place;

6.       Uses specified to enhance the gateway theme for the district. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.160 Circulation plan.
A.      The circulation plan for the Route 66 Corridor specific plan provides for the mitigation of potentially significant impacts associated with the preferred land use plan. As a component of this project, a comprehensive traffic analysis was conducted to identify existing conditions, forecasted future conditions and mitigation measures to address project-related significant impacts. The traffic analysis and mitigation measures are provided in the specific plan environmental impact report and appendices. The traffic study analyzed the forecast traffic impacts associated with the proposed Route 66 Corridor specific plan project located north of Interstate 210 (I-210) along Route 66 between Barranca Parkway and Amelia Avenue in the city.

B.      The study intersections, as shown in Exhibit 4-2a—Study Intersection Locations, are currently operating at an acceptable LOS (LOS C or better) during the p.m. peak hour according to city performance criteria, with the exception of four intersections:

1.       Lone Hill Avenue/Route 66;

2.       Lone Hill Avenue/Westbound I-210 ramps;

3.       Lone Hill Avenue/Eastbound I-210 ramp; and

4.       Lone Hill Avenue/Auto Centre Drive.

C.      The study intersections are forecast to operate at an acceptable LOS (LOS C or better) during the p.m. peak hour according to city performance criteria for forecast year 2020 without project conditions, with the exception of the following five intersections:

1.       Lone Hill Avenue/Route 66;

2.       Grand Avenue/Eastbound I-210 on-ramp;

3.       Lone Hill Avenue/Westbound I-210 ramps;

4.       Lone Hill Avenue/Eastbound I-210 ramps; and

5.       Lone Hill Avenue/Auto Centre Drive.

D.      The proposed project is forecast to generate approximately fifty-eight thousand nine hundred sixty-three daily trips, which includes approximately four thousand five hundred sixty-two p.m. peak-hour trips.

E.       The following eight intersections are operating at a deficient LOS (LOS D or worse) during the p.m. peak hour according to city performance criteria for forecast year 2020 with project conditions:

1.       Grand Avenue/Route 66;

2.       Glendora Avenue/Route 66;

3.       Lone Hill Avenue/Route 66;

4.       Grand Avenue/Eastbound I-210 on-ramp;

5.       Lone Hill Avenue/I-210 WB ramps;

6.       Lone Hill Avenue/I-210 EB ramps;

7.       Lone Hill Avenue/Auto Centre Drive; and

8.       Grand Avenue/Baseline Road.

F.       Also, based on city thresholds of significance, seven significant impacts are forecast to occur at the following intersections for forecast year 2020 with project conditions:

1.       Grand Avenue/Route 66;

2.       Lone Hill Avenue/Route 66;

3.       Grand Avenue/Eastbound I-210 on-ramp;

4.       Lone Hill Avenue/I-210 WB ramps;

5.       Lone Hill Avenue/I-210 EB ramps;

6.       Lone Hill Avenue/Auto Centre Drive; and

7.       Grand Avenue/Baseline Road.

G.      The following mitigation measures, as shown on Exhibit 4-3—Improved Forecast Year 2020 with Project Intersection Geometry, are recommended to address the project-related significant impacts:

1.       Grand Avenue/Route 66. Widen the eastbound Route 66 approach from one left-turn lane, two through lanes, and one right-turn lane to consist of one left turn lane, three through lanes, and one right-turn lane.

2.       Grand Avenue/Eastbound I-210 On-ramp. Widen the southbound Grand Avenue approach from one left-turn lane and three through lanes to consist of two left-turn lanes and three through lanes.

3.       Lone Hill Avenue/Westbound I-210 Ramps. Widen the northbound Lone Hill Avenue approach from one left-turn lane and two through lanes to consist of three left-turn lanes and two through lanes. Widen the southbound Lone Hill Avenue approach from three through lanes and one right-turn lane to consist of four through lanes and one right-turn lane. Widen the westbound I-210 off-ramp from one left-turn lane and one shared left-/right-turn lane to consist of two left-turn lanes and two right-turn lanes.

4.       Lone Hill Avenue/Eastbound I-210 Ramps. Widen the southbound Lone Hill Avenue approach from one left-turn lane and three through lanes to consist of two left-turn lanes and three through lanes.

5.       Lone Hill Avenue/Auto Centre Drive. Widen the westbound Auto Centre Drive approach from two left-turn lanes and one right-turn lane to consist of two left-turn lanes and two right-turn lanes.

6.       Grand Avenue/Baseline Road. Modify the eastbound and westbound Baseline Road approach signal phasing from split-phasing to consist of permitted phasing.

H.      At the Lone Hill Avenue/Route 66 intersection, a Shell Service Station located in the southwest quadrant and an Arco Service Station located in the northwest quadrant of the intersection constrain the physical right-of-way necessary at this intersection to implement physical improvements to mitigate the forecast significant impact.

I.        Based on Los Angeles County CMP thresholds of significance, three significant impacts are forecast to occur at the following intersections for forecast year 2020 with project conditions:

1.       Grand Avenue/Eastbound I-210 on-ramp;

2.       Lone Hill Avenue/I-210 WB ramps; and

3.       Lone Hill Avenue/I-210 EB ramps.

J.       The addition of project-generated trips at the CMP study segments does not result in a significant impact according to the Los Angeles County CMP established thresholds of significance for forecast year 2020 with project conditions. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.170 Community design/streetscape plan.
A.      Introduction. The purpose of the community design and streetscape section is to establish conceptual designs and guidelines for streetscape improvements within public rights-of-way along the Route 66 Corridor. The section presents gateway concepts, streetscape furniture, street trees, and a wayfinding program intended to further the goals and objectives for community design for the Route 66 specific plan project area.

B.      Gateway Concepts. The Route 66 Corridor specific plan project area includes several important entry gateways and activity nodes that can be enhanced to contribute an improved sense of arrival and a strong presence along the primary roadways. The streetscape program provides a visual sense of identification of the corridor and the functional benefit of shaded pedestrian walkways. Four primary entries within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan project area are identified for the incorporation of special treatment—these include the intersections of Barranca Avenue/Route 66, Grand Avenue/Route 66, Glendora Avenue/Route 66, and Lone Hill Avenue/Route 66. Additionally, the Grand and Glendora Avenue corridors include various improvements that further contribute to the enhancement of these primary gateways.

1.       Barranca Avenue Gateway Concept. The Barranca Avenue gateway concept, as shown in Exhibit 4-4 Barranca Entry Gateway Improvement, is envisioned as the western gateway into the city of Glendora. The Barranca Gateway design concept seeks to provide the western “front door” to the city, through the establishment of distinctive streetscape, hardscape and other on-site and off-site amenities.

a.       Barranca Avenue Streetscape. Placing street trees behind a new eight-foot sidewalk on the south side and behind the existing eight-foot sidewalk on the north “opens up” the Route 66 entry area. Street trees (London Plane) are placed in a four-foot-wide planter strip with a continuous hedge where feasible. Traditional acorn-style streetlights placed at approximately one hundred twenty feet on center add to the pedestrian level lighting. Wide bands of river rock crossing the street draw attention to the gateway intersection.

Along the east side of Barranca, streetscape improvements, including special paving, street furniture, planted hedge and street trees are continued.

b.       Gateway Corner Treatment. Gateway corner treatments include a curved river rock accent wall planted with bougainvillea. Special colored concrete paving delineate sidewalks and crosswalks and river rock bands accent the special paving.

c.       Barranca Gateway Median. The use of river rock softens and helps to create a more visually appealing median. A series of river rock planters culminating in a large Route 66 entry statement on a river rock base serve as the median’s focal point.

d.       Barranca Gateway Pedestrian Details. Custom river rock walls with built-in benches and planters placed along pedestrian connections and passageways enhance the overall pedestrian scale of the gateway. Occasional planters and unique overhead trellises add to the pedestrian environment. The use of shade trees is an important element for enhancing the pedestrian environment.

2.       Grand Avenue (South) Gateways. The Grand Avenue (South) gateway design concept, as shown in Exhibit 4-5—Grand Avenue Gateway South Improvements, focuses on streetscape and corridor improvements to establish a formalized approach to the Glendora/Route 66 gateway and provide a prominent southern entry statement into the city.

a.       Grand Avenue Gateway (South) Streetscape. At Baseline Road, new species of street trees on Grand Avenue are placed in tree wells only on the east side where the sidewalk is provides the necessary right-of-way.

Continuing north on Grand Avenue, a grove effect begins with the introduction of a planted parkway and trees in the median. To accommodate the parkway and to encourage more appropriate vehicular traffic, the roadway is narrowed.

b.       Rock Walls. Curved river rock walls placed in the landscaped parkway between Baseline and the surface road act as a screen to the residential area facing the freeway off-ramp, as well as introduce a thematic element used throughout the specific plan area.

The existing linear residential walls along Grand Avenue are resurfaced with a river rock veneer and concrete caps to continue this thematic river rock element.

c.       Grand Avenue Gateway Corner Treatments. Replacing the existing safety railing at the Baseline intersection with a large curved monument wall celebrates the entry to the city. Special paving and river rock bands highlight the crosswalks at both Baseline and Mauna Loa.

3.       Grand Avenue Entry Gateway. The Grand Avenue Entry gateway design concept, as shown in Exhibit 4-6—Grand Avenue Gateway Improvements, is comprised of three distinct zones that transition the traveler into the Grand Avenue/Route 66 Gateway through the use street trees, while also creating attractive and appropriately scaled neighborhood entries.

a.       Grand Avenue Streetscape. A grove effect is created between Mauna Loa and Colorado through a narrowing of the roadway and a double-row of Oak Trees planted in the parkway with a single row in the median.

At Colorado, the median trees are discontinued and replaced one row of Oaks are replaced with curb-adjacent Mexican Fan Palms that begin to frame the view to the mountains.

At the intersection of Route 66, the roadway widens slightly and a single row of Mexican Fan Palms frame views of the mountains to the north.

b.       Grand Avenue Corner Treatments. The primary intersection of Grand and Route 66 is treated with curved river rock accent walls on each corner planted with lush bougainvillea. Special accent colored concrete paving is incorporated in the corner sidewalks and crosswalks with a river rock banding.

c.       Neighborhood Entries. Neighborhood entries at Mauna Loa and Colorado are noted with bump-outs and small river rock monuments. At Mauna Loa, crosswalks are treated with special colored paving and river rock bands.

4.       Glendora Avenue Entry Gateway. The Glendora Avenue gateway design concept, as shown in Exhibit 4-7—Glendora Avenue Gateway Improvements, represents an important Route 66 intersection. The gateway design concepts seeks to significantly improve the functional and visual connection between the Route 66 Corridor and the city’s Village area. Through streetscape improvements, entry signage, river rock amenities and the preservation and enhancement of mountain views, the gateway establishes a stronger connection with the Village area and Route 66 Corridor.

a.       Glendora Avenue Streetscape. Traveling north on Glendora Avenue, curb-adjacent tall Mexican Fan Palms placed approximately forty feet on center frame the views to the mountains. Continuing north through the Route 66/Glendora intersection, Glendora Avenue narrows to allow for a more intimate, pedestrian scale link to the Village and the potential future transit center. The treatment in this area includes double rows of alternating Oak Trees and Mexican Fan Palms.

Along Route 66, evenly spaced London Plane street trees placed behind the sidewalk in a four-foot planted hedge “open up” the gateway. Traditional acorn lights are placed at the curb, approximately one hundred twenty feet on center.

b.       Glendora Avenue Gateway Median. The Glendora Avenue medians provide a series of cascading river rock planters with bougainvillea spilling over the top provide a more formal entry statement to the Village area. These planters are also an appropriate location for a Village entry sign.

c.       Glendora Avenue Corner Treatment. Curb details include curved river rock walls planted with bougainvillea. Special colored concrete paving highlight sidewalks and crosswalks, while bands of river rock placed flush with the surface provide further details.

5.       Glendora Avenue Village Connection. The Glendora Avenue Village connection design concept, as shown in Exhibit 4-8—Glendora Avenue Village Connection, emphasizes the maintenance and enhancement of a pedestrian-friendly zone between the Village, the future transit area and Route 66.

a.       Glendora Avenue Village Connection Streetscape. Wide sidewalks of twelve feet or more with street trees planted in curb adjacent tree wells, along with the existing diagonal on-street parking, characterize the streetscape. Bump-outs, enhanced paving at crosswalks, and a mid-block crosswalk between Carroll and Foothill improve pedestrian safety and mobility. Building new structures at the sidewalk edge encourages retail-commercial storefront visibility and adds to the pedestrian experience.

6.       Glendora Avenue Pedestrian Linkage. The Glendora Avenue pedestrian linkage design concept, as shown in Exhibit 4-9—Glendora Avenue Pedestrian Linkage, focuses on enhancing the future transit area streetscape and links to both the Village and Route 66.

a.       Glendora Avenue Pedestrian Linkage Streetscape. The Glendora Avenue pedestrian linkage provides for a continuous pedestrian linkage from Route 66 to the Village by bringing the Village streetscape enhancements down to the transit area. Similarly, extend the Glendora Avenue streetscape concept of a narrower roadway and wider sidewalks into the transit area. Special pedestrian enhancements and amenities in the transit area connect the Village to the Route 66 pedestrian linkages along Glendora Avenue. Narrowing the roadway width allows for wider sidewalks and more amenities, including a double row of alternating bi-canopy trees consisting of high-canopy Mexican Fan Palms in curb-adjacent tree wells and Oak Trees in tree wells at the back of the sidewalk.

b.       Glendora Avenue Pedestrian Linkage Focal Points. The Glendora Avenue pedestrian linkage creates a focal point at the northern end of the potential transit area that will provide a visual connection between the Village and transit area. Likewise, a focal point at the southern end of the potential station area provides a similar visual connection to Route 66.

Roundabouts are included as a unifying element to the streetscape. The roundabouts are intended to strengthen pedestrian activity and comfort. Additionally, the roundabouts promote the calming of traffic along Glendora Avenue.

7.       Lone Hill Avenue Gateway Concept. The Lone Hill Avenue gateway design concept, as shown in Exhibit 4-10—Lone Hill Gateway Improvements, is intended to provide a welcoming “front door” through streetscape and preservation of views to the San Gabriel Mountain, implementing streetscape enhancements consistent with the overall corridor.

a.       Lone Hill Gateway Streetscape. Tall Mexican Fan Palms planted on Lone Hill at approximately forty feet on center preserve and frame views north to the mountains and complement the existing rows of palms on Lone Hill north of the Route 66.

Along Route 66, the streetscape includes an eight-foot curb adjacent sidewalk with a four-foot planted parkway and a single row of evenly spaced high canopy London Plane street trees. Traditional acorn-style streetlights placed at approximately one hundred twenty feet on center add to the pedestrian level lighting. Bands of river rock bisect the street intersections to draw attention to the gateway intersection.

b.       Lone Hill Gateway Median. The use of river rock softens and creates a more visually appealing median. A series of river rock planters culminating in a large Route 66 entry statement on a river rock base serves as the Lone Hill median’s focal point.

c.       Lone Hill Gateway Corner Treatments. The corner details at Lone Hill provide design consistency with the primary gateways in the project area, including a curved river rock accent wall planted with bougainvillea. Special colored concrete paving delineate sidewalks and crosswalks and river rock bands are used to accent the special paving.

C.      Street Furniture and Tree Design Concept. Creation of an enhanced pedestrian-scaled streetscape environment is an important component of the overall urban design concept. The street furniture, transit shelters, and street trees identified in this section are representative of styles and preferences determined by the community through a townscan visual preference survey conducted during a community workshop. The visual preference survey enabled Glendora residents to visually articulate their preferences for the future.

1.       Streetscape Furniture Palette. The preferred streetscape furniture palette for the Route 66 Corridor, as shown on Exhibit 4-11—Route 66 Furniture Palette, includes a variety of elements to create the desired Route 66 identity. All coated and metal surfaced furniture is envisioned as a dark green to match the fixtures in the Village.

a.       “Glendora” sidewalk pole with single acorn fixture by SOLO, Southern California Edison fourteen feet in height with banner attachments;

b.       Six-foot Courtyard Series Bench by Washbash Valley, designed with green rib pattern/ribbon style and plastisol or vinyl-coated steel with custom Route 66 logo;

c.       Green rib pattern/ribbon style thirty-two-gallon flare top trash receptacle by Wabash Valley (catalog #LRR32F) with plastisol or vinyl coated steel;

d.       Zig-zag-shaped concrete interlocking concrete pavers in a herringbone pattern to match existing pavers in the Village;

e.       Custom low seat walls, planters and neighborhood entry monuments made from river rock.

2.       Street Trees. Trees are an important design element in the Route 66 streetscape. The Route 66 street trees were selected based upon their shape, size, and maintenance, as well as upon the citrus heritage of the city. Recommended street trees include:

a.       Mexican Fan Palm (Washingtonian robusta)—an evergreen fan palm with fast growth up to one hundred feet. Trees are to be used in sidewalk cutouts and parkways on north-south streets to frame views.

b.       Oaks (Holly, California Live Oak, Virginian Oak)—an evergreen oak with slow to moderate growth with rounded canopy of forty to fifty feet. Trees to be used in large parkways and medians.

c.       London Plane (Platanus X acerifolia)—Deciduous tree with moderate growth up to sixty feet with thirty-foot canopy. To be used in sidewalk cutouts, parkways and medians.

d.       Citrus (Lemon or Orange Tree)—an evergreen tree with slow growth and small canopy. Trees to be used in special circumstances only for public space or heritage areas.

e.       Ficus trees to match existing in areas adjacent to the Village.

D.      Signage and Monumentation. Signage and monumentation design concepts for the Route 66 Corridor specific plan project area establish an enhanced identity through the establishment of gateway monument concepts, wayfinding directional signs, and banner concepts.

1.       Gateway Monumentation. Gateway monumentation establishes a visual identity for the Route 66 Corridor identity and provides visual cues to gateway entries. The Route 66 gateway concepts are based on a river rock, natural theme and include curved walls, median planters, and freestanding monument signs. Gateway monumentation features and depicted in Exhibits 4-4 through 4-10.

2.       Transit Shelters. Alternative transportation, including bus service is and will continue to be an important service in Route 66 district. There are a number of opportunities to create unique and interesting transit shelters that contribute to the overall design concept in the district. Exhibit 4-12—Transit Shelter Concepts, illustrates two design concepts including a craftsman-style shelter and a mission-style shelter, consisting of a river rock base and the Route 66 motif.

3.       Wayfinding Signage. The Route 66 wayfinding signage design concept is based on the assertion that when people find it easy to navigate an area, they will be more likely to spend time in a place. When it is difficult to find one’s way around, the tendency is to spend less time there. To enhance wayfinding within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan project area, a family of signs concept has been developed. As shown in Exhibit 4-13—Family of Signs Concept, the “family of signs” concept utilizes the Route 66 logo and includes both vehicular and pedestrian-oriented signs. Pole mounted signs are of green metal consistent with the streetlights and benches and the freestanding signs are composed of river rock consistent with gateway monumentation. Wayfinding signage includes the following features:

a.       Directional signs (transit center, parking, etc.);

b.       Street name signs;

c.       Banner attachment;

d.       Pedestrian information sign;

e.       Parking entry signs.

4.       Banner Concepts. Banners help to further identify the Route 66 Corridor specific plan project area and strengthen the sense of place. The banner concept illustrated in Exhibit 4-14—Route 66 Banner Concepts, incorporates three alternative banner concepts that include the Route 66 motif and a historical citrus packing label from the city.

5.       Screenwall Concepts. The Route 66 screenwall design concept is intended to provide an ability to screen existing uses or facilities that may not contribute to the overall visual character of the project area. The screenwall concept, as shown in Exhibit 4-15—Screenwall Concept, consist of a river rock wall, with design features that soften the screenwall appearance at the street. Design features included concrete stone caps, jogged wall planes and landscape and climbing vines. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.180 Infrastructure plan.
This section describes the required infrastructure improvements necessary to meet the demands of the preferred land use plan. As this project is a policy-level plan, it should be noted that the timing of all infrastructure improvements identified in this section represent the ultimate buildout conditions of the Route 66 Corridor specific plan.

A.      Domestic Water System.

1.       Domestic Water—Existing Conditions.

a.       The city’s water delivery system was created through the purchase of small private water companies and by the city’s own expansion projects. As shown in Exhibit 4-16—Existing Domestic Water System, the system is comprised of eleven service zones containing approximately two hundred miles of pipe. The city receives water from two sources; groundwater pumping, and imported water obtained from the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California. Portions of the water supply system have been identified as requiring rehabilitation or replacement in the near-term. This is mainly due to reaches of pipe that are over fifty years old, or pipe diameters that do not meet city standards for providing current fire flow requirements.

b.       The Route 66 Corridor specific plan area is located in the city’s zone 1 and zone 2 service areas. The land use districts located in the zone 1 service area are: Barranca gateway, town center mixed use, Route 66 service commercial (portion), Grand Avenue gateway mixed use and central Route 66 residential. Zone 1 is the largest zone within the city’s system, and varies in elevation from six hundred twenty feet above mean sea level (amsl) at Gladstone Street and Barranca Avenue to eight hundred ninety feet amsl at Ben Lomond north of Sierra Madre Avenue. The zone is served from a high water elevation of 969.5 feet amsl by five reservoirs. Refer to Exhibit 4-16—Existing Domestic Water System for identification of the existing zone 1 system within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area.

c.       The zone 2 service area is located to the east of zone 1. The development areas in the zone 2 service area are: Lone Hill Gateway and Glendora technology/commercial/office and the remaining portion of Route 66 service commercial. Zone 2 service elevations vary from eight hundred ten feet amsl at Alosta Avenue and the Big Dalton Wash to one thousand thirty feet amsl north of Oak Knoll Drive, with a high water level of one thousand ninety feet amsl. Four reservoirs provide head to the zone with locations at three different sites. The zone 2 system within the specific plan area is shown in Exhibit 4-16—Existing Domestic Water System.

d.       The existing domestic water demand for the specific plan area was calculated using the current land use, and demand factors from the city’s water master plan. Demands were calculated for each of the land use districts, based on a field survey identifying existing land uses by visual appearance, and information obtained in the city’s geographic information system (GIS). Table 4-2—Water Demand Factors summarizes the water usage factors used for this study, as provided in Table V-3 of the city’s WMP.

 

Table 4-2

Water Demand Factors

 

 

Land Use

Residential Water Demand Factor (gpd/du)

Non-Residential Water Demand Factor (gpd/ac)

Commercial

—

2900

Single-Family

600

—

Multifamily

400

—

Mobilehome

400

—

Motel

—

2900

Medical

—

4600

Religious

—

2000

 

e.       The existing average day water demand for the specific plan area is calculated in Table 4-2—Water Demand Factors to be 0.98 MGD. Using the max day factor of 1.85 from the WMP, the existing max day demand is estimated to be one thousand two hundred fifty-four gallons per minute (gpm).

f.        Under the water master plan, several recommendations were made. The WMP determined several reaches of pipe within the study area to be either undersized for fire flow requirements or of such age that replacement was recommended. Most of the existing system currently remains the same as it was at the time of the writing of the WMP. In particular, the backbone to both the zones 1 and 2 systems is a parallel eight-inch loop running on each side of Route 66. These parallel lines were constructed in 1935—1936 and 1954. Therefore, the WMP (which set a fifty year lifespan) determined these pipelines require upgrading.

2.       Proposed Domestic Water System Improvements.

a.       A water demand analysis was performed for this study. Existing demands were estimated for the study area shown in Exhibit 4-17—Domestic Water System Improvements, as described above. Identical water usage factors (per Table V-3 of the city WMP as included in the appendix) were applied to the existing and proposed land uses for the specific plan area. Table 4-3—Estimated Domestic Water Demand summarizes the estimated demands and provides a side-by-side comparison. The average day demand for the proposed redeveloped area is 1.41 MGD. The max day demand for the proposed redevelopment area is one thousand eight hundred ten gpm.

b.       The proposed system recommended should be planned to current operating standards, or as close to current standards as feasible. According to the city staff, the existing system was based upon an approximate one thousand two hundred fifty gpm fire flow for residential and small commercial land use, and two thousand five hundred for large commercial. The current fire flow standard is provided in the WMP for the city which states: two thousand two hundred fifty gpm for two hours for single-family residential, two thousand five hundred gpm for two hours for multifamily residential, one thousand seven hundred fifty gpm for two hours for mobilehome and five thousand gpm for five hours for large commercial. Eight inch lines under current fire flow standards are typically only sufficient for mobile home or single-family residential land uses. The WMP includes recommendations to replace the two eight-inch lines with a single eighteen-inch line to serve both sides of Route 66. However, the city has decided to continue maintaining a parallel system. The parallel pipeline layout facilitates service to each side of the street. Therefore, it is recommended that a fourteen-inch diameter pipe replace each eight-inch pipeline in order to provide the same capacity as the master-planned eighteen-inch.

c.       Based on this analysis, the following is a list of recommended system improvements for adequate service to the Route 66 Corridor redevelopment project:

i.        The zone 2 eight-inch diameter pipelines within Route 66 from Lorraine Avenue east to Amelia Avenue should be upsized to fourteen-inch or dual twelve-inch diameter pipelines to achieve the anticipated five thousand gpm fire flow requirements of the “Route 66 Commercial” land use district.

ii.       Upsize the pipeline in Lorraine Avenue as proposed in the WMP (Improvement Project E-4) to a minimum of a sixteen-inch for the looped system within zone 1.

d.       Exhibit 4-17—Domestic Water System Improvements, shows the changes recommended for the system. The proposed system upgrades described here will improve system capacity. However, computer modeling would be necessary to verify that current fire flow standards are met.

 

Table 4-3

Estimated Domestic Water Demand

 

REFER TO SPECIFIC PLAN EIR

 

B.      Wastewater System.

1.       Existing Wastewater System.

a.       The portion of the city’s wastewater system that will be used for the Route 66 Corridor redevelopment project is a gravity system that flows to the Los Angeles County Sanitation District 22 trunk sewer lines. The city’s gravity sewers will collect the generated wastewater flows within the specific plan area. The general direction of the wastewater flow is east to west. The Lorraine Avenue Trunk and Baseline Road Trunk sewers convey the flows from the existing land uses within the study area to the main Los Angeles County Sanitation trunk tie-in at the intersection of Barranca Avenue and Baseline Road. Exhibit 4-18—Wastewater System shows alignments and diameters of the existing sewers within the study area.

b.       In the absence of city standards, typical industry-standard water-to-wastewater “return” ratios were used for estimating wastewater flows. The return ratio figures are derived from standards of similar water agencies within Southern California, as shown in Table 4-4—Water Demand/Wastewater Generation Factors.

 

Table 4-4

Water Demand/Wastewater Generation Factors

 

 

Land use

Return Ratio (%)

Residential Water Demand Factor (gpd/du)

Wastewater Generation Factor (gpd/ac)

Non-Residential Water Demand Factor (gpd/ac)

Wastewater Generation Factor (gpd/ac)

Commercial

85

—

—

2900

2465

Single-Family

50

600

300

—

—

Multifamily

75

400

300

—

—

Mobilehome

75

400

300

—

—

Motel

80

—

—

2900

2320

Medical

100

—

—

4600

4600

Religious

80

—

—

2000

1600

 

c.       The proposed redevelopment will increase the flow to the sewers serving the specific plan area. Redevelopment within the specific plan area consists of various land uses. The two thousand nine hundred gpd/ac demand factor was used for the study for all commercial areas as a conservative assumption.

d.       Consultation with Los Angeles County Sanitation District No. 22 and the city has indicated that the current sewer system should have sufficient capacity for the additional flows. Table 4-5—Estimated Wastewater Generation provides an analysis of the system by estimating the flows by land use district (location).

 

Table 4-5

Estimated Wastewater Generation

 

REFER TO SPECIFIC PLAN EIR

 

e.       Differences between “existing” and “proposed” at intermediate points within the study area. The existing average flow for the study area is calculated as 0.79 MGD. All of the defined land use districts are estimated to increase wastewater flow to some degree. Table 4-6—Estimated Flow Increases, summarizes estimated flow increase percentages at selected intermediate locations.

 

Table 4-6

Estimated Flow Increases

 

 

#

Location of Sewer

Sewer Diameter (inches)

Estimated Percent of Flow Increase (%)

1

Elwood and Route 66

12

48

2

East end of Mauna Loa Avenue

15

49

3

Glendora and Route 66

10

23

4

Baseline and Glendora

15

48

5

Grand Avenue and Route 66

15

33

6

Baseline and Grand Avenue

18

39

7

Barranca and Baseline

18

34

 

f.        Table 4-7—Capacity by Pipe Diameter, was developed using the Flowmaster software by Haestad Methods to determine the capacity of different diameter pipes resulted in the following values:

 

Table 4-7

Capacity by Pipe Diameter

 

 

Pipe Diameter (inches)

Minimum Slope (ft/ft)*

Full Capacity (gpm)

8

0.0033

300

10

0.0024

500

12

0.0018

700

15

0.0012

1300

18

0.0012

2000

Note:

*       commonly used industry minimum slopes.

 

g.       Based upon correspondence with the Los Angeles County Sanitation District, the Baseline Avenue trunk sewer is currently being monitored. It is estimated that the flows from the Route 66 Corridor study area will increase by approximately thirty-four percent from existing flows as discussed in the following section, and shown in Exhibit 4-18—Wastewater System and Table 4-5—Estimated Wastewater Generation.

2.       Proposed Wastewater System Improvements. A wastewater flow analysis was performed for this study and existing wastewater generation figures were estimated. Identical wastewater flow factors (per Table V-3 of the city WMP with return ratios) were applied to the existing and proposed land uses for the specific plan area. Table 4-5—Estimated Wastewater Generation, summarizes the estimated flows and provides a side-by-side comparison. The average flow for the proposed redeveloped area is 1.06 MGD. The peak wastewater estimated for the Route 66 Corridor redevelopment project is one thousand four hundred seventy gpm. The existing trunk sewers within the collection system evaluated for the redevelopment project may or may not require upsizing or realigning. Monitoring at key locations during development would indicate whether this is necessary, as discussed below.

3.       Wastewater System Recommendations. Analysis of the existing wastewater collection system and proposed flow increase indicates there is adequate facilities to serve the redevelopment project, it is recommend flow monitors be installed at key locations. Based on this analysis, RBF Consulting recommends the seven sewer locations within the study area, and described in Table 4-5—Estimated Wastewater Generation, should undergo extended-period flow monitoring at the seventy-five-, and ninety-five-percent build-out to ensure the collection system is operating with adequate excess capacity, for build-out conditions.

C.      Storm Drainage System.

1.       Storm Drain System Existing Conditions.

a.       The Route 66 Corridor specific plan project area provides a number of storm drain systems collecting surface runoff and providing conveyance to the main flood control channel in the area, the Big Dalton Wash. Existing storm drain facilities are indicated on Exhibit 4-19—Existing Storm Drain System.

b.       A majority of the catch basins on Route 66 drain to mainlines in streets that cross under the roadway. Most of these catch basins and laterals on the north side Route 66. The runoff from the south portion of Route 66 typically flows in the gutter to the streets that intersect Route 66. At these locations, the runoff turns the corner and continues in the cross streets to one of the major flood control channels in the area or is picked up in catch basins on the cross streets. The streets providing storm drain mainlines include:

i.        Barranca Avenue;

ii.       Forestdale Avenue;

iii.     Vecino Drive;

iv.      Grand Avenue;

v.       Glendora Avenue;

vi.      Pasadena Avenue;

vii.    Glenwood Avenue;

viii.   Loraine Avenue;

ix.      Route 66, east of Lone Hill Avenue.

c.       The Big Dalton Wash, the East Branch of the Big Dalton Wash, and the Alosta Avenue Drain all cross Route 66 within the city limits of the city.

d.       The following section provides as summary of Exhibit 4-19—Existing Storm Drain System, including a detailed description of the storm drain mainlines in each of the cross streets as well as some of their catch basin laterals.

i.        Barranca Ave. The storm drain mainline in Barranca Ave north of Route 66 is a thirty-six-inch RCP. South of Route 66, the mainline is a forty-two-inch RCP. This mainline has numerous laterals connected to it, which pick up surface flow on Barranca Ave and one twenty-four-inch RCP that drains Route 66 on the northeast corner of the intersection. These laterals range in size from fifteen inches to twenty-four inches.

ii.       Vecino Drive/Forestdale Avenue. The storm drain mainline in Vecino Drive south of Route 66 is thirty-nine-inch RCP. The mainline in Route 66 between Vecino Drive and Forestdale Avenue is thirty-six-inch RCP. The mainline in Forestdale Avenue north of Route 66 is also thirty-six-inch RCP. Several laterals collect surface runoff in Forestdale Avenue, ranging from fifteen-inch RCP to twenty-seven-inch RCP. There are two laterals that collect surface runoff from Route 66. A twenty-four inch RCP lateral drains the north side of Route 66, east of Forestdale Avenue. A twenty-seven inch RCP lateral drains the south side of Route 66, east of Vecino Drive.

iii.     Grand Avenue. The storm drain mainline in Grand Avenue between Ada Avenue and Heber Street is twenty-seven-inch RCP. The mainline between Heber Street and Leeside Street is thirty-inch RCP. The mainline between Leeside Street and Route 66 is thirty-six-inch RCP. The mainline in Grand Avenue south of Route 66 is forty-five-inch RCP. There are numerous eighteen-inch RCP laterals that pick up surface runoff from Grand Avenue and the streets draining toward Grand, north of Route 66. There is also a twenty-one-inch RCP lateral that collects runoff from the north side of Route 66, east of Grand Avenue.

iv.      Glendora Avenue. The storm drain mainline in Glendora Avenue is thirty-three-inch RCP between Colorado Avenue and Route 66, as well as north of Route 66 to Lemon Avenue. There are several laterals that collect runoff on Glendora Avenue north of Route 66, that range in size from twenty-one-inch to twenty-four-inch RCP. There is also a twenty-one-inch RCP lateral that drains the north side of Route 66, east of Glendora Avenue.

v.       Pasadena Avenue. The storm drain mainline in Pasadena Avenue south of Route 66 is fifty-four-inch RCP. There is approximately a two hundred ten-foot stretch of the mainline just north of Route 66 that is forty-five-inch RCP. However, north of the stretch, the mainline increases to forty-eight-inch RCP. There are several laterals collecting runoff from Pasadena Avenue, ranging in size from eighteen inches to twenty-one-inch RCP. There are two laterals collecting runoff on Route 66. There are two catch basins to intercept surface flow on the north side of Route 66, east of Pasadena Avenue that are connected with a twenty-four-inch RCP lateral. There is also an eighteen-inch RCP lateral collecting runoff on the south side of Route 66, east of Pasadena Avenue.

vi.      Glenwood Avenue. The storm drain mainline in Glenwood Avenue is forty-five-inch RCP between its outlet at the Big Dalton Wash and Route 66, as well as north of Route 66. There is a fifteen-inch RCP lateral draining the west side of Glenwood Avenue just north of Route 66, and another fifteen-inch RCP lateral collecting surface runoff from the north side of Route 66, east of Glenwood Avenue.

vii.    Loraine Avenue. The storm drain mainline in Loraine Avenue is sixty-inch RCP between its outlet at the Big Dalton Wash and Route 66, as well as north of Route 66. There is an eighteen-inch RCP lateral collecting flow from the east side of Loraine Avenue, north of Route 66. There is also an eighteen-inch RCP lateral collecting runoff from the north side of Route 66, east of Loraine Avenue.

viii.   Big Dalton Wash. Both the Big Dalton Wash and the East Branch of the Big Dalton Wash cross Route 66. However, neither of these major flood control channels directly intercepts runoff from Alosta Avenue (Route 66). The East Branch of the Big Dalton Wash travels from east to west to its termination at the Big Dalton Wash near the intersection of Loraine Avenue and Route 66. The Big Dalton Wash travels from the northeast to the southwest through the city. A majority of the storm drain mainlines in the area drain to one of these two flood control channels.

ix.      Alosta Avenue Drain. A majority of the Alosta Avenue Drain is a sixty-six-inch RCP. However, near its outlet into the East Branch of the Big Dalton Wash, the mainline was increased to an eighty-four-inch RCP. Tying into this larger section of the mainline, there are three laterals that collect surface runoff from Route 66. A twenty-one-inch RCP lateral collects runoff from the south side of the highway, and an eighteen-inch RCP along with a twenty-one-inch RCP lateral collect runoff from the north side of the highway.

x.       Route 66. There is a storm drain mainline that goes from the East Branch of the Big Dalton Wash, where the wash goes under Lone Hill Avenue, to Glengrove Avenue, which is a thirty-three-inch RCP. This mainline continues approximately six hundred fifty-feet east of Glengrove Avenue in Route 66. But, the pipe is reduced in size to a thirty-inch RCP. There are several small laterals that tie into this mainline at the intersection of Route 66 and Glengrove Avenue. There is an eighteen-inch RCP lateral that collects surface flows from the southeast corner of Route 66 and Glengrove Avenue, this lateral also collects runoff from the north side of Route 66, east of Financial Way on its way to the mainline.

There is also an additional twenty-one-inch RCP lateral that drains the north side of Route 66, east of Financial Way. At the upstream termination of this mainline, there are several eighteen inches laterals that collect surface runoff from the south side of State Route 66.

e.       The location and size of all existing mainlines and laterals are shown on Exhibit 4-19—Existing Storm Drain System. The capacity as well as the physical characteristics of the main lines are provided in Table 4-8—Storm Drain Mainline Characteristics. The corresponding Mainline Pipe Numbers are shown on Exhibit 4-19.

2.       Storm Drain System Identified Deficiencies.

a.       The city has observed two areas within the project area that currently experience flooding in large storm events. This localized flooding occurs approximately two to three times yearly. One of the two locations where flooding occurs within the project is located on the north side of Route 66 between Vermont Avenue and Grand Avenue. At this location, runoff flows south on Vermont and is never picked up in a catch basin lateral. It then ponds up at the intersection of Vermont and Route 66 and begins to flow west on Route 66. The runoff does not get into the storm drain network until the intersection of Grand Avenue and Route 66. In that area, the flow in the street overtops the eight-inch curb and creates localized flooding.

b.       The other location where localized flooding occurs is on Route 66 near the intersection of Elwood Avenue. There are several catch basins on Route 66, but they do not connect to a storm drain network, nor are there any storm drain plans for these facilities. They have a very shallow slope and move water from Route 66 to the southern portion of Elwood Avenue where the runoff is discharged back into the street. The runoff then flows south in Elwood Avenue to the Big Dalton Wash.

 

Table 4-8

Storm Drain Mainline Characteristics

 

 

Mainline Pipe #

Location

Size

Slope

Capacity* (cfs)

Material

Installation Date

1

Barranca Ave.—Orangepath St. to SR 66

36″

0.0064

53

RCP

1969

2

Barranca Ave.—SR 66 to Bagnall St.

42″

0.0041

64

RCP

1969

3

Forestdale Ave.—North of SR 66

36″

0.0023

32

RCP

1968

4

SR 66—Between Forestdale Ave. and Vecino Dr.

36″

0.0048

46

RCP

1968

5

Vecino Dr.—South of SR 66

39″

0.0010

26

RCP

1968

6

Grand Ave.—Ada Ave. to Heber St.

27″

0.0099

30

RCP

1965

7

Grand Ave.—Heber St. to Leeside St.

30″

0.0103

41

RCP

1965

8

Grand Ave.—Leeside St. to SR 66

36″

0.0082

60

RCP

1965

9

Grand Ave.—South of SR 66

45″

0.0100 **

121

RCP

1965

10

Glendora Ave.—North of SR 66

33″

0.0100

53

RCP

-

11

Glendora Ave.—South of SR 66

33″

0.0141

63

RCP

1960

12

Pasadena Ave.—North of 45″ Stretch

48″

0.0053

104

RCP

-

13

Pasadena Ave.—45″ Stretch just North of SR 66

45″

0.0446

255

RCP

-

14

Pasadena Ave.—South of SR 66

54″

0.0058

150

RCP

-

15

Glenwood Ave.—North of SR 66

45″

0.0269

198

RCP

1960

16

Glenwood Ave.—South of SR 66

45″

0.0232

184

RCP

1960

17

Loraine Ave.—North of SR 66

60″

0.0408

526

RCP

1969

18

Loraine Ave.—South of SR 66

60″

0.0264

423

RCP

1969

19

Alosta Avenue Drain—66″

66″

0.0330

610

RCP

1993

20

Alosta Avenue Drain—84″

84″

0.0052

460

RCP

1993

21

Alosta Ave.—Between Lone Hill Ave and Glengrove Ave.

33″

0.0100**

53

RCP

1980

22

Alosta Ave.—East of Glengrove Ave.

30″

0.0188

56

RCP

-

Notes:

*       All capacities are based on the assumption that the pipes are flowing just full. No pressure flow was taken into consideration.

**    Assumed slope.

 

c.       This system has shown historic evidence of surcharge on Route 66 because it does not have the needed head to push a large amount of water through the shallow box culvert.

3.       Storm Drain System Improvements. Several alternatives for alleviating the localized flooding at the two identified problem locations have been developed. There are estimated sizes and costs associated with these possible solutions. However, a detailed hydrology study should be preformed to determine the required size of storm drain mainlines, laterals, and catch basins. If connection to an existing mainline is proposed, a hydraulic study should also be preformed to determine whether or not additional flows can be added to existing storm drain mainlines.

a.       Route 66/Vermont Avenue Improvements. As shown on Exhibit 4-20—Storm Drain System Improvements. There are two possible options for alleviating the localized flooding on Route 66 between Grand Avenue and Vermont Avenue. Both of the alternatives would involve trenching in existing pavement and laying a new storm drain line with laterals and catch basins from the mainline in Grand Avenue to Vermont Avenue. All of the runoff from Vermont eventually gets into the Grand Avenue mainline so these possible new lines will not be changing the existing drainage patterns in the area.

i.        Route 66/Vermont Option 1. The first alternative would be to run approximately one thousand seven hundred feet of thirty-inch RCP east in Route 66 from the mainline in Grand Avenue to the intersection of Route 66 and Vermont Avenue. A catch basin and lateral on either side of Vermont Avenue just north of the intersection will help alleviate the flooding on Route 66.

ii.       Route 66/Vermont Option 2. Some of the runoff that attributes to the flooding on Route 66 comes from farther north in the city. The second alternative would be to run approximately one thousand seven hundred feet of twenty-four-inch RCP east in Ada Avenue from the mainline in Grand Avenue to the intersection of Ada Avenue and Vermont Avenue. A catch basin and lateral on either side of Vermont Avenue just south of the intersection will remove some of the surface water before it becomes a problem. However, there will still be a large area draining to the impacted area on Route 66, so this may not totally alleviate flooding in the area.

b.       Route 66/Elwood Avenue Improvements. As shown in Exhibit 4-20—Storm Drain System Improvements. There are two possible options for alleviating the localized flooding at the intersection of Elwood Avenue and Route 66. Both of the alternatives would involve trenching in existing pavement and laying a new storm drain line with laterals and catch basins.

i.        Route 66/Elwood Option 1. The runoff that is causing flooding at the intersection of Elwood Avenue and Route 66, eventually sheet flows south in Elwood Ave to the Big Dalton Wash. The first alternative to alleviate the flooding at the intersection would be to construct approximately six hundred feet of thirty-inch RCP storm drain in Elwood Avenue from the Big Dalton Wash to the intersection. The existing curb inlets would need to be replaced with catch basins and laterals to the proposed mainline in Elwood. The construction cost, including pavement removal and replacement, trenching, pipe, traffic control, and catch basins will be around one hundred fifty thousand dollars.

ii.       Route 66/Elwood Option 2. The second alternative would be to connect to the storm drain mainline in Glenwood Avenue. However, since the runoff causing localized flooding at the intersection of Elwood Avenue and Route 66 does not get into that mainline in the existing condition, a hydraulic analysis of the mainline in Glenwood will need to be done to verify its capacity. This alternative would include approximately seven hundred feet of thirty-inch RCP storm drain in Route 66 from the mainline in Glenwood Avenue to the intersection. The existing curb inlets would need to be replaced with catch basins and laterals to the proposed line in Route 66. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

Article V. Route 66 Corridor Design Guidelines
21.10.200 Design guidelines user’s guide.
The user’s guide to the Route 66 design guidelines is intended to provide interested persons with straightforward guidance for optimizing the use of the design guidelines for projects and improvements to properties within the Route 66 specific plan area (see Figure 1). The user’s guide includes a description of the purpose and applicability of the design guidelines, an overview of how to get started using the design guidelines, a step-by-step summary of the design process, and information on where to get additional help with the design guidelines.

 

The Route 66 Design Guidelines are based on both Glendora’s History and its Future Vision



 

A.      Purpose and Applicability of the Design Guidelines.

1.       The way in which land is developed and buildings are built or rehabilitated influences both the overall image of a community as perceived by residents and visitors and the attractiveness of a place to prospective and existing investors and businesses. The Glendora general plan, through its land use element, supports quality design throughout the community. Additionally, the city of Glendora relies on its project approval process to pursue excellence in architectural and overall project design; including development and redevelopment within the Route 66 Corridor.

2.       The purpose of the Route 66 specific plan design guidelines, therefore, is to provide consistent design guidance for the development and redevelopment of the Route 66 Corridor that reflects the Glendora community’s commitment to quality, true-to-Glendora design and economic development. To this end, a driving intent of the Route 66 specific plan design guidelines is to be user-friendly (i.e., easy to find information and use of simple, understandable language), easy to implement (by property owners, small business owners, investors, design professionals, city staff, planning commission, etc.), and well-illustrated to help articulate the design objectives for the Route 66 specific plan area.

 

Building using Design Guidelines



 

Building not using Design Guidelines



 

3.       The guidelines will be used by city staff, the planning commission, and the city council in the review of proposed projects in compliance with requirements of the city’s general plan and Municipal Code. The guidelines are applicable to the following types of projects within the Route 66 specific plan area:

a.       Any construction requiring a building permit;

b.       Projects/uses requiring a discretionary zoning application such as a development plan review or conditional use permit;

c.       Any construction (whether or not a building permit or zoning application is required) that affects the exterior elevation of an existing building or structure (e.g., replacing doors or windows);

d.       A change in the exterior appearance of a building (e.g., painting, reroofing, replacing siding) or similar changes; and

e.       A change in the use of an existing building that requires additional parking.

4.       During its review of applicable projects, city staff, the planning commission, and the city council will use discretion in applying the various provisions in the Route 66 specific plan design guidelines to specific projects. It is not anticipated that each guideline will apply equally to every project. In some circumstances, one guideline may be relaxed to facilitate compliance with another guideline determined by the city to be more important in a particular case. The overall objective is to ensure that the intent and spirit of the guidelines are followed and that the project respects its surroundings in terms of scale, character, and orientation.

B.      How to Get Started. To most effectively get started using the Route 66 design guidelines, the following basic process is recommended:

 

Step 1: Read the Route 66 Design Context section below for an understanding of general design priorities for the corridor.

Step 2: The Route 66 specific plan area is divided into the following 9 land use districts:

● Barranca Gateway

● Grand Avenue Commercial Gateway

● Town Center Mixed Use

● Glendora Avenue Gateway

● Route 66 Service Commercial

● Central Route 66 Residential

● Lone Hill Gateway

● Glendora Technology, Commerce, and Office

● Grand/Route 66 Gateway

Review Exhibit 5-1 to determine the Route 66 land use district in which your project(s) is located.

Step 3: Turn to the section of district-specific design guidelines below that is written for the land use district in which your project(s) is located. This section will provide you with specific design guidance that will help your project(s) be compatible with the character desired for your district.

Step 4: Once you have reviewed the district-specific design guidelines, review the area-wide design guidelines section for guidance on a range of items that will help your project(s) be compatible with the design features desired for the entire Route 66 corridor.

Step 5: Subsequent to completing Steps 1 through 4, schedule a meeting with the Glendora planning department to review your ideas, identify processes and requirements, ask questions, and discuss potential issues, solutions and approaches. The department is more than happy to help you be a successful part of the Route 66 corridor.

Step 6: If you have any additional questions, please call, write, or e-mail the Glendora planning department.

(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.210 Design context.
Route 66 serves many important existing and envisioned roles in the Glendora community. It is a major transportation corridor, an economic backbone of local businesses, a symbol of a rich history and future promise, and a place that many call home. It is also a corridor in transition, evolving from a collection of different types of development that occurred individually and incrementally (reflecting the era in which they built) to one that seeks to achieve more compatibility between adjacent uses and a strong design image that unifies the vernacular architecture that does and will always exist.

To achieve the community’s vision for a more vital and visually enhanced Route 66, it is important that project designers both recognize the unique design context of the corridor and make specific efforts to enhance it. The elements that help define the envisioned character of Route 66 include:

●       Identifiable landmark buildings amidst understated buildings and signs;

●       Views to surrounding hills and mountains and connections to nearby natural resources;

●       Pedestrian scale environments within a larger auto-oriented environment;

●       Good quality development with a feeling of being “handmade” and “true-to-Glendora.”

To successfully maintain and strengthen the Route 66 Corridor’s existing character, project designers will be required to integrate design features that support the city’s efforts to preserve the authenticity of Glendora and maintain an image of quality development. Following the Route 66 specific plan design guidelines will help achieve this goal.

A.      Common Design Principles. While every project is unique, each should demonstrate adherence to certain design principles that are central to enhancing the quality of the development along Route 66. This section provides the basic design goals that each project is expected to address—building upon the Route 66 design context section above. Newly-constructed projects will have a greater opportunity to address each of the design principles more fully, while projects that involve additions or remodeling may be more limited in their ability to address each specific principle.

The following common design principles contribute to nurturing compatible relationships between new projects, existing uses, and future development—all in an effort to help ensure that projects along Route 66 are well-integrated and demonstrate respect for Glendora’s unique character and sensitivity to the contextual influences of the area, especially in terms of building scale and architectural design. It is expected that all project proponents will strive to implement the principles outlined below to the greatest degree possible. The information in this design guidelines manual will help in achieving this goal.

1.       High Quality. Maintain a high level of expectation for quality development.

Quality of development can be expressed in a variety of ways: through the adherence to authentic architectural styles and details; the honest and simple use of materials and colors; the provision of useable open space (plazas and courtyards); the concern for human scale and pedestrian orientation; and the use of landscaping to soften the otherwise hard surfaces of structures and pavement. All projects are expected to achieve a high level of quality.

 

Building of Higher Quality



 

Building of Average Quality



 

2.       Human Scale. Develop buildings that include human-scale details, pedestrian amenities, and create new linkages between and within developments where possible.

Glendora is a community that prides itself on its heritage as a city and the history of its people. An important aspect of the Route 66 Corridor is to respond to the importance of people, while also acknowledging the roles of transit and automobile transportation. The extension of a human scale character throughout the Route 66 Corridor is a basic design principle to be addressed by all projects. Project proponents should demonstrate how the proposed project contributes to the goal of human scale development along Route 66.

 

Building with Many Human Scale Qualities



 

Building with Few Human Scale Qualities



3.       Vernacular Character. Protect the existing vernacular character of Route 66 and promote diversity in new development.

The vernacular nature of existing development contributes to the unique identity of Route 66. New projects are expected to promote a diversity of architectural style while maintaining continuity of scale, pedestrian amenities, patterns of open space, and use of landscaping. The guidelines accommodate a variety of architectural styles, including: mission revival; Spanish colonial revival; art deco; moderne; craftsman; traditional storefront; and contemporary highway vernacular. Choosing which architectural style to use is in part a matter of personal choice, keeping in mind both the existing architectural context and the desired architectural character defined in the district-specific design guidelines. Through these design guidelines, individual project designs should respond to the basic character-defining features of each of these styles as described later in this document (see the section on area-wide design guidelines).

 

Many Architectural Styles Along Route 66 Contribute to a Vernacular Character



 

4.       Development Character. Promote a consistent and coherent rhythm of structures and open spaces along the street edge.

The structures, and the spaces and landscaping between them, create a variety of physical environments—rhythms—along Route 66. The desired character within the Route 66 Corridor varies depending upon the rhythms that exist or that are envisioned, as described in each of the district-specific design guidelines sections provided later in this document. Development character is achieved through the thoughtful provision and arrangement of front and side building setbacks, location of structures, plazas and courtyards, outdoor dining areas, pedestrian paseos and linkages, view corridors and vistas to surrounding hills/mountains, landscaped areas and other natural features, and other details that, when aggregated, will create a positive rhythm along Route 66. Development character also entails protecting adjacent residential uses from the impacts of non-residential development.

 

Optimal Development Character Created Through a Coherent Rhythm of
Building Design, Streetscape, and Open Space



 

Unpleasant Development Character Created Through Uncoordinated
Building Design, Open Space Placement, and Miscellaneous Streetscape



(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.220 District-specific guidelines.
A.      Barranca Gateway.



 

1.       Character Area Description.

a.       The Barranca gateway district is intended to serve as the western gateway into the city. The Barranca gateway district seeks to provide the western “front door” to the city, through the establishment of distinctive architecture, streetscape, hardscape and other on-site and off-site amenities. The Barranca gateway district is envisioned to capitalize on adjacent market potential introduced by Azusa Pacific University and Citrus College. A high-level of street-oriented development and strong pedestrian comfort is envisioned to attract nearby students and residents to this district. Uses appropriate for this district include residential, retail sales, offices, and other service uses that provide for the daily needs of local residents. The district is intended to promote stable and attractive commercial development that is compatible with adjacent residential use. Commercial uses are strongly encouraged at intersection locations.

b.       Key Objectives:

i.        City’s western gateway;

ii.       Street-oriented development;

iii.     Pedestrian focus;

iv.      Mix of uses (residential/commercial/retail);

v.       Capitalize on adjacent market potential;

vi.      Respect adjacent residential development.

2.       Character-Defining Design Features and Guidelines. The following guidelines are intended to create the building and site design framework for fostering the desired character and quality of new development, redevelopment, and rehabilitation for the Barranca gateway district within the Route 66 Corridor.

a.       Relationship Between Building and Street—Street Orientation—Pedestrian Orientation. For the Barranca gateway district, this edge treatment encourages orienting buildings to have the front face the street, but providing an adequate setback and pedestrian space between buildings and the road. Properties undergoing redevelopment or rehabilitation should incorporate the characteristics of this relationship between buildings and street/parking to the maximum degree possible.

As illustrated below, the key features of this relationship between buildings, adjacent streets, and on-site parking include:

i.        Enhancing quality of pedestrian environment along the sidewalk with building setbacks and enhanced sidewalk spaces.

ii.       Creating continuous pedestrian activity in an uninterrupted sequence by minimizing gaps between buildings, blank walls and parking lots.

iii.     Creating pedestrian connections to parking lots at the rear or sides of buildings.

iv.      Using building indentations to create small pedestrian plazas along the street wall.

b.       Relationship Between Building and Rear Yard—Setback, Buffer and Stepback. Within the Barranca gateway district, the relationship between buildings and rear yard areas is critical due to the prevalence of Route 66-fronting development sharing rear property lines with residential neighborhoods. For this district, upper stories of buildings are encouraged to be stepped back away from residential uses to minimize visual intrusion and balance sun and shade impacts. Landscaping and parking generally comprise the rear yard area, designed to optimize compatibility with adjacent residences. As illustrated below, the key features of this relationship between buildings and rear yards include:

i.        Introducing generous landscaping along rear property line to optimize buffer;

ii.       Installing low-scale light standards, using light shields, and setting back building to minimize light spillover from parking area and building to adjacent properties;

iii.     Stepping back upper stories of buildings and introducing parking areas or drive aisles in rear yards to maintain privacy of residences, minimize visual intrusion, and balance shade and sun impacts.

 

Setback, Buffer and Stepback Relationship Between Buildings and Rear Yards
is Encouraged for the Barranca Gateway District (Section View, below)



 

B.      Grand Avenue Commercial Gateway.



1.       Character Area Description.

a.       The Grand Avenue commercial gateway district is intended to enhance Grand Avenue’s function as a primary commercial/retail district within the city. The district is envisioned to serve as a primary southern gateway to the Route 66 Corridor through the provision of higher intensity commercial development catering to the local and regional market, with buildings envisioned of a maximum two stories in height. Distinctive architecture and pedestrian amenities compatible with adjacent residences, is encouraged. The district is intended to provide a wide range of retail sales, business and personal services primarily oriented to the automobile customer. The district is envisioned as a primary node for serving the general commercial needs of the city through the promotion of stable and attractive retail development.

b.       Key Objectives.

i.        A primary commercial node;

ii.       Primary southern gateway;

iii.     Higher intensity commercial development;

iv.      Capture local and regional market;

v.       Auto-oriented gateway.

2.       Character-Defining Design Features and Guidelines. The following guidelines are intended to create the building and site design framework for fostering the desired character and quality of new development, redevelopment, and rehabilitation for the Grand Avenue commercial gateway district within the Route 66 Corridor.

a.       Relationship Between Building and Street—Setback from Street—Balanced Parking Orientation. For the Grand Avenue commercial gateway district, this edge treatment encourages balancing the distribution of parking bays within front and side setback areas, with generous parking lot landscaping, and landscaped parkways and street trees accenting the sidewalk edge. Properties undergoing redevelopment or rehabilitation should incorporate the characteristics of this relationship between buildings and street/parking to the maximum degree possible.

As illustrated below, the key features of this relationship between buildings, adjacent streets, and on-site parking include:

i.        Create pedestrian linkages from the public sidewalk to building perimeter and entries.

ii.       Provide vehicular access and pedestrian connections to adjoining parcels whenever possible.

iii.     Provide accent landscaping and enhanced paving at vehicular entries.



Relationship Between Building and Street: Setback from Street—Balanced Parking Orientation
is Encouraged for the Grand Avenue Commercial Gateway District
(Plan View above; Axonometric View below)



b.       Relationship Between Building and Rear Yard—Buffer and Stepback. Within the Grand Avenue commercial gateway district, the relationship between buildings and rear yard areas is critical due to the prevalence of Grand Avenue-fronting development sharing rear property lines with residential neighborhoods. For this district, upper stories of buildings are encouraged to be stepped back away from residential uses to minimize visual intrusion and balance sun and shade impacts. As buildings are located closer to rear property lines (since parking is predominant in front and side yard areas), a generous landscaped buffer and other screening techniques are employed in rear yard areas to optimize compatibility with adjacent residences. As illustrated below, the key features of this relationship between buildings and rear yards include:

i.        Introducing generous landscaping along rear property line to optimize buffer.

ii.       Installing low-scale light standards, using light shields, and introducing other screening to minimize light spillover from rear service areas and buildings to adjacent properties.

iii.     Stepping back upper stories of buildings to maintain privacy of residences, minimize visual intrusion, and balance shade and sun impacts.

 

Buffer and Stepback Relationship Between Buildings and Rear Yards is Encouraged
for the Grand Avenue Commercial Gateway District



C.      Town Center Mixed Use.



1.       Character Area Description.

a.       The town center mixed use district is intended to provide for a complementary mix of land use and development types that are compatible with and reinforce pedestrian activity and transit utilization. The town center mixed use district will emphasize a complementary mix of development types, including multifamily residential, commercial uses and smaller-scale street-oriented retail development in buildings no taller than three stories in height.

b.       Key Objectives.

i.        Future transit use potential;

ii.       Expanded housing opportunities;

iii.     Street-oriented/pedestrian-friendly.

2.       Character-Defining Design Features and Guidelines. The following guidelines are intended to create the building and site design framework for fostering the desired character and quality of new development, redevelopment, and rehabilitation for the town center mixed use district within the Route 66 Corridor.

a.       Relationship Between Building and Street—Street Orientation—Pedestrian Orientation. For the town center mixed use district, orient buildings to have the front face the street, but providing an adequate setback and pedestrian space between buildings and the road. This street facing orientation serves to create a strong relationship between buildings and the street. This edge treatment also encourages a strong relationship between on-street transit stops, adjacent buildings, and pedestrian connections. Properties undergoing redevelopment or rehabilitation should incorporate the characteristics of this relationship between buildings and street to the maximum degree possible.

Key features of this relationship between buildings, adjacent streets, and on-site parking include:

i.        Enhancing quality of pedestrian environment along the sidewalk with building setbacks and enhances sidewalk spaces.

ii.       Creating continuous pedestrian activity in an uninterrupted sequence by minimizing gaps between buildings, blank walls and parking lots.

iii.     Creating pedestrian connections to parking lots at the rear or sides of buildings.

iv.      Using building indentations to create small pedestrian plazas along the street wall.

v.       Accommodating on-street transit stops.

b.       Relationship Between Building and Rear Yard—Setback, Buffer and Stepback.

i.        Within the town center mixed use district, three relationships between buildings and rear yard areas exist that require specific design guidance:

(A)    Rear yard adjacent to residential;

(B)    Rear yard adjacent to residential street or alley;

(C)    Rear yard adjacent to rail.

ii.       For this district, upper stories of buildings are encouraged to be stepped back away from rear-adjacent features and uses to minimize visual intrusion and balance sun and shade impacts. Landscaping and parking generally comprise the rear yard area, designed to optimize compatibility with adjacent residences. As illustrated below, the key features of this relationship between buildings and rear yards include:

(A)    Introducing generous landscaping along rear property line to optimize buffer.

(B)    Installing low-scale light standards, using light shields, and setting back building to minimize light spillover from parking area and building to adjacent properties.

(C)    Stepping back upper stories of buildings and introducing parking areas or drive aisles in rear yards to maintain privacy of residences, minimize visual intrusion, and balance shade and sun impacts.

 

Setback, Buffer and Stepback Relationship Between Buildings and Rear Yards Adjacent to
Residential is Encouraged for the Town Center Mixed Use District (Section View, below)

 



c.       Transit Supportive Design Guidelines. Unlike the other districts within the specific plan area, the town center mixed use district will realize transit-supportive development and redevelopment as a result of future service by the Metro Gold Line (light rail). To optimize the benefits of light rail transit service to district businesses, visitors and residents, the following transit supportive design guidelines are recommended for new development, redevelopment, and rehabilitation.

i.        Every project within the district should be designed in consideration of the future Metro Gold Line station as a pedestrian destination by including accessible and attractive connections to the larger pedestrian (i.e., sidewalk or pathway) system and adjacent developments.



 

ii.       All projects within the town center mixed use district should demonstrate pedestrian orientation by including weather protection (sun, wind, rain) elements such as awnings, colonnades, or canopies; building entrances and storefronts fronting on a segment of the pedestrian system; and the use of interesting paving, pedestrian-scale lighting, benches, fountains, bicycle racks, trash receptacles, landscaping, public art, and/or other similar amenities.



iii.     Encourage shared (reciprocal access) parking, centrally located public parking, structured parking, to encourage transit use, walking, and bicycling and to maximize the development potential of sites within the town center mixed use district.

 

Shared parking and access agreements are encouraged



 

Parking lot designs should include pedestrian connections from transit stops to
storefronts convenient access to adjacent buildings



D.      Route 66 Service Commercial.



 

1.       Character Area Description.

a.       The Route 66 service commercial is intended to provide for a variety of smaller-scale commercial, office and light industrial/manufacturing uses in buildings generally no taller than two stories in height. Flexible commercial and low-intensity industrial development allowing for office/assembly and warehousing under one roof is encouraged. The district is envisioned a primary node for locally-serving businesses and commercial activity. The Route 66 commercial district is envisioned contribute to a positive visual image along Route 66 through the establishment of streetscape elements, landscaped buffers and quality site design.

b.       Key Objectives.

i.        Primary locally-serving commercial uses;

ii.       Auto-oriented focus;

iii.     Larger landscape buffers/screening;

iv.      Improved streetscape;

v.       Focus on site improvement (façade, etc.);

vi.      Lot consolidation.

2.       Character-Defining Design Features and Guidelines. The following guidelines are intended to create the building and site design framework for fostering the desired character and quality of new development, redevelopment, and rehabilitation for the Route 66 service commercial district within the Route 66 Corridor.

a.       Relationship Between Building and Street—Setback from Street—Balanced Parking Orientation. For the Route 66 service commercial district, this edge treatment encourages balancing the distribution of parking bays within front and side setback areas, with parking lot landscaping, and landscaped parkways and street trees accenting the sidewalk edge. Properties undergoing redevelopment or rehabilitation should incorporate the characteristics of this relationship between buildings and street/parking to the maximum degree possible.

As illustrated below, the key features of this relationship between buildings, adjacent streets, and on-site parking include:

i.        Create pedestrian linkages from the public sidewalk to building perimeter and entries.

ii.       Provide vehicular access and pedestrian connections to adjoining parcels whenever possible.

iii.     Provide accent landscaping and enhanced paving at vehicular entries.

iv.      Small retail and service uses are encouraged.

v.       Provide for larger front landscaped setbacks and parking to the side and rear of structures.

 

Relationship Between Building and Street: Setback from Street—Balanced Parking Orientation
is Encouraged for the Route 66 Service Commercial District
(Plan View above; Axonometric View below)



 

b.       Relationship Between Building and Rear Yard—Buffer and/or Connection.

i.        Within the Route 66 service commercial district, two primary relationships exist between buildings and rear yard areas that require specific design guidance:

(A)    Rear yard adjacent to rail property;

(B)    Rear yard adjacent to wash or hillside.

ii.       On the north side of Route 66, the focus of Route 66 fronting properties is on providing an adequate and aesthetic buffer from the adjacent rail corridor. On the south side of Route 66 fronting properties share rear property lines with the Big Dalton Wash and the South Hills. A generous landscaped buffer and, where applicable, connections to the natural areas are employed in rear yard areas as the primary methods of optimizing the relationship between the wash or hillside and adjacent buildings. As illustrated below, the key features of this relationship between buildings and rear yards include:

(A)    Introducing generous landscaping along rear property line to optimize buffer.

(B)    Providing safe connections to the natural areas where applicable.

(C)    Installing low-scale light standards, using light shields, and introducing other screening to minimize light spillover from rear service areas and buildings to adjacent properties.

 

Buffer and/or Connection Relationship Between Buildings and Rear Yards Adjacent to
Railroad Property is Encouraged for the Route 66 Service Commercial District



 

Buffer and/or Connection Relationship Between Buildings and Rear Yards Adjacent to
Wash or Hillside is Encouraged for the Route 66 Service Commercial District



 

E.       Central Route 66 Residential.



 

1.       Character Area Description.

a.       The central Route 66 residential district is intended to contribute to the mix of housing choices offered to Glendora residents and provide consistency with the Glendora general plan housing element, through the provision of higher density multifamily residential development. Locally-serving retail and other residential-compatible commercial uses that cater to nearby residents at corner locations are encouraged within this district. New residential development in this district is envisioned to establish a positive visual image along the Route 66 Corridor and encourage pedestrian connections to adjacent trailways, transit stops, commercial uses, and public sidewalks.

b.       Key Objectives.

i.        Consistency with general plan;

ii.       Higher density residential (sale/rental);

iii.     Locally-serving retail commercial at corner locations;

iv.      Enhanced streetscape.

2.       Character-Defining Design Features and Guidelines. The following guidelines are intended to create the building and site design framework for fostering the desired character and quality of new development, redevelopment, and rehabilitation for the central Route 66 residential district within the Route 66 Corridor.

a.       Relationship Between Building and Street—Setback from Street—Landscape Orientation and Street Adjacent—Pedestrian Orientation. For residential development within the central Route 66 residential district, this edge treatment encourages landscaped setbacks between buildings and streets, interrupted only by pedestrian areas, plazas, and sidewalks. Parking areas are largely invisible from the Route 66 Corridor, and fences and walls are attractively designed and soften through generous landscaping, reinforcing a positive image. Properties undergoing redevelopment or rehabilitation should incorporate the characteristics of this relationship between buildings and street/parking to the maximum degree possible.

i.        As illustrated below, the key features of this relationship between buildings, adjacent streets, and on-site parking include:

(A)    Create pedestrian connections between buildings and to nearby transit stops.

(B)    Use landscaped setbacks to create “outdoor rooms” with plazas and gardens.

(C)    Parking absent from front yards and landscaped setbacks. Parking is typically located behind or between buildings, in a location that maximizes visibility and accessibility by residents, yet is secondary to community open space.

 

Relationship Between Building and Street: Setback from Street—Landscape Orientation
is Encouraged for Residential Development in the Central Route 66 Residential District



 

ii.       For commercial development that occurs within the central Route 66 residential district, this edge treatment encourages placing the front elevation of new commercial buildings with an appropriate setback from the property line to create a strong relationship between buildings, an adequately sized public sidewalk and the street, excluding architectural projections or other architectural features. This edge treatment also encourages a strong relationship at corner locations, between on-street transit stops, adjacent buildings, nearby residences, and pedestrian connections.

iii.     As illustrated below, the key features of this relationship between buildings, adjacent streets, and on-site parking include:

(A)    Providing building setbacks from the sidewalk edge to serve as a buffer between private residential space, pedestrian sidewalk, and vehicular traffic.

(B)    Creating continuous pedestrian space in an uninterrupted sequence by minimizing gaps between buildings, blank walls and parking lots.

(C)    Creating pedestrian connections to parking lots and adjacent residential areas (as applicable and appropriate) at the rear or sides of buildings.

(D)    Using building indentations to create small pedestrian plazas along the street wall.

(E)     Accommodating on-street transit stops.

b.       Relationship Between Buildings and Rear/Side Yards—Buffer and/or Connection.

i.        Within the central Route 66 residential district, two primary relationships exist between buildings and rear yard areas that require specific design guidance:

(A)    Rear yard of residential development adjacent to wash;

(B)    Rear yard of commercial development adjacent to wash.

ii.       Both residential and commercial development fronting on Route 66 within this district share rear property lines with the Big Dalton Wash. A generous landscaped buffer and, where applicable, connections to the natural areas are employed in rear yard areas as the primary methods of optimizing the relationship between the wash and adjacent buildings. As illustrated below, the key features of this relationship between buildings and rear yards include:

(A)    Introducing generous landscaping along rear property line to optimize buffer.

(B)    Providing safe connections to the wash where applicable.

(C)    Installing low-scale light standards, using light shields, and introducing other screening to minimize light spillover from rear service areas and buildings to adjacent properties.

F.       Lone Hill Gateway.



 

1.       Character Area Description.

a.       The Lone Hill gateway district is intended to serve as the eastern gateway of Glendora’s Route 66 Corridor. The Lone Hill gateway seeks to provide a welcoming “front door” through streetscape, quality architecture, views to the San Gabriel Mountains while promoting stable and attractive commercial development that is compatible with neighboring residential uses. The district is envisioned as a node for locally-serving retail uses catering to residents and the day-time population generated by adjacent employment. The district is envisioned to include a complementary mix of locally-serving retail, service commercial, and professional offices within buildings no taller than two stories in height.

b.       Key Objectives.

i.        Streetscape enhancement;

ii.       View preservation;

iii.     Locally-serving commercial node;

iv.      Capitalize on adjacent employment.

2.       Character-Defining Design Features and Guidelines. The following guidelines are intended to create the building and site design framework for fostering the desired character and quality of new development, redevelopment, and rehabilitation for the Lone Hill gateway district within the Route 66 Corridor.

a.       Relationship Between Building and Street—Setback from Street—Balanced Parking Orientation. For the Lone Hill gateway district, this edge treatment encourages balancing the distribution of parking bays within front and side setback areas, with parking lot landscaping, and generous landscaped parkways and street trees accenting the sidewalk edge. Properties undergoing redevelopment or rehabilitation should incorporate the characteristics of this relationship between buildings and street/parking to the maximum degree possible.

i.        As illustrated below, the key features of this relationship between buildings, adjacent streets, and on-site parking include:

(A)    Create pedestrian linkages from the public sidewalk to building perimeter and entries.

(B)    Provide vehicular access and pedestrian connections to adjoining parcels whenever possible.

(C)    Provide accent landscaping and enhanced paving at vehicular entries.

 



Relationship Between Building and Street: Setback from Street—Balanced Parking Orientation
is Encouraged for the Lone Hill Gateway District
(Plan View above; Axonometric View below)



b.       Relationship Between Buildings and Rear/Side Yards—Buffer and Stepback. Within the Lone Hill gateway district, the relationship between buildings and rear yard areas is critical due to the prevalence of Lone Hill-fronting development sharing rear property lines with residential neighborhoods. For this district, upper stories of buildings are encouraged to be stepped back away from residential uses to minimize visual intrusion and balance sun and shade impacts. As buildings are located closer to rear property lines (since parking is predominant in front and side yard areas), a generous landscaped buffer and other screening techniques are employed in rear yard areas to optimize compatibility with adjacent residences.

i.        As illustrated below, the key features of this relationship between buildings and rear yards include:

(A)    Introducing generous landscaping along rear property line to optimize buffer.

(B)    Installing low-scale light standards, using light shields, and introducing other screening to minimize light spillover from rear service areas and buildings to adjacent properties.

(C)    Stepping back upper stories of buildings to maintain privacy of residences, minimize visual intrusion, and balance shade and sun impacts.

 

Buffer and Stepback Relationship Between Buildings and Rear Yards
is Encouraged for the Lone Hill Gateway District



 

G.      Glendora Technology, Commerce and Office.



 

1.       Character Area Description.

a.       The Glendora technology, commerce, and office district is intended to serve as a primary employment center within the city. The district is intended to promote uses including administrative, professional research, and retail/service commercial uses limited to accessory uses—all within buildings no taller than three stories in height. The district is envisioned to promote strong internal and external pedestrian circulation that provides on-site amenities and enhanced connections to adjacent retail and commercial development.

b.       Key Objectives.

i.        Employment generation;

ii.       Strong internal/external circulation;

iii.     On-site amenities;

iv.      Connections to adjacent commercial node.

2.       Character-Defining Design Features and Guidelines. The following guidelines are intended to create the building and site design framework for fostering the desired character and quality of new development, redevelopment, and rehabilitation for the Glendora technology, commerce, and office district within the Route 66 Corridor.

a.       Relationship Between Building and Street—Setback from Street—Landscape Orientation. For development within the Glendora technology, commerce, and office district, this edge treatment encourages landscaped setbacks between buildings and streets, interrupted only by pedestrian areas, plazas, and sidewalks. Parking areas are largely screened from the Route 66 Corridor, and fences and walls are attractively designed and soften through generous landscaping, reinforcing a positive image. Properties undergoing redevelopment or rehabilitation should incorporate the characteristics of this relationship between buildings and street/parking to the maximum degree possible.

i.        As illustrated below, the key features of this relationship between buildings, adjacent streets, and on-site parking include:

(A)    Create pedestrian connections between buildings and to nearby transit stops.

(B)    Use landscaped setbacks to create “outdoor rooms” with plazas and gardens.

(C)    Parking absent from front yards and landscaped setbacks.

 



 

Relationship Between Building and Street: Setback from Street—Landscape Orientation
is Encouraged for the Glendora Technology, Commerce and Office District
(Plan View above; Axonometric View below)

 



b.       Relationship Between Buildings and Rear Yards—Buffer and Stepback. Within the Glendora technology, commerce, and office district, the relationship between buildings and rear yard areas is critical due to the prevalence of Route 66 fronting development sharing rear property lines with residential neighborhoods. For this district, upper stories of buildings are encouraged to be stepped back away from residential uses to minimize visual intrusion and balance sun and shade impacts. As buildings are located closer to rear property lines (since parking is predominant in front and side yard areas), a generous landscaped buffer and other screening techniques are employed in rear yard areas to optimize compatibility with adjacent residences.

i.        As illustrated below, the key features of this relationship between buildings and rear yards include:

(A)    Introducing generous landscaping along rear property line to optimize buffer;

(B)    Installing low-scale light standards, using light shields, and introducing other screening to minimize light spillover from rear service areas and buildings to adjacent properties;

(C)    Stepping back upper stories of buildings to maintain privacy of residences, minimize visual intrusion, and balance shade and sun impacts.

 

Buffer and Stepback Relationship Between Buildings and Rear Yards
is Encouraged for the Glendora Technology, Commerce, and Office District



 

H.      Grand/Route 66 Gateway.

1.       Area Character Description.

a.       Key Objectives.

i.        Pedestrian-oriented site planning and design;

ii.       Provision for public spaces, plazas and courtyards;

iii.     Minimum height, mass and scale standards to highlight the importance of the intersection;

iv.      Provision for a mix of office/retail uses;

v.       Excellence of architectural design, materials and landscaping creating a sense of place;

vi.      Uses specified to enhance the gateway theme for the district.

2.       Character-Defining Design Features and Guidelines.

a.       The Grand/Route 66 Gateway district is envisioned as a key gateway focal point for people arriving to the city from the 210 Freeway. Due to its location as a key intersection of two major thoroughfares at Grand Avenue and Route 66, high quality architecture and appropriate building mass and scale are important design elements to ensure the sense of gateway entry to the city from the 210 Freeway. Buildings which provide a dramatic architectural presence to the gateway intersection would provide the character and dramatic gateway theme sought by the Route 66 specific plan.

Architectural features to promote a pedestrian scale and sense of place would be required. Storefronts would be oriented to the sidewalk or courtyards. Landscape features including sidewalk planters, street trees, courtyards and plazas supporting pedestrian activity would be necessary elements of any proposed design. Courtyards would be designed as shared space between all uses and public spaces.

b.       Pedestrian-Oriented Site Planning. Site planning should incorporate public plazas and setback spaces. Parking and driveways should be oriented to sides and rear areas. Arcades and openings in the façade leading from the street into the structure or interior plazas should be considered. Upper stories should step back from the ground floor plane or provide balcony opportunities. Pedestrian amenities and access to bus transit must be considered. Trees and landscape treatments which further define and soften the scale of the structure are required. Intersection treatment must be integrated into the Route 66 street enhancement plan.

Example:



 

c.       Materials and Colors. The overuse of stucco façade treatment is discouraged. Developers are encouraged to incorporate other façade materials including wood, stone, metal and glass in the design. Materials and colors should reflect the themes and heritage of the physical landscape, such as granite, river rock, sand, and wood. Colors should reflect soft pastel and earth tones indicative of the coastal sage environment of the San Gabriel foothills. The use of glass to integrate interior and exterior-designed space is encouraged in appropriate areas. The use of materials from sustainable, environmentally friendly sources is strongly encouraged.

d.       Courtyards and Public Spaces. Courtyards incorporating natural features, water features and garden elements as well as pedestrian amenities such as tree shaded seating are encouraged. Integration of exterior and interior spaces is encouraged. Pavement treatment is also a key element of courtyard and sidewalk public space. Varied paving materials which are integrated into and support the overall design are encouraged.

 

From The Master Architect Series V, Architects 49, Selected and Current Works

published by Images Publishing, 2002.



(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.230 Area-wide guidelines.
A.      This section provides design guidelines and concepts, which are applicable area-wide to projects within the Route 66 specific plan area. It is organized into the following subsections to ensure the creation of good community design and quality development:

1.       General commercial;

2.       Special consideration commercial;

3.       Industrial/business park;

4.       Multifamily residential;

5.       Architectural styles;

6.       Public space amenities;

7.       Signage.

Users of the design guidelines should consult city planning staff for assistance with identifying the most appropriate subsections for the subject project.

B.      General Commercial. This subsection provides design guidelines and concepts, which are applicable to commercial projects within the Route 66 specific plan area, including retail, service, and office uses. It should also be noted that the general commercial guidelines found below will also be utilized for review of the special use commercial projects found in the special consideration commercial guidelines subsection.

1.       Site Planning and Design Details.

a.       Introduction. Proper site planning and design of new commercial development contributes greatly to a quality visual environment and to a higher degree of compatibility with surrounding uses. The following guidelines should be incorporated into the design of commercial projects in the Route 66 specific plan area to optimize site planning and design attributes.

b.       Building Siting.

i.        The siting of buildings should recognize the particular characteristics of the site and should relate to the surrounding built environment in pattern, function, scale, and character.

ii.       Building siting and design should encourage pedestrian activity.

iii.     Buildings should face the primary street frontage and provide direct linkages to the public sidewalk.

iv.      When possible, freestanding buildings should be sited along street frontages. Buildings sited along street frontages in conjunction with landscaping treatment helps to screen parking areas.

v.       Where buildings are sited along street frontages, ensure adequate space for public sidewalk and landscaping. Additional building setback should be provided to provide a sufficient and comfortable pedestrian space between the building and street traffic.

 

Freestanding building sited along street frontages creates a link to the sidewalk



 

Whenever possible, place freestanding buildings along street frontages



 

c.       Compatibility.

i.        Commercial development uses should be buffered from residential as much as possible. Building orientation, landscaping, and increased setbacks should be used to provide adequate separation between incompatible uses.

 

Substantial landscaping is encouraged to buffer residential structures



 

ii.       Commercial development use should not face residential streets.

d.       Pedestrian Activity Areas.

i.        The sitting and design of buildings should facilitate and encourage pedestrian activity.

 

Building siting and design should facilitate and encourage pedestrian activity



 

ii.       Development should provide site amenities and other design features that encourage pedestrian utilization.

 

Providing amenities at corner locations offer opportunities for pedestrian activities



 

Plazas at corner locations are encouraged



 

iii.     When possible, buildings should be clustered to create courtyards, plazas, and outdoor dining areas.

iv.      Commercial buildings should be designed to maximize the relationship with adjacent street frontage.

v.       Pedestrian activity areas at mid-blocks corner locations are encouraged.

2.       Parking and Circulation Guidelines.

a.       Introduction. Properly functioning parking areas are beneficial to property owners, tenants, and customers and they contribute to the design success of a property. Parking lots need to allow customers and deliveries to reach the site, circulate through the parking lot, and exit the site easily and safely. The following guidelines should be incorporated into the design of commercial projects in the Route 66 specific plan area.

b.       General.

i.        Parking space and aisle dimensions should conform to city standards.

ii.       A vehicle entering any commercial parking area in Glendora should not be required to enter a street to move from one location within the same parking facility or premises. Parking areas should be interlinked.

iii.     Parking lots should be designed with a clear hierarchy of circulation: major access drives with no parking; major circulation drives with little or no parking; and then parking aisles for direct access to parking spaces.

iv.      Parking lots should be divided into a series of connected smaller lots utilizing raised landscape strips and raised walkways.

v.       Parking aisles and parking spaces directly adjacent to the building are strongly discouraged. Raised walkways and landscape strips may be utilized adjacent to buildings to create this spatial separation.

vi.      Parking should not dominate the site in areas adjacent to any street. Parking should be concentrated in areas away from the street, behind buildings and well landscaped.

 

Parking lots should not dominate the site



 

c.       Project Entry Design.

i.        Entry drives should be adequately spaced apart from one another and from street intersections to optimize vehicle, pedestrian, and bicycle safety.



 

ii.       A main entry drive should extend from the public street to the front cross aisle and should:

(A)    Include medians located between the public street to the first bisecting parking aisle;

(B)    Include sidewalks from the street to the front cross aisle on both sides;

(C)    Include landscaped parkways flanking both of its sides and not have any parking stalls along it.

 

Utilize special accents at project entries



d.       Pedestrian Circulation.

i.        Avoid vehicle access lanes located near major building entries where pedestrians will enter or exit.

ii.       Design parking areas so that pedestrians walk parallel to moving cars in parking aisles to minimize the need for the pedestrian to cross parking aisles and landscape islands to reach building entries.

Don’t do this



 

Do this



 

iii.     Clearly defined pedestrian access should be provided from parking areas to primary building entrances.

 

Clearly define pedestrian access



iv.      All commercial projects should connect onsite pedestrian circulation system to offsite public sidewalks. At a minimum this connection should:

(A)    Be located on one side of the main entry drive aisle;

(B)    Be adequately wide for optimal accessibility at all points including locations where signs, poles, fire hydrants, etc., are placed in the walkway;

(C)    Be raised and protected from the drive aisle by a curb;

(D)    Be constructed of concrete or interlocking paving stone systems.

v.       Emphasis on pedestrian crossings of driveways and major circulation aisles should be accentuated at building entries by extending pedestrian walkways into the parking aisle/lane.

vi.      Access by disabled persons shall be incorporated into the overall pedestrian circulation system.

 

The project design should be in compliance with all existing disability access laws



 

e.       Bus Turnouts. Bus turnouts should be constructed in the Route 66 specific plan area wherever the potential for auto/bus conflicts warrants separation of transit and passenger vehicles. Bus turnouts should be considered by the traffic safety committee when warranted based on traffic conditions, passenger volumes, vehicle speed, and/or accident patterns.

f.        Screening.

i.        All parking lots should incorporate screening at their street periphery. Screening should maintain a clear visual zone and may be implemented utilizing one of the following alternatives:

(A)    Utilize a low-lying, continuous evergreen hedge;

(B)    Utilize low-lying earth berm;

(C)    Installing non-deciduous (evergreen) trees.

 

All parking lots should maintain a clear visual zone



ii.       The use of walls in a front or street side yard setback is inappropriate.

iii.     Walls or landscaping should not be located where they block the sight lines of drivers entering, leaving or driving throughout the site.

 

Appropriate screening of a parking lot



 

g.       Parking Lot Landscaping.

 

Intermediate planting island in parking lot



 



i.        Parking lot landscaping should be evenly distributed throughout the parking area.

ii.       Parking lots should include landscaping that accents the importance of driveways from the street, frames the major circulation aisles, and highlights pedestrian pathways.

iii.     Provide continuous landscape planting strips between every row of parking. Planting strips should include shade trees and should be constructed with a concrete mow strip on both sides.

iv.      Create large planting islands at the ends of parking rows that are planted with shade trees, low shrubs and/or groundcover.

v.       Provide interior planting islands between parking spaces to avoid long rows of parked cars.

 

Provide planting strips between every row of parking



 

h.       Parking Lot Lighting.

i.        The style of lighting fixtures for parking lots should match or compliment the style utilized within the public right-of-way. (See Article IV of the Route 66 Corridor specific plan.)

ii.       The type and location of parking area lighting should preclude direct glare onto adjoining property, streets, or skyward.

iii.     Pedestrian scale/decorative parking lot lighting is encouraged.

 

Example of pedestrian-scale lighting in a parking lot



iv.      The color of the parking lot lighting poles should be either black, brown, bronze, hunter green, or midnight blue.

v.       “High mast” flood lighting above the height of the tallest building on site is discouraged.

vi.      Lighting systems need to be designed for two levels. One to be on during normal operations hours and one to be a reduced intensity level throughout late non-operational hours (for security purposes).

i.        Paving.

i.        Parking Surfaces. Decorative paving treatments are encouraged to be incorporated into parking lot design, driveway entries, and pedestrian crosswalks.

ii.       Sidewalks and Pedestrian Ways.

(A)    The design, materials, and colors of pedestrian areas should compliment the architectural style of the primary buildings and should make a positive contribution to the aesthetic and function of the site.

 

Paving should blend with the architectural style of the site



 

(B)    Texture and color variation in paving material should occur where pedestrian and vehicular areas overlap.

 

Rough paving will slow traffic down



 

(C)    The use of stamped concrete, stone, brick or granite pavers, exposed aggregate, or colored concrete is encouraged in parking lots to promote pedestrian safety and to minimize the negative impact of large expanses of black asphalt pavement.

 

Pedestrian walkways should encourage decorative paving treatments



 

j.        Loading and Delivery.

i.        Loading facilities should not be located at the front of buildings where it is difficult to adequately screen them from view. Such facilities are generally more appropriate at the rear of the site.

 

Loading and delivery at side and rear of building is encouraged



 

ii.       When commercial buildings back to residential properties, loading and delivery will need to be planned to occur at the side of the building away from residences. Loading and delivery areas should not be located in a required setback area.

3.       Architectural Design Elements.

a.       Introduction. There are no particular styles required for new commercial development, commercial redevelopment, and commercial rehabilitation within the Route 66 specific plan area. However, at least eight common architectural styles exist within Route 66 and elsewhere in Glendora that can provide inspiration to and help shape new development, redevelopment, and rehabilitation (see the architectural styles section below). The following guidelines for architectural design elements are presented to encourage a quality and completeness of commercial project design that will contribute to the overall quality of the envisioned Route 66 built environment.

b.       Architectural Imagery.

i.        The use of standardized “corporate franchise” architectural styles are strongly discouraged.

ii.       Architectural styles should consider compatibility with surrounding character, including a building’s style, form, size, materials, and roofline.

iii.     Design features should be consistent on all elevations of a structure. Side and rear elevations should not be minimized because they are oriented away from public view.

c.       Building Form and Mass.

i.        Height and scale of infill developments should complement existing adjacent structures while providing a sense of human scale and proportion.

ii.       New structures should be designed to avoid blank façades, instead providing storefront windows, doors, entries, transoms, awnings, cornice treatments and other architectural features designed to add visual interest.

iii.     Building mass/height should relate to adjacent sites to allow maximum sun and ventilation, protection from prevailing winds, and to enhance public views and minimize obstruction of view from adjoining structures.

iv.      Building heights should vary so that the building appears to be divided into distinct components.

d.       Building Façades.

i.        Building façades should be articulated with architectural elements and details. Buildings should be segmented in distinct massing elements. Vertical and horizontal offsets should be provided to minimize large blank walls and reduce building bulk.

ii.       Building façades should be broken down into a series of appropriately proportioned “structural bays” or components typically segmented by a series of columns, masonry piers, or other architectural treatments.

 

Create interesting building façade with unique architectural elements



 

iii.     Primary building entries should be easily identified. Use of projections, columns, or other design elements that articulate entries should be utilized.

 

Building entries should be easily identified



 

iv.      The size and location of doors and windows should relate to the scale and proportions of the overall structure.

v.       Blank building façades along side property lines are strongly discouraged as they diminish the visual quality of contiguous properties as well as the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area. To optimize the quality of side property line facing building façades, including firewalls and parapet walls for zero lot-line construction, project applicants are strongly encouraged to include one or more of the following elements in architectural design plans:

(A)    Public art (e.g., murals, wall mounted sculptures, etc.);

(B)    Architectural details;

(C)    Architectural lighting;

(D)    Landscaping (e.g., vines).

e.       Storefront Proportion.

i.        Overall commercial projects should have details that are repeated across the face of the building integrating the storefront components into the character of the entire façade of the commercial project.

 

Storefronts in shopping center



 



 

ii.       The main entry into a store should be emphasized at the street to announce a point of arrival in one or more of the following ways:

(A)    Flanked columns, decorative fixtures or other details;

(B)    Covered by means of a portico (formal porch) projecting from or set into the building face; and

(C)    Punctuated by means of a change in roofline, a tower, or a break in the surface of the subject wall.

 

Storefronts should be visually pleasing



 

iii.     Buildings situated at the corner of a public street should provide a prominent corner entrance to retail shops.

iv.      Commercial storefront entries are typically recessed and/or sheltered by a covered arcade structure, canopy or awning. This provides more area for display space, a sheltered transition area to the interior of the store, and emphasizes the entrance. The recessed entry should be well illuminated twenty-four hours a day.

 

Commercial storefront entries should employ shelter by utilizing a covered arcade, canopy, or awning



 

v.       Doors of storefronts (especially retail shops) should contain a high percentage of clear glass in order to view the retail contents.

vi.      Storefront windows should be clear and as large as possible to maximize the visibility to the storefront displays and retail interior.

f.        Building Wall Articulation.

i.        Long, blank, unarticulated building walls that face public view are discouraged and should be divided into a series of structural bays (e.g. characterized by masonry piers that frame window and door elements).

ii.       Flat, monolithic building walls are strongly discouraged. Monolithic building walls should be “broken” by vertical and horizontal articulation (e.g., sculpted, carved or penetrated wall surface defined by recesses and reveals) characterized by: (a) breaks (reveals, recesses) in the surface of the wall itself; or (b) placement of window and door openings; or (c) the placement of balconies, awnings and canopies.

iii.     Storefronts with no windows and small doors are not permitted. Large window and door openings on commercial storefronts are very desirable, as they are more inviting.

 

Wall façades employing both vertical and horizontal articulation



 

g.       Roofs.

i.        Full gabled, hipped, and shed roofs are encouraged.

 

Full roofs are encouraged



 

ii.       Continuous mansard roofs or “tacked on” brow mansard roofs are discouraged.

iii.     Long, unbroken, monotonous, horizontal rooflines are strongly discouraged. Vertical or horizontal articulation is required.

iv.      Radical roof pitches that create overly prominent or out-of-character buildings such as A-frames, geodesic domes, or chalet-style buildings are discouraged.

v.       The visible portion of sloped roofs should be sheathed with a roofing material complementary to the architectural style of the building and other surrounding buildings.

vi.      Interior rooftop access is encouraged.

vii.    Cornice lines of new buildings (horizontal rhythm element) should be aligned with buildings on adjacent properties to avoid clashes in building height.

h.       Materials/Colors.

i.        Exterior materials, textures and colors should compliment the architectural style or theme of a building.

ii.       Materials that contribute to good quality architecture are:

(A)    Stucco, smooth, sand or light lace finish;

(B)    Clay or concrete roof tiles;

(C)    Native fieldstone;

(D)    Sandstone and flagstone;

(E)     Brick, as an accent material;

(F)     Wrought iron (rust proof; anodized aluminum);

(G)    Tile, as an accent material;

(H)    Slumpstone garden walls;

(I)      Split face concrete block;

(J)     Slump block (for building walls);

(K)    Metal accents;

(L)     Concrete block as bulkhead or accent material only;

(M)   Clapboard or shingle siding;

(N)    Brick or stone use in foundations and chimneys.

iii.     Materials that detract quality architecture are:

(A)    Reflective metal or aluminum siding/roofing;

(B)    Plywood siding;

(C)    Plastic tile;

(D)    Pipe railings;

(E)     Metal/concrete stairs;

(F)     Precision architectural concrete block;

(G)    Bare aluminum window frames;

(H)    Simulated rock applied vertically on walls.

iv.      Color is one of the primary theme-conveying elements of commercial development. The following color guidelines are recommended for commercial development within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area:

(A)    Exterior materials, textures and colors should complement the architectural style or theme of a building.

 

Materials, colors, and textures should complement the overall architectural style of a building



 

(B)    Colors and materials should be durable and weather resistant.

(C)    Avoid use reflective or metallic colors that create glare.

(D)    Avoid fluorescent or bright colors.

(E)     Colors should not contrast greatly with adjacent structures.

(F)     Colors should be consistent with the architectural style of the building.

(G)    Natural, subdued colors are encouraged.

(H)    Franchise/corporate businesses should incorporate the architecture and color theme of the overall commercial project to form a consistent theme throughout.



 

i.        Equipment and Utility Screening.

i.        All mechanical equipment should be concealed from view of public streets and neighboring properties. Concealment of the elements behind walls, landscaping or undergrounding is encouraged.

ii.       Roof-mounted equipment, utilities, or other appurtenances should be screened on all four sides by a structural feature that is an integral part of the building architectural design. Screening material should be compatible with the material used on the building and not exceed the height of all vents and mechanical equipment.

iii.     Ground-mounted equipment, utilities, or other appurtenances should be screened from view by a decorative wall or landscape feature that is compatible with the architecture of the development site or placed in underground vaults.

iv.      Electronic surveillance equipment or alarm hardware should be as invisible and unobtrusive as much as possible.

j.        Security Grilles.

i.        Permanent, fixed security grilles in front of windows are discouraged. If security grilles are necessary, they should be placed inside the building behind the window display area.

ii.       The use of scissors grilles is discouraged since they communicate a message of high crime and cannot be integrated visually into the overall design of a building or storefront.

C.      Special Consideration Commercial.

1.       The guidelines contained in this subsection provide supplementary design guidance addressing the more challenging development types within the Route 66 specific plan area. Certain types of development present design challenges that require unique solutions. Development types in this subsection include:

a.       Offices;

b.       Vehicle dealerships (new/used);

c.       Service stations and car washes;

d.       Auto repair services;

e.       Drive-through business;

f.        Big box retail;

g.       Mixed use projects;

h.       Telecommunication facilities;

i.        Religious institutions;

j.        Shopping centers;

k.       Specialty retail centers;

l.        Hotels and motels.

Development applicants should consult other applicable design provisions in addition to those contained within this subsection.

2.       Offices.

a.       Description. Office development is located within the Route 66 specific plan area commercial and industrial districts. Although appropriate for these districts, office uses have physical and functional characteristics that are not typical of traditional commercial and industrial development. These features include:

i.        Scale of buildings are typically larger;

ii.       Intensity of development is lower;

iii.     Higher utilization of on-site parking;

iv.      Uses typically occur in multi-story buildings;

v.       Fewer public entries;

vi.      Buildings not typically featured directly on the street frontage;

vii.    Consistency in types of tenants.

 

Contemporary office building



 

b.       Site Organization.

i.        Office buildings should consider the characteristics of the site and should relate to the surrounding built environment in function, pattern, and scale.

ii.       Office buildings should be placed at the minimum required front setback. No parking should be permitted to occur between the front of the building and the street. Surface parking should be located at the rear of the site or at the side of the building.

 

Parking should be located at the rear or side of office development



 

c.       Building Design.

i.        Office development should incorporate variations in vertical and horizontal wall planes to reduce scale and massing.

ii.       Building heights for office development should be designed to minimize conflicts with adjacent residential uses.

iii.     Primary building entries should be well defined and provide a “sense of entry” for the building.

iv.      Office buildings should have the primary entry visible from the public street and be accessible from pedestrian pathways or parking areas.

 

Building entries should be well defined



 

3.       Vehicle Dealerships (New/Used).

a.       Description. Vehicle dealerships specialize in the sale and servicing of new and used automobiles. The sale and services of automobiles present a variety of design challenges. These features include:

i.        Vehicle display oriented toward the street;

ii.       On-site vehicle servicing and repair;

iii.     Vehicle drop-off and pick up areas;

iv.      Use of heavy equipment and machinery.

 

Vehicle dealership



 

b.       Site Organization.

i.        Outdoor vehicle displays oriented to a public street should be compatible with the architecture of primary structures on a site.

ii.       Sufficient space should be provided for service drop-offs to prevent back up on a public street and new vehicle delivery.

iii.     Potentially noisy activity, such as vehicle repair, cleaning, or testing should be oriented to minimize impacts to adjacent residential properties.

iv.      Service or repair bay openings should be oriented away from public street frontage or residential properties.

v.       Storage areas for daytime storage items and utilities, equipment, or similar facilities should be screened from view from the public street and any adjacent residential area.

c.       Building Design.

i.        Indoor storage areas should be architecturally consistent with the primary structure on a site.

ii.       Service uses should be contained entirely within a building of solid (e.g., masonry) construction. The access points to the service bays should not face the public street.

iii.     Vehicle washing areas should be designed and located so they are not visible or audible from public streets or residential areas.

iv.      Cashier kiosk, under canopies and other ancillary structures, should be complementary to the architecture of primary buildings on a site.

d.       Landscaping, Walls, Fences.

i.        Landscaping should be provided along building perimeters and parking lots.

ii.       Chain-link fences, barbed wire, razor wire, or similar should never be used.

iii.     When vehicle displays are provided, landscaping should be designed to provide buffering to adjacent rights-of-way.

e.       Other.

i.        The use of public address systems is discouraged. Should a public address system be utilized, noise should not impact adjacent properties.

ii.       Compressors and other pneumatic equipment (except HVAC) should be located within the interior of a building to minimize noise impacts on adjacent properties.

iii.     Indoor storage facilities should be provided on-site for vehicle, parts, and potentially hazardous materials (oil, lubricants, etc.).

 

Dealership service bays should face away from public streets and residential uses



 

4.       Service Stations and Car Washes.

a.       Description. Service stations and car washes are highly utilized uses that are characterized by unique site features. These features include:

i.        Intensive on-site vehicle utilization;

ii.       On-site repair and servicing;

iii.     Large expanses of paving;

iv.      Use of equipment and machinery;

v.       Use of potentially hazardous materials.

 

Reduce visual impacts with landscaping along perimeters



 

b.       Site Organization.

i.        Building elevations containing service or repair bays should not face toward a public street or toward residential uses.

ii.       Structures on a site should be grouped together and integrated into the overall design of a site.

iii.     Service bay door and car wash openings should be oriented to reduce visibility from public streets and should be oriented away from adjacent noise sensitive uses.

 

Orient bay door openings to reduce visibility from the street.



 

iv.      When commercial development abuts a service station, two-way vehicular access that is integrated with the adjacent development should be provided.

v.       A fuel delivery truck lane should be provided through the site and oriented to provide for right side unloading of the vehicle into underground tanks.

vi.      Site design for projects located at street corners should provide structural or strong design elements to anchor the corner. This can be accomplished using built elements or with strong landscaping features.

 

Service station that has landscaping features to anchor the corner



 

vii.    Storage facilities should be enclosed within the primary structure on the site.

viii.   The siting of self-serve carwash bays, drying and vacuuming areas should not conflict with on-site vehicle circulation.

ix.      Self-service car wash bays, and drive-through car wash facilities should be designed to ensure all drainage is confined on-site.

x.       When commercial development abuts a services station, two-way vehicular access integrated with the adjacent development should be provided where feasible.

c.       Building Design.

i.        Building elevations facing public streets should be architecturally detailed. Building design should be given equal design consideration on all elevations.

ii.       Service station building design should consider the context of the site and area.

iii.     Corporate or franchise design is strongly discouraged.

iv.      The roof of structures, including pump canopies, should incorporate full roof treatments with a low to moderate pitch. Flat roof structures or mansard roof applications are strongly discouraged.

Canopies and primary structures should be architecturally compatible



 

v.       Pump island canopies should be designed with a hip, gable, barrel vaulted, or other roof system to match the architecture of primary structures on the site.

vi.      High quality, durable building materials should be used. Service stations and car washes should incorporate façade material to produce texture design. Reflective, glossy, and fluorescent surfaces are discouraged.

vii.    Car wash equipment should be enclosed within a permanent structure. Exceptions can be made for self-serve vacuuming equipment.

viii.   Car wash building design should incorporate noise control measures that minimize noise generated by machinery, blowers or other mechanical equipment.

ix.      When service stations/car washes include retail uses, the storefront facing a public street should be designed to optimize the amount of unobstructed, clear glass.

x.       When service stations/car washes include retail uses, cash registers should be clearly visible from adjacent public streets.

xi.      When service stations/car washes include retail uses, a clearly defined pedestrian path should be proved from required on-site parking to the primary customer entrance.

d.       Circulation and Parking.

i.        Fuel trucks should be able to enter and exit a site with ease. Maneuvering to park and unload should be minimized.

 

Fuel truck driveways should not obstruct vehicle circulation and parking areas.



 

ii.       The location of filling pumps, carwash bays, or other on-site facilities should be designed to avoid vehicle stacking or overflow onto adjacent streets.

iii.     Self-service facilities, such as water and air, or telephone should be located so that they do not obstruct on-site circulation.

iv.      Parking for on-site retail uses should be located in close proximity to the primary customer entry.

 

Buildings facing the public street should provide architectural details



 

e.       Landscaping, Walls, Fences.

i.        When service stations/car washes front public streets, a berm and hedge should be provided.

ii.       Landscaped planters along the footprint of the entire building, except at pedestrian and vehicle entries, are strongly encouraged.

iii.     Required perimeter walls and fencing should provide flowering vines at regular intervals to discourage graffiti.

iv.      Security fencing, in addition to required perimeter walls should be decorative and should be consistent with adjacent architecture.

 

Landscaping, especially at street corners, should be used extensively



 

Roll-up door hood enclosure located on the interior wall



 

v.       Service bays should be provided with roll-up (or-similar) doors. All operating mechanisms should be located within the interior of the structure.

 

Landscape berms and/or hedges should be provided along all streets



 

5.       Auto Repair Services.

a.       Description. A major problem with older auto repair and service facilities is inadequate storage for vehicles being serviced, resulting in cars, etc., being parked on the street, sidewalks, landscaping, and neighboring properties. Additionally, auto repair service facilities can be problematic uses due to noise, traffic, and the presence of hazardous materials.

 

Auto Repair Service Facility



 

b.       Site Organization.

i.        The interior of service bays should not be visible or audible from adjacent public streets, nearby residential structures, or active open space.

ii.       Sufficient space should be provided for vehicle drop-off. Site design should provide space for vehicle stacking during peak hours.

 

Architectural design of auto repair uses should be compatible
in architectural style with adjacent development



 

iii.     High quality, durable building materials should be used. Service stations and car washes should incorporate façade material to produce texture design. Reflective, glossy, and fluorescent surfaces are discouraged.

c.       Building Design.

i.        Building design should be clean and simple, stylistically consistent, and related to surrounding buildings through use of similar scale, materials, colors, and/or detailing.

ii.       Building structures should be permanent, lightweight metal or other temporary appearing structures are discouraged.

iii.     Special design considerations should be made for the storage of oil, lubricants and other potentially hazardous materials.

iv.      All equipment (except HVAC) should be located entirely within a building.

v.       Building elevations facing public streets should maximize the use of clear glass and should minimize blank walls.

d.       Circulation and Parking.

i.        Auto repair service access should not occur on streets with adjacent residential uses.

ii.       Sufficient on-site vehicle stacking areas should be provided to avoid vehicle stacking on adjacent public streets.

iii.     A clearly defined pedestrian walkway should be provided from the required on-site parking to the primary customer entrance.

e.       Landscaping, Walls, Fences.

i.        Landscaping should be incorporated within all setback areas, along the building base, adjacent to customer entries, and along property lines visible from offsite or from customer access areas.



 

ii.       When auto repair services front public streets, a berm and hedge should be provided.

 

Landscaping should be incorporated throughout a project site



 

iii.     When appropriate, landscaped planters should be provided along the footprint of the building.

iv.      Required perimeter walls and fencing should provide flowering vines at regular intervals to discourage graffiti.

v.       Security fencing, in addition to required perimeter walls should be decorative and should be consistent with adjacent architecture.

f.        Other.

i.        Public address systems should not be used in outdoor areas. Any public address system should confine noise to within an enclosed building.

ii.       Adequate indoor storage/trash areas should be designed to accommodate disposal of junk parts packing from parts shipments, and used oil and lubricants pending recycling. (All items should be stored indoors.)

6.       Hotels and Motels.

a.       Description. Hotels and motels can be considered both a commercial and residential-type use. Therefore, the design and orientation of hotel and motel develop must consider both the impacts of hotel/motel uses on adjacent development and the impacts from adjacent development. The following guidelines should apply to hotel and motel development in the Route 66 specific plan area.

 

Hotel/Motel



 

b.       Site Organization.

i.        The primary visual presence along the major street frontage should be the building and driveway approach, not the parking lot.

ii.       Some short-term parking spaces should be provided near the office for check-ins and check-outs.

iii.     Delivery and loading areas should be screened to minimize impact on incompatible uses.

iv.      Loading and unloading areas should be located in the rear of the building lot.

 

Minimize the presence of a parking lot with landscaping



 

v.       Recreational facilities such as swimming pools should be designed to offer privacy to facility users and to minimize noise impact on adjacent uses.

vi.      Utilize parking lots and other open spaces on the site to help buffer the hotel/motel from any adjacent incompatible uses.

vii.    Hotels and motels should provide adequate common open space.

c.       Building Design.

i.        All sides of a building should be architecturally consistent. Long unarticulated wall façades are discouraged and should be divided into structural bays.

ii.       The scale of buildings should be related to surrounding development patterns. Upper floors should be set back to lessen the appearance or mass and bulk.

iii.     For structures over two stories, access to guestrooms should be provided from hallways interior. Avoid room entrances directly adjacent to parking lots or exterior walkways.

 

Setback upper floors to minimize the appearance of mass and bulk



 

iv.      Exterior building materials should include natural stone (marble, granite, slate, etc.) and/or cultured stone. The choice of materials should be complementary to the design of the entire structure.

v.       Avoid locating driveway, garage ramps or loading and service areas where they interfere with the flow of pedestrian movement or impact the privacy of guestrooms.

vi.      All mechanical equipment of all types, including swimming pool equipment and air conditioning units, should be located within a building.

vii.    Walkway, stairway, and balcony railings and other similar details should be architecturally consistent with the basic building design.

 

Covered drop-off zones



 

Balcony railings should complement the building



 

viii.   Exterior corridors on multi-level buildings over two stories located adjacent to residential uses are strongly discouraged.

d.       Parking and Circulation.

i.        A porte-cochere and/or covered drop-off zone for vehicles and pedestrians, independent of drive aisles, should accommodate guest loading and drop-off and serve as the primary entry to the hotel.

ii.       Primary walkways are those that connect pedestrians from the street to the main entry and from a building to on-site amenities. The width of primary pedestrian walkways should exceed minimum city standards than standards for sidewalks along public streets.

iii.     Avoid locating driveway, garage ramps, or loading and service areas where they interfere with the flow of pedestrian movement or impact the privacy of guestrooms.

e.       Landscaping, Walls, Fences.

i.        In addition to all standards that may apply to hotel/motel development, the site should be landscaped according to commercial landscape design standards and guidelines.

ii.       Landscaping is encouraged in all street front setback areas, along the building base, adjacent to entrances to hotels and motels, and along property lines visible from offsite or from customer access areas.

iii.     Walls and fences along side a rear property lines should be designed to complement the architecture of the primary buildings on a site. Decorative elements, or flowering vines should be incorporated.

iv.      The height of walls and fences should be minimized when adjacent to parking, driveways and pedestrian access. Decorative elements, or flowering vines should be incorporated.

v.       Landscaped buffers should separate ground floor units from on-site walkways, parking facilities and other on-site amenities.

f.        Other.

i.        Hotel and motels should provide outdoor and indoor amenities for guest. The design of amenities should be consistent with the architecture of primary structures on the site. Amenities should include spa, pool, weight room/training stations and a business center.

ii.       Landscaped areas should separate ground floor units from pedestrian walkways, project amenities and drive aisles/parking areas.

iii.     Decorative walls or fences should be incorporated along the perimeter of the property.

 

Decorative walls and fences are encouraged



 

7.       Drive-Through Businesses.

a.       Description. Drive-through businesses include restaurants, banking institutions with drive up teller/ATM access, or other similar facilities. Drive-through businesses require additional site design considerations to mitigate vehicular access, on-site circulation visual and noise impacts. The following supplementary guidelines should be incorporated into any development providing drive-through service.

 

Drive-through businesses should be architecturally compatible
with other buildings in the same commercial development



 

b.       Site Organization.

i.        The primary visual presence along the major street frontage should be the building, not parking, drive-through window, or a drive-through lane. Buildings should be “built to” the minimum front setback lines with parking, drive-through windows, and drive-through lanes located at the rear or side of the property.

ii.       Menu board speaker placement should protect adjacent residential areas from excessive noise. Drive-through aisles should be located away from adjacent residential structures.

iii.     The main entrance should be sited at the maximum distance from drive-through aisles.

iv.      Drive-through lanes should accommodate car back up at menu board.

c.       Building Design.

i.        Building elevations facing public streets, whether such elevations function as the front, side, or rear of the building should be architecturally detailed.

ii.       Buildings should incorporate a full roof with built-in roof top equipment wells hidden through wood/metal trellis work.

 

Equipment concealed with a horizontal wood trellis



 

iii.     If the drive-through is a pad building for a shopping center, the architecture should be compatible with the design of the center in which it is located.

iv.      Franchise identifying features should only be located on the main structure.

d.       Other.

i.        Drive-through aisles should be screened from the view of street frontage and adjacent parking areas. Landscaped berms, low masonry walls, or thick shrub landscaping should be utilized.

 

Screen drive-through aisles from street



 

ii.       Drive-through traffic should be separated from pedestrian traffic, vehicular traffic and parking. The drive-through lane should be a separate and distinct lane; it should be distinctly separate from the parking area.

iii.     Queuing and circulation related to drive-through lanes must not interfere with ingress and egress at driveways.

 

Delineate drive-through aisles and driveway entry and exit with enhanced paving



 

8.       Big Box Retail.

a.       Description. Big box retail development describes commercial development characterized by larger than average retail square footage under one roof. Big box retail development requires extensive parking to accommodate higher than average parking demand. The following guidelines shall apply to all big box retail development.

 

Example of big box retail



b.       Site Organization.

i.        Parking lots for big box retail should not occur entirely in front of the building.

ii.       The number of entrances and exits should be designed and located to avoid interference with traffic flow along adjacent streets.

 

When possible, locate vehicle entries on side streets



 

c.       Building Design.

i.        A variety of roof types are encouraged. Distinct and interesting rooflines instead of flat roofed structures are recommended.

ii.       A substantial cornice should be used at the top of a parapet wall or roof curb.

 

Design big box retail buildings with distinctive architectural features.
Avoid plain, box-like structures and create an identifiable base



 

iii.     The big box building should contain an identifiable base.

iv.      Base materials should be highly resistant to damage, defacing and general wear and tear. Precast decorative concrete, stone masonry, brick and commercial grade ceramic tile are examples of acceptable base material.

v.       Big box buildings should be designed with in-line shops with entrances from interior and exterior of the big-box buildings to create a more human scale setting.

vi.      Building entries should be readily identifiable. Design building entrances with architectural features and distinctive materials and colors to articulate entrances.

vii.    Exterior wall treatments such as arcades, portico’s, insets, colonnades, and wing walls should be used to successfully mitigate the appearance of the typical big-box building appearance.

 

Articulate façades with inset, arcades, and window recesses



 

viii.   The perimeter of the building should be surrounded on all four sides by landscaping and/or enhanced pedestrian pathways.

ix.      Permitted storage areas should be consistent with the architecture of the primary building.

 

Outdoor storage areas should be consistent with the architecture design of the primary building



 

d.       Other.

i.        The design of loading areas should prevent truck back-up maneuvers from or onto the public rights-of-way.

ii.       Loading should be located and designed to minimize direct exposure to public view. These areas should be screened with landscaping to reduce visual impacts.

 

Loading areas should be designed to minimize direct exposure to public view



 

9.       Mixed-use Projects.

a.       Introduction. The following guidelines apply to mixed-use development. Multiple or mixed-use projects are defined as developments which combine commercial/office and residential uses or structures on a single lot, or as components of a single development. The uses may be combined either vertically within the same structure, or spread horizontally on the site in different areas and structures. The primary design issue related to mixed-use projects is the need to successfully balance the requirements of residential uses with the needs of commercial uses.

 

Mixed use projects should successfully balance commercial and residential uses



 

b.       Site Organization.

i.        Organize mixed-use development sites to orient buildings to the street and to minimize the visual impact of driveways, parking areas, and utilities.

ii.       Mixed-use development sites should be organized to maximize usable onsite space that enlivens the street edge, provides for pedestrian interest, and offers users with active and passive places to spend their time.

iii.     Mixed-use development should optimize the provision of common areas, designed as integral components to the overall project design. Common areas for commercial uses should provide a strong relationship to the street, while usable private space provided for residential uses should be oriented and accessible only to those uses (i.e., separated from commercial uses). Courtyards, gardens, plazas, and similar common areas are encouraged.

iv.      Loading/service areas, including refuse/recycling enclosures, should be located out of public view, must not front onto a primary shopping street, and should be placed as far as possible from residential units and be completely screened from adjacent residential development. The location and design of refuse/recycling enclosures should minimize potential nuisances from odors.

v.       Electrical and communication transformers/cabinets located in the public right-of-way should be installed below grade in the right-of-way or located on-site and screened from public view.

vi.      The use of freestanding accessory structures in mixed-use developments should be minimized and avoided. All mechanical equipment, storage, and other facilities should be contained within spaces and enclosures designed as integrated components of mixed-use buildings. Where accessory structures are warranted, they should be located to the rear of primary buildings within the mixed-use development and designed to minimize the visual impacts of adjacent properties.

c.       Building Design.

i.        When horizontal mixed-use projects (uses dispersed on a site) are appropriate, the design of structures should be complementary in scale and architectural treatments and be perceived as an integrated, interdependent development.

ii.       Minimize the perceived scale of a mixed-use building by stepping down the height toward the street and neighboring smaller structures. The front wall of a mixed-use building should not exceed two stories to maintain a human scale. Where the front wall of mixed-use buildings exceeds two stories, they should be set back to minimize the appearance of mass and bulk.



 

iii.     Break up the perceived mass of a mixed-use building by dividing the building front into “modules” or into separate structures that are similar in size to buildings traditionally in the Village. Use a ratio of solid to void (wall to window) as seen from the public right-of-way that is similar to that found on traditional structures in the Village.

iv.      Separate, easily identifiable and secure entrances should be provided when residential and commercial uses are provided in the same structure.

v.       Integrate porches, awnings, balconies, bay windows, and stoops to provide visual interest and human scale to mixed-use buildings, consistent with architectural designs traditionally found in Glendora.

vi.      Architectural style and use of materials should provide consistency throughout the entire mixed-use project. Building details that create and maintain the simple and traditional character found in Glendora are desired.

vii.    Simple material finishes are encouraged. Building colors should evoke a sense of richness and liveliness to complement and support the overall character of the envisioned character for the district.

viii.   Exterior building lighting should be used to accentuate the building design and highlight architectural details and features. Innovative lighting is encouraged and commercial looking “wall packs” are discouraged as exterior lighting features.

ix.      The placement of noise generating equipment such as refrigeration units, air conditioning, and exhaust fans should consider impacts to noise-sensitive uses.

x.       Backflow prevention/anti-siphon valves must be integrated into the building design and concealed from public view. Such devices may not be located within the right-of-way on primary pedestrian streets.

xi.      All other mechanical equipment must be located behind or on top of the building and screened from public view with parapet walls, landscaping, etc.

 

Architectural styles and use of materials should be consistent throughout mixed-use projects



d.       Circulation and Parking.

i.        Site access drives and parking facilities for residential uses and commercial uses should be separated, and should incorporate distinctive signage, architectural elements and landscape features to differentiate access to commercial and residential parking areas. Residential parking areas should be secured, the entries for which should be controlled through a special entry code or remote control assigned to each resident.

ii.       When enclosed parking is provided for all uses of a mixed-use development, residential and commercial uses should be provided with separate parking.

iii.     Parking lot security lighting for mixed-use developments must be a primary consideration and should not spill over or otherwise impact adjacent uses, especially residential areas.

e.       Landscaping, Walls, Fences.

i.        Mixed-use developments should be landscaped according to commercial landscape design standards and guidelines.

ii.       Landscaping and other amenities of mixed-use development projects should compliment the streetscape palette envisioned for adjacent public rights-of-way.

iii.     Landscaping should be an integral component to all usable common space of mixed-use developments.

iv.      The use of walls and fences in mixed-use developments is discouraged, except for screening of mechanical equipment, refuse and recycling enclosures, etc. Where used, the design of walls and fences should compliment the design of the primary structures.

v.       Secured residential access gates should be opaque to provide a clear line of site as residents enter.

10.     Telecommunication Facilities.

a.       Description. Telecommunications facilities includes poles, towers, antenna, support facilities and components. Telecommunication facilities introduce the potential for adverse visual impacts due to siting and design requirements. The following guidelines encourage the minimization of such impacts through facilities design and siting.

b.       Site Organization. Telecommunication facilities should be located to minimize their visibility. The use of landscaping is encouraged to screen the facility, where necessary.

 

When possible, cell towers should provide for dual use



 

Cell tower concealed within an obelisk



 

c.       Facilities Design.

i.        All telecommunication facilities should be designed to blend into the existing natural or built environment to the greatest extent possible.

ii.       Telecommunication facilities mounted onto existing buildings are encouraged. Every effort should be made to conceal the facility within or behind existing architectural features.

 

Wall-mounted cellular site



 

iii.     Roof-mounted facilities should be placed and screened appropriately to limit the visual impact on the building’s silhouette.

iv.      Roof-mounted facilities should be screened on all four elevations.

v.       Telecommunication facilities mounted below a building parapet should blend with the existing building’s architecture. Facilities should be painted consistent with the design features and materials of the building.

 

Photo of cell site blending into structure



vi.      All telecommunication facilities should use materials, colors and textures that will blend with the natural setting and built environment.

vii.    Telecommunication facilities should be painted with compatible, non-reflective paint. The color should blend with the surrounding environment.

d.       Other.

i.        Co-location of facilities (use of the same site by multiple carriers) is preferred. Applicants should seek all opportunities to co-locate facilities.

ii.       Telecommunication facilities should be as small as possible and the minimum height necessary without compromising reasonable reception or transmission.

iii.     Ground-mounted telecommunication facilities should be screened with landscaping of sufficient height and depth.

iv.      Switching equipment for telecommunication facilities should be located indoors when possible.

v.       Exterior location of back-up generators for telecommunication facilities is strongly discouraged.

11.     Religious Institutions.

a.       Description. Religious institutions include a wide variety building types typically utilized by faith-based organizations. Religious institutions are characterized by higher profile architectural design and significant on-site parking requirements. In addition, religious institutions may be located in a variety of land use districts including commercial, industrial and residential. The following guidelines apply to the design and development of religious institutions.

b.       Site Organization.

i.        The orientation of buildings and the positioning of other elements on the site, such as entries, parking lots, and driveways, should be designed to minimize traffic and noise impacts on adjacent properties.

ii.       Religious institutions should be placed at the minimum required setback. The building’s façade should be parallel to the street(s).

iii.     Avoid locating parking between the front of the building and the street. Parking should be located at the rear and/or side of the property.

iv.      Exterior space, plazas, and courtyards are encouraged and should relate to the surrounding structures.

v.       Site design should ensure minimal shadow impacts onto adjacent properties.

c.       Building Design.

i.        Height and scale of religious institutions should compliment adjacent structures.

ii.       Building façades should be detailed in such a way to make them appear smaller in scale.

iii.     Building elevations facing streets, whether they function as the front, side, or rear or the building should be architecturally detailed to avoid being perceived as the back of the building.

iv.      Long, blank, unadorned, façades are strongly discouraged. Monolithic façades should be broken up by the provision of vertical and horizontal design elements.

v.       Spires and towers should be designed as an architecturally integrated element of the building design and should not appear as an “add-on” or “tacked-on” object of the site and building. Spires and towers should be designed in scale and character with the building and adjacent development.

d.       Circulation and Parking.

i.        Parking should be located in close proximity to the primary entrance. A safe pedestrian path should be provided from all parking areas to the main entrance.

ii.       Parking should be screened from public view by walls and landscaping or other appropriate methods.

e.       Landscaping, Walls, Fences. Screening and buffering should be provided between the church property and adjacent residential uses to minimize any potential impacts.

12.     Neighborhood Shopping Centers.

a.       Description. Neighborhood centers typically include grocery store/drug store anchor(s) with a series of smaller shops. They may also have one or more freestanding building sites. Because they are usually located in or next to residential areas, the major design problem related to neighborhood centers is the interface between the center’s service activities and adjacent residences. Proximity of loading and storage to residences should be avoided. This section applies to centers having a gross square footage of under three hundred thousand square feet.

 

Neighborhood Commercial Center



 

b.       Site Organization.

i.        All buildings on the same site should demonstrate a strong spatial and functional relationship to each other. In addition, buildings should demonstrate a variety in size and mass.

ii.       Portions of primary buildings and freestanding buildings should be located at the street setback lines.

iii.     Parking should be provided within convenient walking distances of all tenants. Walking paths to building from street should comply with ADA specifications.

iv.      In areas where the shopping center adjoins smaller residential neighborhoods, the apparent or perceived scale of the shopping center should respect the neighborhood. This can be achieved in a number of ways. For example:

(A)    Keeping buildings as small as possible, particularly in height;

(B)    Reducing scale through building articulation and ornamentation;

(C)    Avoiding large flat walls and large scale design elements; and

(D)    Distributing the project floor area among a complex of smaller buildings.

c.       Building Design.

i.        Where long buildings are unavoidable, their linearity should be mitigated by changes in the building height, wall plane, and spatial volumes and by varied use of window areas, arcades, materials, and roof elements.

ii.       Portions of commercial buildings adjacent to and visible from residential properties should always be stylistically consistent with the more public portions of the commercial building.

iii.     Building elements, such as large blank building walls, loading areas, etc., which disrupt the continuity of shops and businesses, are discouraged along major pedestrian corridors.

iv.      The use of arcades, awnings, or similar architectural treatments is encouraged to provide relief from the sun.

 

Changes in height, wall plane and volume mitigate the linearity of
long buildings and provide an interesting environment



 

The use of arcades is strongly encouraged



 

Tower elements or other vertical architectural treatments are required



 

v.       Incorporate tower elements or other vertical architectural features on “ends” of shopping center, which do not exceed twice the height of the building they are attached to.

vi.      Flat roofs, mansards and veneer parapets are discouraged. Full roof treatments are encouraged, over decorative parapets hiding flat roofs.

 

Full roof treatments are encouraged, over decorative parapets hiding flat roofs



 

13.     Specialty Retail Centers.

a.       Description. Specialty retail centers are unanchored retail centers that provide specialty goods and/or services that are generally unavailable in the surrounding area. The market for a specialty center is as large as a regional center, a ten- to fifteen-mile radius. The specialty retail center functions as recreation for many shoppers. Shoppers at these centers are less inclined to visit only one shop, and tend to spend time browsing through several shops. Specialty retail centers typically rely for their appeal on particularly attractive and often thematic architecture as well as unusual goods and services.

 

Specialty Retail Center



 

b.       Site Organization.

i.        The site should be organized to encourage pedestrian circulation throughout. Walkways should be attractive and embellished with landscaping, ornamental lighting fixtures, furniture, trellises, and/or other decorative features.

ii.       Multiple buildings in a single project should employ variety in size and mass to provide visual interest.

iii.     Landscape intensity should be significantly greater for specialty shopping centers, and should typically include substantial amounts of plantings around buildings, walkways, and plazas.

c.       Building Design.

i.        Building design should express a single strong architectural theme with substantial and consistent architectural detailing, except that individual storefronts may exhibit different but compatible themes.

 

Storefronts should exhibit different but compatible themes





 

ii.       All other site features, including landscaping, outdoor furniture, and site fixtures are required to conform to the architectural theme.

iii.     Full variable roof planes and building height is encouraged.

14.     Parking Garages.

a.       Description. Parking garages once thought of as purely utilitarian structures that simply housed vehicles have begun to be recognized as structures that play vital roles in cities beyond places where vehicles are stored. They contribute to the architectural character of their surroundings and can provide valuable commercial space at the ground floor level. Typical issues to be addressed in the design of parking garages relate to security for users and the need to integrate the parking garage from an architectural standpoint into its surroundings.



 

b.       Site Organization.

i.        Where appropriate, parking garages should incorporate ground floor retail adjacent to the public sidewalk.

ii.       A landscaped setback should be provided on all sides of the parking structure except where ground floor in-line retail space is provided.

c.       Access and Circulation.

i.        Vehicle stacking areas for entering and exiting traffic should be sufficiently long to minimize the back up of traffic onto surrounding streets or within the garage.

ii.       As rules of thumb, one inbound lane should be provided for a garage with a capacity of up to five hundred vehicles; at least two inbound lanes should be provided for garages with a capacity of more than five hundred vehicles.

iii.     As a rule of thumb, exit lanes should be provided at a ratio of one lane for each two hundred to two hundred fifty vehicles.

d.       Security and Lighting.

i.        A minimum of level of lighting should be provided inside parking structures to optimize visibility. Higher levels are recommended for remote areas subject to security problems such as stairways, elevators, and other pedestrian access points.

ii.       Lighting levels should be equally distributed to provide uniform illumination over the entire parking area.

iii.     The architectural design of the garage should eliminate possible hiding places and openings that could allow random pedestrian access.

iv.      During periods when parking activity is substantially less than the garage capacity, as during night operations, there should be a means of securing unused parking levels from use, including stairwells and elevators. If the garage is not operated on a twenty-four-hour basis the entire facility should be secured from access during hours when the facility is closed.

v.       For security reasons, at least one or two sides of the stair tower should include glass running vertically the height of the tower. Elevators should be provided with glass-back cabs and shafts.

vi.      Stairs and elevators should be located adjacent to a street on the exterior of the structure where lobbies can be exposed to outside view.

e.       Building Design. Parking structures should be designed to help reduce the mass and scale of the garage and to ensure their compatibility with surrounding uses.

The following design guidelines should be implemented to the greatest extent feasible whenever they apply:

i.        Conceal view of vehicles in the garage through a combination of screen walls and plantings.

ii.       Design the garage’s exterior elevations to avoid a monolithic appearance. This can be accomplished as follows:

(A)    Minimize horizontal and vertical banding by balancing both horizontal and vertical elements.

(B)    Use simple, clean geometric forms, and coordinated massing.

(C)    Step back upper levels of the garage.

(D)    Coordinate openings in the parking garage with the size and modulation of adjacent windows, structural bays, and storefronts if the parking garage contains other uses.

(E)     Use masonry materials that are predominantly light in color, but avoid unpainted concrete.

(F)     Avoid a sloping ramp appearance by providing level and uniform spandrels.

(G)    Visually define and differentiate between pedestrian and vehicular entrances through appropriate architectural detailing. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.240 Industrial/business park.
Well-designed industrial business park building



 

A.      Introduction. The following design guidelines seek to assure high quality development in industrial and business park districts by:

1.       Achieving well-planned, quality designed industrial development;

2.       Ensuring compatibility between new industrial development and existing community character; and

3.       Creating environments in which industrial, research and development activities and operations may be conducted with minimal impact on the natural environment and surrounding land uses.

B.      Site Planning Guidelines.

1.       General Site Planning Guidelines. These guidelines are developed to protect adjoining uses from excessive noise, odor, objectionable views and unrestricted vehicular circulation.

a.       The main elements of good industrial site design as illustrated on the graphic on this page include:

i.        Controlled site access (1);

ii.       Service areas located at the sides and rear of buildings (2);

iii.     Convenient public access and visitor parking (3);

iv.      Screening of storage, work areas, and mechanical equipment (4);

v.       Storage and service area screen walls, as required by the Zoning Ordinance (5);

vi.      Emphasis on the main building entry and landscaping (6).

 

Appropriate Industrial Site Layout Prototype



b.       A variety of building setbacks should be provided in order to avoid long monotonous building façades and to create diversity.

c.       Larger than minimum required building setbacks should be provided on buildings thirty feet high or higher.

d.       Avoid large expansive parking lots along street frontages. Place buildings not parking along industrial frontages.

e.       A development should be located and designed to carefully fit into the surrounding environment and to not dominate the existing character of the area.

f.        Auxiliary structures associated with industrial buildings or complexes such as trash enclosures and storage areas should be compatible with and integrated into the overall design of a business park.

2.       Site Access.

a.       Industrial/business parks should be marked by entry features, such as a monument sign, special paving, or landscaping.

b.       The entry to each development area should be clearly visible to motorists.

3.       Views and Screening.

a.       Buildings should be located to minimize alteration of the natural topography and tree removal.

b.       Landscape screening and building orientation should be used to minimize the visual impact of new development.

c.       Buildings should not detract from the scenic and visual quality of the community, and should not impair views from major public roads, trails, or vehicular turnouts.

4.       Screen Wall Guidelines.

a.       If walls are not required for a specific screening or security purpose they should not be utilized. The intent is to keep walls as low as possible while performing their screening and security functions.

b.       Walls should be designed to blend with the site’s architecture. Landscaping is encouraged to be used in combination with walls.

 

Landscaping should be used to minimize impact



 

Landscaping along security walls is encouraged



 

Walls should be constructed with quality materials



 

c.       When security fencing is required it should be a combination of solid pillars, or short solid wall segments and wrought iron grille work.

d.       Long expanses of fence or wall surfaces should be offset and architecturally designed to prevent monotony. Landscape pockets should be provided in intervals along the wall. Also, include vines on wall surfaces to break up flat surfaces.

e.       Walls and fences should be designed with architectural treatment or a decorative appearance on both sides, and should be solidly constructed of attractive and quality materials such as wood, masonry, native stone, detailed wrought iron, brick, or decorative block.

f.        Walls and fences should be designed in such a manner as to create an attractive appearance to the street and to complement the architecture of the industrial park.

g.       Gates should be provided in walls or fences where necessary to allow emergency access.

h.       High solid walls and fences along public streets can have a negative impact and should be minimized.

i.        Perimeter walls and fences topped with barbed wire, razor wire, or broken glass is strongly discouraged.

 

High solid walls along public streets are discouraged



5.       Amenities.

a.       Building placement that creates opportunities for plazas, courtyards, patios, or outdoor dinning is strongly encouraged. Setback areas may be used to provide space for these areas.

b.       Recreational facilities such as jogging trails, bicycle paths, etc., should be encouraged within industrial/business parks. Jogging trails and bicycle paths should connect with a regional or sub-regional bicycle path system.

 

Provide small commercial services within industrial/business parks



 

6.       Natural Features. Business parks should demonstrate an effort to retain significant existing natural features characteristic of the surrounding setting. Where possible, existing vegetation, waterways, drainage courses, views, rock outcroppings, and other natural features should be protected, preserved, and integrated into the development plan where feasible.

a.       All areas that are not paved or not covered by buildings should be retained in existing vegetation or landscaped.

b.       Altered areas should be restored and revegetated to replicate the natural conditions prior to construction.

c.       Mass grading that results in building sites separated by steep, geometric slope embankments should be avoided. Contour grading should be employed to replicate preconstruction site conditions.

C.      Parking and Circulation Guidelines. The design of industrial/business park onsite circulation systems should address the needs of different user groups; visitors, employees and truck loading and unloading.

1.       Parking lots and cars should not be the dominant visual elements of the site. Large expansive paved areas located between the street and the building should be avoided in favor of smaller multiple lots separated by landscaping.

2.       Parking lots adjacent to and visible from public streets should be screened from view through the use of rolling earth berms, low screen walls, changes in elevation, landscaping or combinations thereof.

3.       Optimize shade coverage of parking lots.

4.       The circulation system should be designed to reduce conflicts between vehicular and pedestrian traffic, provide adequate maneuvering and stacking areas, and consideration for emergency vehicle access and security gating systems.

5.       Entrances and exits to and from parking and loading facilities should be provided in compliance with applicable city development requirements.

6.       A vehicle entering the parking facility should not be required to enter a street to move from one location to any other location within the parking facility or premises.

7.       Safe and convenient pedestrian walkways should be provided between buildings and building entrances and parking areas.

8.       Pedestrian access should be provided between transit stops and buildings. Transit shelters should be provided where appropriate.

9.       Pedestrian walkways should be accessible, safe, visually attractive, and well defined by decorative pavement, landscaping, low walls, and low-level lighting.

 

Use berming or grade differentials to screen parking lots



 

Provide clearly paved pedestrian walkways within parking lots



 

Pedestrian walkways should be visually attractive



 

D.      Loading Facility Guidelines.

1.       Location.

a.       To alleviate the unsightly appearance of loading facilities for industrial uses, these areas should not be located at the front of buildings where it is difficult to adequately screened them from view. Such facilities are more appropriate at the rear of the site.

b.       When it is physically not possible to locate loading facilities at the rear of the building, loading docks and overhead doors should be located along the side of the building.

2.       Screening.

a.       Loading facilities need to be sited with care on the industrial site. Whenever possible, these facilities need to be screened from public view as much as possible.

b.       Where screening is required by applicable development regulations, a combination of elements should be used including solid masonry walls, berms, and landscaping.

c.       The method of screening should be architecturally integrated with the adjacent building in terms of materials, colors, shape, and size.

 

Screen all loading facilities



 

E.       Landscaping and Lighting Guidelines.

 

Landscaping should be used to soften building exteriors



 

1.       Landscaping.

a.       Landscaping should be used to define areas such as entrances to buildings and parking lots, define the edges of various land uses, provide transition between neighboring properties, and provide screening for outdoor storage, loading and equipment areas.

b.       Landscaping should be in scale with adjacent buildings and be of an appropriate size at maturity to accomplish its intended purpose.

c.       Buildings should be located on “turf-islands.” A large landscape strip, including mow strips, should be provided between parking areas and the office (front) portion of a structure.

d.       Landscaping around the entire base of the building softens the edge between the parking lot and building and should be accented at entrances to provide focus.

e.       Use changes in building elevation or berming at the edge of the building in conjunction with landscaping to reduce structure mass and height along street façades.

f.        Landscaping should be protected from vehicular and pedestrian encroachment by raised planting surfaces, depressed walks, or the use of curbs. Concrete mow-strips are desired between turf and shrub areas.

g.       In the instance where an industrial use is adjacent to a non-industrial use, appropriate buffering techniques such as additional setbacks, walls, screening and landscaping may be required on a case-by-case basis to mitigate any negative effects of the industrial use.

h.       Use of vines on walls is strongly encouraged in industrial areas to reduce their visual impact and opportunities for graffiti.

2.       Lighting.

a.       Large areas should be illuminated to minimize the visual impact and amount of spillover light onto surrounding projects. High-mounted, widely spaced pole fixtures that illuminate large areas from a single source are not appropriate.

b.       Lighting fixture placement should provide the best illumination for outdoor areas such as parking, shipping and receiving, pedestrian walkways, and work areas.

c.       The design of lighting fixtures and their structural support should be of a scale and architectural design compatible with on-site buildings. If possible, a light standard theme should be provided throughout the industrial/business park.

 

Confine light spread to within the site boundaries



 

F.       Architectural Guidelines. Unlike the general commercial design guidelines, the guidelines for industrial/business park development seek not to impose strict scale and articulation guidelines, but to promote high quality and creative development, which will be an asset to the city. These guidelines will assist the developer in understanding the city’s concept of “quality” design relative to industrial and business park projects.

 

Placing building not parking along industrial frontages is encouraged



 

Example of a quality industrial/business park building



 

1.       General.

a.       Each business park should have a distinct architectural concept that is consistent in theme but rich in subtle variation. Buildings within the same industrial park should be designed to provide a clear, unified, and easily identifiable image. Methods to achieve this include using similar architectural styles and materials, complementary roof forms, signage, colors, and decorative pavement.

b.       The architectural qualities and design elements for industrial buildings that are encouraged are:

i.        Building modulation indentations and architectural details;

ii.       Building entry accentuation;

iii.     Screening of equipment and storage areas; and

iv.      Landscaping to soften building exteriors and buffer between uses.

c.       The elements that are prohibited include:

i.        Large blank, flat surfaces;

ii.       Exposed, untreated concrete block walls (except split face);

iii.     Unscreened loading doors facing the street; and

iv.      Exposed roof drains.

 

Plain box-like structures are discouraged



 

2.       Height and Mass.

a.       The design of industrial buildings should consider the visual and physical relationship to adjacent uses. A structure which dominates its environment by its relative size is discouraged.

b.       Varying building heights/massing and setbacks to define different functions such as offices and warehousing is encouraged.

3.       Building.

a.       Employ variety in building forms to create visual character and interest.

b.       Avoid long unbroken building façades. Façades with varied front setbacks are required.

c.       Front and sidewall elevations should provide building offsets and architectural details.

d.       Entrances to individual buildings should be readily identifiable to visitors and architectural integrated within overall building composition.

 

Entrances should be identifiable to visitors



 

4.       Roofs.

a.       Roof drains and rooftop equipment should be screened from view by architectural features integrated with the design of the structure.

b.       Roofs should be integral to the architectural theme of industrial buildings. Rooflines of industrial buildings should include variations to avoid long, continuous planes.

 

Screening rooftop equipment is encouraged



 

5.       Materials/Colors.

a.       Materials and colors should be used to produce diversity and visual interest.

b.       Use various siding materials, i.e., masonry, concrete texturing, cement or plaster to produce effects of texture and relief that provide architectural interest.

c.       Avoid materials with high maintenance such as stained wood, clapboard, or shingles.

d.       Plant material should be utilized immediately adjacent to walls to discourage graffiti. Vines where planted should be maintained on walls.

e.       Materials should be chosen to withstand abuse by vandals or accidental damage by machinery. False façades and other simulated materials and ornamentation are discouraged.

f.        Compatible colors in a single façade or composition add interest and variety while reducing building scale and breaking up plain walls.

g.       Light, neutral colors should be used on industrial buildings to help reduce their perceived size. Contrasting trim and color bands can help break up the vertical monotony of flat walls.

h.       Brightly-colored industrial/business park buildings are strongly discouraged. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.250 Multifamily residential.
A.      Introduction.

1.       By their nature, multifamily developments are large in scale and tend to dominate their surroundings if not properly designed. Additionally, issues of parking, circulation, open space, site amenities, and resident safety need to be addressed.

2.       The purpose of this section is to provide design guidelines that address the particular issues associated with multifamily developments. The guidelines cover attached-type dwellings in general, including apartments, condominiums, and townhouses. Multifamily development exists and is planned for the central Route 66 residential district of the specific plan area.

3.       The primary objective of the design guidelines in this section is to ensure quality development that will stand the test of time, be safe and convenient for its residents, and be compatible with the character of the city.

B.      General Design Objectives. The design guidelines for multifamily developments are based on the following objectives.

1.       Establish multifamily residential architectural designs that complement and that support high quality development.

2.       Provide attractive, functional, and convenient site arrangements.

3.       Identify landscape materials and designs that enhance the appearance of multifamily housing developments and contribute to the overall quality of the Glendora community.

4.       Provide for amenities appropriate to the different age groups of multifamily residential developments within an area.

5.       Apply the principles of crime prevention through environmental design (CPTED) to enhance safety and security within multifamily residential developments.

C.      Site Planning.

1.       Context.

a.       New multifamily residential development should be compatible with other development in the immediate area through the use of complementary building arrangements, buffers, and avoidance of overwhelming building scale and visual obstructions.

b.       Landscaping should complement existing landscape materials, location, and massing on adjacent developments.

2.       Building and Facilities Location. Appropriate building siting can reduce the perceived density of multifamily developments, maximize open space areas, provide “eyes on the street” surveillance, and enhance neighborliness by creating community gathering spaces.

 

Dwelling units oriented to the street



 

a.       The siting of buildings should consider the existing neighborhood context. Developments should generally be oriented parallel to the public street or to the development’s internal streets, with some setback variation to provide visual interest.

 

Buildings sited to reinforce “eyes on the street”



 

b.       The clustering of multifamily units should be a consistent site planning element. Whenever possible, buildings should be configured around courtyards, gathering areas, and open spaces.

 

Buildings are configured to form a centralized open space area for children’s outdoor play



 

c.       Buildings should be oriented to provide some privacy yet still relate to the street and the existing community. Doors should be visible from the street and windows should allow residents to have “eyes on the street” for natural surveillance.

 

Doors and windows encourage “eyes on the street”



 

d.       Energy efficiency and energy conservation should be considered in building siting. Buildings should be oriented to take advantage of prevailing breezes whenever possible.

e.       Where public transit is located near the development the site design should consider convenience and comfort factors for residents. These include direct access, widened sidewalks, shaded seating areas, and weather protection provided near public transit stops.

3.       Open Space. Common open space provides opportunities for casual social interaction and safe play areas for children, and it reduces the perceived density of the development. Private open space serves as an outdoor room for residents and a protected play area for toddlers.

a.       Residents should have access to useable open space for recreation and social activities. Open spaces should be conveniently located for the majority of units.

 

Centralized open space provides convenient access for many units



 

b.       Open space areas should be sheltered from the noise and traffic of adjacent streets or other incompatible uses. Open space siting should take advantage of prevailing breezes and sun orientation in order to provide a comfortable environment.

c.       A series of connected open space areas of varying shape, appearance and usage are encouraged. Smaller areas may directly relate to a cluster of units, while the larger areas may serve several clusters as common open space.

Large and small open spaces are connected



 

Private open space at rear of unit



 

d.       Boundaries between private and common open spaces should be clearly defined by low walls or plant materials.

e.       Buildings should be sited and designed so that windows of neighboring units do not overlook private open spaces likely to be used for private activities.

f.        Private open space should be provided adjacent to the units it serves and should be immediately adjacent to the public right-of-way or common open space.

 

Private open space adjacent to common open space



4.       Outdoor Play Areas. On-site outdoor play areas can provide children with a safe and interesting environment, and allow parents to easily view play areas in order to supervise play activities. Children, especially those in the five- to twelve-year-old age group, tend to play throughout the entire grounds of a development, not just in designated play areas. Therefore, their needs, as well as maintenance requirements, should be important design considerations.

a.       Children’s play areas should be visible from as many units as possible and from private open space areas. Direct, convenient access from ground level, private open space to the communal play area is encouraged.

 

Units with views and convenient access to the play area



 

b.       Outdoor play areas should be located adjacent to laundry rooms, community centers, or similar common facilities. Play areas should not be located near public streets, parking, or entry areas unless physically separated by appropriate walls, fencing, or dense landscaping.

c.       Hard surface areas for outdoor activities (e.g., bicycle riding, skating, rope jumping, and hopscotch) should be provided. These active play areas should be safely separated from vehicular use areas.

d.       In larger developments, separate, but not necessarily segregated, play areas or informal outdoor spaces should be provided for different age groups for safety reasons. Small developments may combine play areas (e.g., a tot lot incorporated into a larger activity area for older children).

 

Create separate play areas for the activities of younger and older children



 

e.       Seating areas should be provided where adults can supervise children’s play and also where school-age children can sit. Seating location should consider comfort factors, including sun orientation, shade, and wind.

5.       Miscellaneous Site Elements.

a.       Walls and Fences.

i.        The design of walls and fences, as well as the materials used, should be consistent with the overall development’s design. Fence and wall color should be compatible with the development and adjacent properties. To facilitate quick removal of graffiti, all wood fences should be painted. Paint color used on fences should be common colors readily purchased and kept readily available on the development’s premises.

ii.       If front yard fences are provided, visually penetrable materials (e.g., wrought iron or tubular steel) should be used.

 

Penetrable wrought iron fences allow views



 

Low retaining walls in the front yard



 

iii.     Wall design and selection of materials should consider maintenance issues, especially graffiti removal and long-term maintenance. Concrete capstones on stucco walls are encouraged to help prevent water damage from rainfall and moisture.

iv.      Individual dwelling unit patio and rear yard fences and walls visible from the development’s open space should be of a height not to preclude natural surveillance by residents into and out of these areas. Outdoor privacy walls between units, however, may be higher. To increase privacy, it is encouraged that the privacy walls be solid.

b.       Site Furniture.

i.        The design, selection and placement of all site furnishings (e.g., tables, benches, bollards, and trash receptacles) should be compatible with the overall site design and architectural character of the development.

ii.       Seating opportunities should be provided in both sunny and shaded areas. Seating in areas that offer opportunities for social interaction and informal surveillance, (e.g., a bench near the communal mailbox area or benches near tot lot areas and laundry rooms) are strongly encouraged. A variety of sitting area designs, from formal arrangements (benches) to informal arrangements (low walls or steps) are encouraged. In general benches should be located in areas that have some provision for shade.

 

Seating areas in a shaded location



 

iii.     A drinking fountain located near each children’s play area is encouraged. Drinking fountains should be “high/low” to accommodate various age groups and disabled persons.

iv.      Onsite trash receptacles should be located in or adjacent to high use areas (e.g., community facilities, play areas, and laundry rooms).

c.       Refuse Storage Areas.

i.        Refuse storage areas should be located in convenient but not prominent areas, such as inside parking courts, or at the end of parking bays. They should be well screened in compliance with requirements of the Development Code.

 

A trellis and gate screen the trash enclosure



 

ii.       Trash receptacles should be accessible for trash collection but should not block circulation drives near loading areas or conflict with parking. For security reasons, trash enclosure locations should not create blind spots or hiding areas.

d.       Mailboxes.

i.        Mailboxes should be located in highly visible, heavy use areas for convenience, to allow for casual social interaction, and to promote safety. A bench or seating area in close proximity to the mailbox location is strongly encouraged, and a trash receptacle should be located adjacent to the mailboxes.

ii.       Incorporation of design features, such as a built frame consistent with the development’s architectural style, is encouraged.

 

A bench near the mailbox offers an opportunity to socialize



 

e.       Signs.

i.        Signs contribute to the development’s identity as a unique environment. Professionally designed, creative signs are strongly encouraged, especially for internal directions and building identification.

ii.       Clear legible entry signs should be provided to identify the development. Internal circulation signs and visitor parking areas should also be clearly indicated. A directory that shows the location of buildings and individual dwelling units within the development is encouraged.

iii.     Building numbers and individual unit numbers should be readily visible, in a consistent location, well lit at night, and compatible with the overall design of the development.

 

Visible building numbers help visitors to easily locate units



 

D.      Architecture. It is not intended that these guidelines designate a particular architectural style or a specific design character. The primary focus should be to construct a high quality residential environment that is compatible with the surrounding community. The architectural guidelines address the overall external appearance of the development, including building forms, details, and proportions. Use of single-family residential design elements (e.g., pitched roofs, porches, individual entries) are recommended to reduce perceived density, give identity to the development and its individual dwelling units, add visual interest, and be compatible with the context.

1.       General.

a.       Architectural styles most appropriate to influence the design of multifamily developments within the specific plan areas include: Monterey, Craftsman, Mission Revival, and Spanish Colonial Revival.

b.       To create a unified appearance, all support buildings in the development, (e.g., laundry facilities, recreation buildings, carports, garages, and the management office) should be compatible in architectural design with the rest of the development.

2.       Building Scale and Height.

a.       Buildings should incorporate smaller-scale architectural forms such as bays, recessed or projecting balconies, and dormers to visually reduce the height and scale of the building and emphasize the definition of individual units. Architectural elements such as bay windows, porches, projecting eaves, awnings, and similar elements that add visual interest to the development are strongly encouraged.

b.       In order to “scale down” façades that face the street, common open space, and adjacent residential structures, it may be desirable to set back portions of the upper floors of new multifamily buildings.

c.       Varied building heights are encouraged, both to provide visual interest and give the appearance of a collection of smaller structures. Building heights at the development’s edge should be considered within the context of the project’s surroundings, the adjacent uses, and the distance from adjacent buildings. The development’s building height should create a transition from the heights of adjacent existing residential development, rather than form abrupt height changes.

 

Height transition from existing one-story dwelling to new two-story development



 

3.       Façade Modulation.

a.       Boxy and monotonous façades that lack human scale dimensions and have large expanses of flat wall planes should be avoided. Architectural treatments, such as recessed windows, moldings, decorative trim, and wood frames, should be used to add visual interest to the façade. Windows of varied shape, size, and placement are encouraged.

 

Examples of various windows styles that create visual interest on a building



 

b.       Building façades that enclose stairwells should include residential-type windows to reduce the visual bulk of the stairwell and enhance safety. Building façades enclosing elevator shafts should use architectural treatments to reduce the visual mass.

c.       To provide visual interest and avoid an identical appearance, garage doors should incorporate some architectural detailing that is consistent with the overall development’s architectural design, such as patterned garage doors or painted trim.

4.       Building Entries.

a.       Courtyard doors or gates used at building entries should be attractively designed as an important architectural feature of the building or development.

b.       Individual entries should have a strong relationship with a fronting street, internal walkway, or courtyard, as appropriate to the overall siting concept. A transitional area from the public space or walkway to the private dwelling unit entry, such as a porch, steps, or landscaped walkway, should be provided.

c.       Each dwelling unit’s entry should be emphasized and differentiated through architectural elements such as porches, stoops, or roof canopies, and detailing. Opportunities should be provided for residents to personalize their entry by providing ground level space or a wide ledge for potted plants.

 

A wide ledge creates opportunities to personalize the dwelling unit



5.       Stairs.

a.       Minimize the number of second floor dwelling units served by a single flight of stairs. Where appropriate for the architectural style, the stairway design should be open to allow for natural surveillance.

Open stairways allow natural surveillance



 

b.       Where prefabricated metal stairs are used, additional design features such as screen walls, enhanced railings, or accent colors should be used to enhance their appearance. The additional design features should be consistent with the overall building design.

6.       Building Materials.

a.       The development’s dwelling units, community facilities, and parking structures should be unified by a consistent use of building materials, textures, and colors. Exterior columns or supports for site elements, such as trellises and porches, should utilize materials and colors that are compatible with the rest of the development.

b.       Building materials should be durable, require low maintenance, and be of comparable quality and image to what is used in the surrounding neighborhood. Frequent changes in building materials should be avoided.

7.       Roofs.

a.       Roof pitches and materials should appear residential in character and should consider the prevailing roof types in the neighborhood, including flat roofs, hipped or gabled roofs, and mansard roofs. The roof pitch for a porch may be slightly lower than the roof pitch of the main building.

b.       Roof lines should be broken up and varied within the overall horizontal plane. Combinations of roof heights that create variation and visual interest are encouraged.

c.       Carport roofs visible from buildings or streets should incorporate the roof pitch and materials of the main buildings.

8.       Color.

a.       Color should be used as an important design element in the development’s appearance. The predominant colors for the dwelling units and accessory structures should be natural or muted tones. Appropriate use of more than one predominant paint color is encouraged. Compatible accent colors are encouraged to enhance important building elements.

b.       The color of shadow patterns, relief, decorative trim, and wood frames should be distinctive yet compatible with the overall building color.

c.       Materials such as brick, stone, copper, etc. should be left in their natural colors. Such materials should not appear thin and artificial. Veneer should turn corners and avoid exposed edges.

 

Veneer materials should turn corners and avoid exposed edges



 

9.       Mechanical Equipment and Vents.

a.       On-site mechanical equipment visible from buildings or a public street should be screened.

b.       Roof flashing and vents exposed to public view should be painted to match adjacent surfaces or concealed in a manner consistent with the building’s appearance.

E.       Landscaping. Landscaping serves many functions in a multifamily housing development. Plant materials can create unique identity, visually connect areas, soften the architecture, provide shade, and screen unattractive areas. Landscaping is important to site design and safety/security issues, as it helps to define outdoor space and edges and can be used to discourage graffiti. An attractive, well-maintained landscaped environment contributes to overall resident satisfaction in the development and it also enhances the appearance of the surrounding neighborhood.

1.       Use of Landscaping.

a.       Landscape design and selection of plant materials are an important component in multifamily developments. The development’s budget should provide for quality landscaping design, proper installation, and plant sizes that will “fill in” and beautify the development within a reasonable period of time.

b.       Use of landscaping is encouraged to define and accent specific areas such as building and parking lot entrances and the main walkways to community facilities.

c.       Plant materials should be used to define the territorial edge between public and private space, buffer adjacent uses, when appropriate, and screen service areas.

2.       Landscape Design.

a.       Landscaped areas should generally use a three-tiered planting system consisting of ground cover; shrubs and vines; and trees. Grass is a high-maintenance ground cover that should be used primarily for active recreation areas. Grass should not be used in narrow strip areas; groundcover or shrubs are more appropriate.

 

Groundcover, shrubs and trees help to create an attractive development



 

b.       Different landscape designs and plant materials should be used in the various courtyards and common open space areas of the development to create an individual identity for each space.

c.       Landscape designs that emphasize water-efficient plants are encouraged. Water-intensive landscaping, such as grass, should be concentrated in areas of high visibility and use.

d.       Vines and climbing plants on buildings, trellises, perimeter walls, and fences are encouraged, both to provide an attractive appearance and to minimize graffiti.

e.       Landscape plantings should be used to help define property lines and distinguish private space from public space by creating a strong edge through a distinct change of plant material, form, height and/or color.

f.        Trees and shrubs should be selected based on their mature size and root characteristics. Plants with root systems that uplift hardscape materials should be avoided.

g.       Landscape materials should be used to help screen trash enclosures and mechanical equipment so that they are not exposed to view from the street or major walkways within the development.

h.       Trees and shrubs should not be planted so close together that they create maintenance and security problems at maturity. They should not completely obstruct views into the development from the public right-of-way, especially views to dwelling entries and common open space areas.

i.        Tree height and spread should consider the location of light standards in order to avoid conflicts and maintenance problems as the tree grows.

j.        The following are design concepts that are encouraged in all developments:

i.        Use specimen trees and accent plant materials at major focal points, such as the entry to the development or where major walkways intersect with the common open space area.

ii.       Use landscaping to help define the edges of common open space areas and to distinguish the boundary between private and common open space areas.

iii.     Use plantings to soften building lines and emphasize the positive features of the site. Use plantings to create shadows and patterns against walls.

iv.      Use dense landscaping to physically separate children’s outdoor play areas from vehicular parking or entry areas.

v.       Use trees to create canopy and shade, especially in parking areas and passive open space areas. Trees with open branching structures and less dense foliage should be used to allow “filtered” views to parking lots for security purposes.

k.       Hardscape materials should be consistent with the architectural design or style of the development. The use of interlocking pavers, scored concrete, or rough-textured concrete to define site entries is strongly encouraged. Stamped concrete or colored concrete is not recommended due to excessive maintenance and repair costs associated with its use.

F.       Parking and Circulation. Safe and efficient parking and circulation arrangements take into consideration the needs of pedestrians, children at play, parking lot appearance, and prevention of car theft or damage.

1.       Parking.

a.       One large parking area where cars would dominate views and increase perceived density should be avoided. Parking areas should be divided into a series of small parking courts with convenient access that relates to adjacent dwelling units. For security reasons, dwelling units should have sight lines out to the parking areas, but these views should be partially filtered through use of appropriate landscaping, such as trees.

 

Small parking courts with trees that filter views from dwelling units



 

b.       Parking areas should be located in the development’s interior and not along street frontages. Parking areas should not compete with open space. Carports and tuck-under parking should not be visible from a public street.

c.       Parking structures, such as garages and carports, should be located where they do not obstruct natural surveillance.

d.       Entry drives should have an adjacent pedestrian entry path.

e.       Special accents that define the main entry, create territorial reinforcement, and provide visual interest are strongly encouraged. Examples include architectural detailing, specialty lighting, textured paving, a hardscape decorative border strip along the driveway, and accent plant materials such as specimen trees and flowering plants.

 

Entry drive with textured paving and border strip



 

f.        Carports, detached garages, and accessory structures should be designed as an integral part of the development’s architecture. They should be similar in material, color, and detail to the main buildings of the development. If prefabricated metal carports are used, architectural detailing consistent with the main building should be incorporated.

g.       Parking courts should be well designed, with consideration given to landscaping, lighting, building massing, and pedestrian/vehicular circulation.

h.       Visitor and disabled parking should be clearly identified and distributed throughout the development to provide convenient access to groups of dwellings and community facilities.

i.        For convenience, parking spaces should be assigned, but the parking space numbering system should not identify the dwelling unit that is assigned to the space.

2.       Pedestrian Circulation. Pedestrian circulation provides safe, efficient access to facilities and dwelling units for residents, encourages opportunities for casual social encounters, and allows natural surveillance by residents.

a.       Convenient pedestrian connections should be provided to adjoining residential developments, commercial projects, and other compatible land uses.

b.       Pedestrian access to adjacent existing or planned open space areas and corridors should be provided for the development’s residents.

 

Provide access to adjacent open space corridors



 

c.       Cross circulation between vehicles and pedestrians should be minimized. A continuous, clearly marked walkway should be provided from the parking areas to main entrances of buildings.

d.       Walkways should be located to minimize the impact of pedestrians on the privacy of nearby residences or private open space. Avoid siting a walkway directly against a building. A landscaped planting area between walkways and building façades is strongly encouraged.

e.       Adequate lighting should be provided along all walkways.

3.       Access to Dwellings. Access to dwellings should provide a unique identity for the individual unit, allow opportunities for social interaction and increase natural surveillance.

a.       The main entry to each dwelling unit should be clearly visible from the nearest public circulation walkway. A porch, covered stoop, or similar entry feature should be provided at each unit’s front entry.

 

Individual private walkways lead to each ground level unit



 

b.       Stairwells should be centrally located to the units served and should be visible from as many units as possible.

c.       Minimize the number of units sharing a common entry or stairway.

d.       To minimize the outdoor clutter that can accumulate in private open space areas, private storage space for strollers, bicycles, etc., should be provided for each dwelling unit. Its location should be either inside the unit, or outside and immediately adjacent to the unit.

e.       Walkways and access to dwelling units should be designed to facilitate the moving of furniture by considering minimum widths, heights, and turning angles.

G.      Public Safety Through Design. Residents have a basic right to feel safe and secure in their homes. The following guidelines promote the use of site planning, landscaping, community involvement, and physical and psychological barriers to create a safe environment and to prevent crime, vandalism, and graffiti. The principles of crime prevention through environmental design (CPTED) are used extensively. The lighting guidelines are less detailed, and recognize that specific illumination levels are dependent on the individual site characteristics.

1.       Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED). The following CPTED strategies should be incorporated into the design of multifamily developments, whenever possible.

a.       Use the concept of natural surveillance, or “eyes on the street,” by promoting features that maximize the visibility of people, parking, and building entrances.

b.       Use the concept of territorial reinforcement by promoting features such as landscape plantings, paving designs, and gateway treatments that define property lines and distinguish private space from public space.

c.       Use the concept of natural access control by designing streets, walkways, building entrances, and development entries to clearly indicate public routes and to discourage access to private areas.

2.       Opportunities for Surveillance.

a.       Windows and entries should be placed to maximize natural surveillance of the site. Sight lines from dwelling units to the parking area should be provided.

b.       Open spaces, courtyards, circulation corridors, and individual dwelling unit entrances should be designed to be visible from as many dwelling units as possible. Enclosure of private open space should not prevent common open space surveillance by residents.

c.       The management office should be located in a central, visible location, and community meeting rooms and other amenities should also be located close to other heavily used areas.

 

Security is enhanced with a management office that is in a highly visible location



 

d.       Laundry rooms should be located adjacent to the children’s play area to facilitate supervision. Doors and walls should have windows to allow natural surveillance both into the laundry room and outside to the surrounding area.

 

A laundry room with windows allows open views out to the surrounding area



 

3.       Hierarchy of Space.

a.       Development design should use a “hierarchy of space” to define territory for public space (streets), community space (common open space, play areas, communal laundry, community center, etc.), and private space (individual units and private open space.) The use of design elements to define the public/private edge, such as special paving, change in building materials, and grade separations, or physical barriers such as landscaping, fences, walls, screens, or building enclosures, are encouraged.

 

Grade separation and low retaining walls establish a public/private edge and define



 

b.       Building entrances and individual dwelling unit entries should be accentuated by architectural elements, lighting, and/or landscaping to further emphasize their private nature.

4.       Access.

a.       Doors to community facilities should contain some transparency and be key-controlled by residents. Courtyard gates and shared building entrances that access individual units should automatically lock when closed.

b.       All front doors in individual dwelling units should have a peephole or other feature to allow residents to see who is at the door before opening it. To prevent break-ins, doorknobs should be located beyond easy reach from any windowpane. Single cylinder dead bolt locks should be installed on the exterior doors of all individual dwelling units. Sliding glass doors should have one permanent door on the outside and the inside moving door should have a locking device and a pin.

c.       If security bars are provided, they should be located only on the inside of windows and have proper emergency release mechanisms.

5.       Lighting.

a.       Lighting levels should vary depending on the specific use and conditions, but the overall consideration should be to provide lighting levels sufficient that intruders cannot lurk in shadows, steps and other grade changes are apparent, residents can easily unlock their door or identify visitors on their doorstep, and opportunities for theft and vandalism are eliminated.

b.       Street lighting should be installed along the internal circulation streets. Lighting should be designed to shine downward and eliminate skyward glare. Light standards should be residential/pedestrian in scale and be spaced appropriately for the fixture, type of illumination and pole height.

c.       Lighting in parking areas should be arranged to prevent direct glare into adjacent dwelling units and onto neighboring uses/properties.

d.       Pedestrian-scaled lighting should be located along all walkways within the development. Lighting bollards should not be used as they do not illuminate large enough areas and are subject to vandalism. Light standards heights are recommended that concurrently allow proper illumination, discourage vandalism, and have a pedestrian scale. Site lighting may be located on buildings to illuminate site areas not covered by individual light standards. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.260 Architectural styles.
A.      Mission Revival.

1.       Introduction.

a.       The following architectural styles are presented to encourage architectural diversity and quality within the Route 66 specific plan area. It is not the intent of this section to dictate preferences of architectural styles. This section should be used by city staff and officials, as well as project applicants, to more effectively achieve the image envisioned for the Route 66 specific plan area.

b.       As the name implies, the mission style finds its roots in the architecture of the California missions. In the late 1800s, several innovative California architects began to advocate the mission style in a response to other “revivalist” movements taking place then on the east coast. They chose as their inspiration local Hispanic design elements and adapted these elements to adorn traditional building shapes whether residential or nonresidential. The mission style found great impetus when the Santa Fe and Southern Pacific railroads adopted the style for their stations.

 









 

2.       Character-Defining Features.

a.       Parapets with coping fashioned after the California missions.

b.       Full pitched roofs over most of the building. Simple low pitch hip or gable roofs are preferred. Shed roofs may be appropriate when attached to taller walls. Minor portions of the roof may be flat.

c.       Symmetrical façades are most common but asymmetrical designs are also acceptable.

d.       Clay tiled roofs using two-piece tile of consistent color. “S” type tile and multi-colored tile are prohibited.

e.       Simple box-like massing with the appearance of thick walls. Windows and doors are recessed to expose thickness of walls.

f.        Arched doors and windows with semicircular shapes preferred. Large windows are multi-paned.

g.       Arcades used to define courtyards and walkways.

h.       Smooth plaster/stucco walls with hand-troweled finish.

i.        Exposed timber structural elements for beams, rafter tails, and corbels. Color is dark stain.

j.        Simple wrought iron grillework railings, window grilles, and decoration.

k.       Quatrefoil windows on primary façade.

l.        Tile accents used around door and window openings, built in seating, paving, and general decoration.

m.      Building colors are white, off-white, or earth tone with contrasting door and window trim colors.

n.       Larger structures may incorporate mission-like bell towers.

B.      Spanish Colonial Revival. The Spanish colonial revival style borrows from the full range of Spanish architecture. Beginnings of the style derive primarily from the Panama-California Exposition of 1915. Until that time, mission-style architecture was more popular. The exposition showcased the richness of Spanish and Latin American architecture and trendsetting architects of the time found new inspiration in this style during the 1920s and 1930s.









 

1.       Character-Defining Features.

a.       Simple low-pitched roofs are preferred. Shed roofs may be appropriate when attached to taller walls. Minor portions of the roof may be flat.

b.       Asymmetrical façades are most common.

c.       Multi-level clay tiled roofs using two-piece tile of consistent color. “S” type tile and multi-colored tile are prohibited.

d.       Eaves with little or no overhang.

e.       Simple box-like massing with the appearance of thick walls. Windows and doors are recessed to expose thickness of walls.

f.        Large windows are multi-paned.

g.       Arcades used to define courtyards and walkways.

h.       Smooth plaster/stucco walls with hand-troweled finish.

i.        Decorative masonry or tile vents.

j.        Exposed timber structural elements for beams, rafter tails, and corbels. Color is dark stain.

k        Simple wrought iron grillework railings, window grilles, and decoration.

l.        Tile accents used around door and window openings, built in seating, paving, stairs, and general decoration.

m.      Building colors are white, off-white, or earth tone with contrasting door and window trim colors.

n.       Larger structures may incorporate round or square towers.

C.      Monterey. The Monterey style is essentially a two-story adaptation of early Spanish colonial styles. As trade opened up the west coast, Anglo immigrants arrived in the territory with their own building traditions. As these were superimposed on the traditional adobe construction, the two-story versions came to be called Monterey style after the colonial capital of California. A revival of the style from 1925 to 1940 favored Spanish detailing while versions from the 1940s and 1950s emphasize English colonial details. Because this style is always two-story and therefore may be larger in scale than adjacent buildings, the Monterey style should be used carefully and with appropriate consideration to the style and scale of surrounding buildings.

 





 

1.       Character-Defining Features.

a.       Low pitched gabled roofs.

b.       Second-story balcony, usually cantilevered and covered by main roof.

c.       Clay tiled roofs.

d.       Simple box-like massing with the appearance of thick walls. Windows and doors are recessed to expose thickness of walls.

e.       Large windows are multi-paned.

f.        Arcades used to define courtyards and walkways.

g.       Smooth plaster/stucco walls with hand-troweled finish.

h.       Exposed timber structural elements for beams, rafter tails, and corbels. Color is dark stain.

i.        Wood grillework, railings, window grilles, and decoration.

j.        Staircases are fully enclosed.

k.       Building colors are white or off-white with contrasting door and window trim colors.

D.      Art Deco. Art deco architecture also gained prominence during the Chicago Tribune competition. It preceded its counterpart, art moderne, and differs from it in a number of ways. Art deco buildings emphasize the vertical through towers and other projections. Façade details include decorative zigzags, chevron and other geometric and stylized motifs.





 

1.       Character-Defining Features.

a.       Smooth wall surface, usually stucco;

b.       Decorative zigzags, chevrons, and other geometric motifs;

c.       Towers and other vertical projections give vertical emphasis.

E.       Art Moderne. The art moderne style of architecture gained recognition in the early 1920s in conjunction with a worldwide competition to design the Chicago Tribune building. In the moderne style, one or more corners may be curved and it is common for windows to turn those corners. These houses generally have smooth wall surfaces, flat roofs, and a strong horizontal emphasis through balustrades and detailing. The use of glass block and small round windows is common.

Moderne building





 

1.       Character-Defining Features.

a.       Smooth wall surface, usually stucco;

b.       Flat roof with small ledge or coping at roofline;

c.       Horizontal grooves, lines, or balustrades offer horizontal emphasis;

d.       Asymmetrical façades most common.

F.       Craftsman. The craftsman style was inspired by the work of the Greene brothers who practiced architecture in Pasadena from 1893 to 1914. The craftsman style represented a philosophy of life that featured honesty, integrity, and a return to nature. Natural woods, shingles, earth colors, brick, stone, river rock, and heavy wooden beams signified a oneness with nature. The rocks and bricks were often used on foundations, chimneys, foundations, and railings to set a unifying theme. Oriental, Tudor, and Swiss-influenced elements lent variety to the style.

Since the craftsman style is predominantly residential in character, its use for commercial buildings should be approached cautiously. This style is most appropriate for buildings that do not require large commercial display windows. Restaurants and office buildings are two examples.

 





1.       Character-Defining Features.

a.       Low-pitched gable roof.

b.       Clapboard or shingle siding.

c.       Exposed timber structural elements, rafter tails, brackets, corbels.

d.       Large open porches with columns.

e.       Square or tapered columns.

f.        Overhanging eaves with exposed rafters.

g.       Projecting brackets/beams.

h.       Large front window(s) usually in three parts.

i.        Front door with sidelights.

j.        Doors and windows outlined with heavy wood molding.

k.       Colors are typically medium to dark earth tones.

G.      Traditional Storefront. Traditional storefront commercial architecture has its roots in American downtowns. This style of architecture includes large display windows on the ground floor (to allow people to see in and out of the building) and one or more stories above (to provide opportunities for accessory uses to occur above). Regardless of the period of American history in which a building was constructed, this style of architecture includes three character-defining elements: the storefront; the upper façade; and the cornice. While these elements are shared, buildings falling within the traditional storefront architectural style may also possess thematic or stylistic traits of other architectural styles (e.g., Victorian, etc.).



 



 

1.       Character-Defining Features.

a.       The storefront is the ground-level of the front façade, containing large display windows with bulkheads (or kick plates) and often including transoms above the display windows.

b.       The upper façade, which is the area above the ground-floor storefront opening, typically contains both wall material (i.e., brick, wood, or stucco) and windows.

c.       The cornice provides a cap for the entire façade, typically detailed in design, and screening utilities on the roof.

d.       Height and width of buildings are in proportion with surrounding buildings.

e.       Proportional relationship exists between door and window openings, creating a rhythm.

f.        Human scale and typically abutting sidewalk.

H.      Contemporary Highway Vernacular—Context-Sensitive. Contemporary highway vernacular architecture includes buildings that are used for selling products or services, but are not of the “pure architecture,” such as commercial buildings designed by famous architects. They are generally easy to construct, designed by industrial designers, and are characterized by a main structure subservient to the signs upon the exterior. This architectural style is based on a concept known as “product-place-packaging,” wherein a business or franchise does not rely on creating a structure for a specific landscape, but creates a fully internalized atmosphere that is identical across all the stores. As a result, this architectural style varies by business type and company; however, a building fitting this style is typically built exactly (or near exactly) the same way in each location.

Gas stations, hotels and motels, fast food establishments, and drug stores provide the most common examples of contemporary highway vernacular architecture. The aggregate of this architectural style has become known as the “commercial strip”: large signs, franchised organizations, and large parking lots. In many locales, this type of architecture is regulated as “formula businesses,” having to adhere to design guidelines and development standards which require conformance to more traditional architectural styles valued by the community—in an effort to move away from an “Anywhere USA” image. For the Route 66 specific plan area, contemporary highway vernacular architecture is encouraged so long as it demonstrates a high level of sensitivity to the envisioned architectural context for the planning area.

 

Most franchises or corporate businesses will work with communities
to modify their typical building design to better fit the local context



 

1.       Character-Defining Features.

a.       Main structure subservient to the signs upon the exterior;

b.       Internalized atmosphere that is identical across all the stores;

c.       Exterior easily recognized and identified with a certain company across all the stores;

d.       Surrounded by large parking areas;

e.       Often regulated to conform to locally supported traditional architectural styles. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.270 Public space amenities.
A.      Site amenities form elements of commonality, which help to establish the identity of a commercial area and provide comfort and interest to its users. Individual site amenities within a commercial setting should have common features, such as color, material, and design to provide a cohesive environment and a more identifiable character.

 

Private development is encouraged to include site amenities compatible
with the Route 66 Specific Plan Streetscape Furniture



 

B.      Seating is an important amenity that should be provided throughout commercial areas within the Route 66 specific plan area. Seating in the public right-of-way should coordinate with other streetscape furnishings.

C.      Walls and fences are generally used for security purposes to define ownership, to mitigate nuisances such as noise, and to screen areas from public view. Walls and fences should be kept as low as possible while performing their functional purpose.

D.      Landscaping should be used in combination with walls to soften the otherwise blank surfaces. Vines planted on walls are strongly encouraged to hide flat wall surfaces and to help reduce graffiti.

 

Provide seating in a shaded area



 

E.       Pedestrian scale lighting is strongly encouraged. The style and color of lighting should relate to the overall architectural design of the primary commercial structure.

F.       Tree grates should occur along street edges and plazas where a continuous walking surface is needed. Grate sizes should be a minimum of four feet in diameter. Knockouts must be provided to enlarge the inside diameter for supporting a larger tree trunk as the tree grows.

G.      Tree guards should extend vertically from tree grates, and serve to protect trees in highly active areas. Tree guards should be narrow and painted in a similar color and relate to other site furnishings.

 

Compatible tree grate and guard



 

H.      Bollards are intended to separate pedestrians from vehicular traffic areas and to light sidewalk surfaces. Bollard design should coordinate with other streetscape furnishings. In locations where emergency access may be necessary, removable bollards are encouraged.

 

Bollards are encouraged to promote safety of pedestrians



 

I.        Trash receptacle design should coordinate with other streetscape furnishings.

J.       Pots and planters should be located where pedestrian flow will not be obstructed.

K.      Pots and planters should be durable and have natural color tones that compliment the adjacent structures.

 

Pots should be clustered together and away from pedestrian flow



 

L.       Directories should be provided near pedestrian entrances of commercial centers to assist visitors in orienting themselves.

 

Directories help customers find businesses



 

M.     Kiosks that serve as information booths and/or shelter for small vendors are encouraged. Kiosks should be located where pedestrian flow will not be obstructed.

N.      Bicycle racks should be selected that are durable and visually subdued. Based on their performance, “loop racks” and “ribbon bars” are encouraged, and should be sized according to parking requirements.

O.      The design of newspaper boxes should be consolidated into one rack. The rack should be attractive on all sides and properly anchored.

 

Newspaper racks should be designed as attractive public amenities



 

P.       Bus stops should be as transparent as possible to increase unobstructed visibility from the ground level up in all directions.

Q.      Visual features, such as fountains, should be incorporated into commercial developments to attract pedestrians.

 

Pop-set fountains are increasingly popular visual fixtures in commercial developments



(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.280 Signage.
A.      Introduction. Signs are one of the most noticeable visual elements throughout the Route 66 specific plan area. Not only do signs communicate something about the goods or services being offered at a particular establishment they also communicate something about the quality of the businesses and the image of the community as a whole. Taken together with other visual elements in the environment, signs play a major role in how people perceive the city’s image. Well-designed signs that communicate their message clearly, without attempting to compete for attention will help create a more pleasant visual environment with the Route 66 specific plan area.

 

A good quality sign enhances the aesthetic character of the development



 



The sign design guidelines are designed to help ensure quality signs that communicate their message in a clear fashion; however, the “guidelines” are not strict sign “standards” as are found in the city’s Sign Code. The design guidelines may be interpreted with some flexibility in their application to specific signs/projects. This is in recognition that not all guidelines may be workable or appropriate for each sign or project. In some circumstances, a particular guideline may be relaxed to facilitate compliance with another guideline determined by the city to be more important. These decisions will be made on a case-by-case basis. The primary objective is to ensure that the overall intent of the design guidelines is followed is each case.

 

Design guidelines ensure good quality signs



 



 

B.      General Design Guidelines.

1.       Sign Legibility.

a.       Use a brief message. The fewer the words, the more effective the sign. A sign with a brief, succinct message is simpler and faster to read, looks cleaner and is more attractive. Evaluate each word carefully, and, if it does not contribute directly to the sign’s message, it should probably be eliminated. Businesses with long names are encouraged to use a generic identification (e.g., “CLEANERS”) rather than force too much sign copy into the allowed sign area.

 

Keep signs as simple as possible



 



 

b.       Ensure legibility. An effective sign should do more than attract attention; it should communicate its message clearly. Usually, this is a question of the readability of words and phrases. The most significant influence on legibility is lettering style and spacing. Use the following guidelines to help ensure sign legibility.

i.        Avoid hard-to-read, intricate typefaces. Typefaces that are difficult to read reduce the sign’s ability to communicate.

ii.       Avoid spacing letters and words too close together. Crowding of letters, words or lines will make any sign more difficult to read. Conversely, over-spacing these elements causes the viewer to read each item individually, again obscuring the message. Lettering should not occupy more than seventy-five percent of the sign face.

 

Avoid typefaces that are hard to read



 

iii.     Limit the number of lettering styles in order to increase legibility. A general rule to follow is to limit the number of different letter types to no more than two for small signs and three for larger signs.

iv.      Avoid faddish and bizarre typefaces. Such typefaces may look good today, but soon go out of style. The image conveyed may quickly become that of a dated and unfashionable business.

c.       Use significant contrast. If there is little contrast between the brightness or hue of the message of a sign and its background, it will be difficult to read.

d.       Avoid signs with strange shapes. Signs that are unnecessarily narrow or oddly shaped can restrict the legibility of the message. If an unusual shape is not symbolic, it will probably be confusing.

e.       Use symbols and logos. Pictographic images will usually register more quickly in the viewer’s mind than a written message.

2.       Location.

a.       Signs should be designed to relate to the architectural features of the building on which they are located and create visual continuity with other storefronts in the same building and adjacent buildings.

b.       Signs should be placed to indicate the location of access to a business. Signs should be placed at or near the public entrance to a building or main parking area to indicate the most direct access to the business.



 

c.       Signs should be placed consistent with the proportions of the building’s façade. For example, a particular sign may fit well on an upper, more plain wall, but would overpower and obstruct the finer detail of a lower storefront area. A sign appropriate near the building’s entry may look tiny and out of place above the ground level.

 

Don’t do this. Inconsistent sign patterns create confusion



 

Do this. Employ a consistent sign pattern



 

d.       On buildings that have a monolithic or very plain façade, proper sign placement can establish appropriate rhythm, scale, and proportion.

e.       Signs should not be located so that they cover or interrupt the architectural details or ornamentation of a building’s façade.

f.        Signs should not project above the edge of the rooflines and should not obstruct, windows and/or doorways.

3.       Color.

a.       Too many colors overwhelm the basic function of communication. If they compete with content for the viewer’s attention. Limited use of the accent colors can increase legibility, while large areas of competing colors tend to confuse and disturb. Limit colors to three on a single sign.

b.       Contrast is an important influence on the legibility of signs. The most aesthetic and effective graphics are produced when light colored letters and images are placed on a dark, contrasting colored background.

 

Light colored letters on contrasting background





 

c.       Colors or color combinations that interfere with legibility of the sign copy or that interfere with viewer identification of other signs should be avoided. Bright day-glo (fluorescent) colors should be avoided as they are distracting and do not blend well with other background colors.

 

Avoid combinations of materials that camouflage the sign’s message



 

d.       Colors should relate to and complement the materials or paint scheme of the buildings, including accent and trim colors.

4.       Illumination.

a.       If the sign can be illuminated by an indirect source of light, this is usually the best arrangement because the sign will appear to be better integrated with the building’s architecture. Light fixtures supported in front of the sign cast light on the sign and generally a portion of the face of the building as well. Indirect lighting emphasizes the continuity of the building’s surface and signs become an integral part of the façade. Conversely, internally illuminated cabinet signs where only the sign face is illuminated tend to stand out and not appear integrated with the building’s façade.

 

Internally illuminated signs are discouraged



 

b.       Individually illuminated letters, either internally illuminated or back-lighted solid letters (reverse channel), are a preferred alternative to internally illuminated plastic-faced cabinet signs. Signs comprised of individual letters will be better integrated with the building because they use the building’s façade as their background.

 

Signs illuminated by an indirect source of light are encouraged



 

c.       The use of backlit, individually cut letter signs is strongly encouraged for all types of business and signs, including monument-type signs.

 

Good example of a backlit sign that is easy to read



d.       The use of internally illuminated cabinet-type signs with translucent panels or panels with reflective surfaces, including, but not limited to, acrylic, fiberglass, plastic, or metal is strongly discouraged and the Sign Code prohibits their use for monument-type signs. If internally illuminated cabinet signs are used for wall signs, their sign panels should be opaque so that when illuminated only the lettering, not the background, is illuminated. The background or field should have a nongloss, nonreflective finish.

e.       Whenever indirect lighting fixtures are used, care should be taken to properly shield the light source to prevent glare from spilling over into residential areas and public rights-of-way.

 

Backlit letter signs are encouraged





 

5.       Materials.

a.       Sign materials should be selected with consideration for the architectural design of the building’s façade. Sign materials should compliment materials used on the building and should also contribute to the legibility of the sign. For example, the glossy finishes used on most cabinet signs are often difficult to read because of glare and reflections.

b.       Sign materials should be extremely durable. Paper and cloth signs are not suitable for exterior use because they deteriorate quickly. If wood is used, it should be properly sealed to keep moisture from soaking into the wood and causing the sign’s lettering to deteriorate.

 

Avoid materials that cause glare and make the sign hard to read



 

Select materials that are durable



 

Avoid cloth and other nondurable materials



 

6.       Electrical Raceways and Conduits.

a.       Electrical transformer boxes and raceways should be concealed from public view. If a raceway cannot be mounted internally behind the finished exterior wall, the exposed metal surfaces of the raceway should be finished to match the background wall, or integrated into the overall design of the sign.



 

b.       If raceways are necessary, they should be as thin and narrow as possible and should never extend in width or height beyond the area of the sign’s lettering or graphics.

c.       All exposed conduit and junction boxes should be concealed from public view.

C.      Design Guidelines for Specific Sign Types.

1.       Wall and Building Signs.

a.       A wall sign should be located where architectural features or details suggest a location, size, or shape for the sign. The best location for a wall sign is generally a band or blank area between the first and second floors of a building.

b.       New wall signs in a shopping center should be placed consistent with sign locations on adjacent businesses. This will establish visual continuity among storefronts and create a unified appearance for the center.

 

Place signs where architectural features suggest a location



 

Wall signs of consistent size and placement are encouraged



 

c.       Lettering should not occupy more than about seventy-five percent of the area of the sign to avoid a cluttered look and to help maintain the readability of the sign.

d.       Wall signs should not project from the surface upon which they are attached more than the required for construction purposes.

e.       Internally-illuminated cabinet-type signs are strongly discouraged. Internally-illuminated, individually-cut channel letters are preferred.

2.       Projecting Signs.

a.       The use of pedestrian-oriented projecting signs is strongly encouraged.

b.       Projecting signs should be used for ground floor uses only.

c.       Projecting signs should ensure clearance for pedestrians.

d.       Sign supports and brackets should be compatible with the design and scale of the sign and the architectural design of the building.

 

Sign supports and brackets should be of quality materials







e.       Internal illumination of a projecting sign is prohibited.

f.        The text, copy, or logo face should not exceed seventy-five percent of the sign face of a projecting sign.

g.       The sign should be hung at a ninety-degree angle from the face of the building.

3.       Window Signs.

a.       Window signs on ground level, coverage should not unsafely obstruct or overwhelm the total window area. Window signs should not be used above the second level.

b.       Permanent window signs should be limited to individual letters and/or logos placed on the interior surface of the window. White or gold leaf is the recommended colors. Glass-mounted graphics may be applied by painting, silk screening, or vinyl die-cut forms. The use of nonpermanent materials such as paper is strongly discouraged.

Window signs should be limited to the business name





c.       The text or sign copy of a window sign should be limited to the business name, proprietor’s name, hours of operation, and brief messages identifying the type of product or service (e.g., “maternity wear” or “attorney”) or pertinent information (e.g., “se habla Espanol” or “reservations required”).

4.       Awning Signs.

a.       Signs on awnings should be limited to ground floor and second floor uses.

b.       Awning signs should be limited to awnings covering a main or side/rear entrance on a street or parking lot.

c.       The shape, design, and color of awnings should be carefully designed to coordinate with, and not dominate, the architectural style of the building. Where multiple awnings are used on the building, the design and color of the sign awnings and all other awnings should be coordinated.

 

Good example of awning shape coordinated with window size/shape



 

d.       The shape, design, and color of awnings should be carefully designed to coordinate with, and not dominate, the architectural style of the building. Where multiple awnings are used on the building, the design and color of the sign awnings and all other awnings should be coordinated.

e.       Only permanent signs that are an integral part of the awning or canopy should be used. To avoid having to replace awnings or paint out previous tenant signs when a new tenant moves in, the use of replaceable valances should be considered.

 

Lettering on valance only is encouraged



 

5.       Freestanding Monument Signs.

a.       Freestanding monument-type signs (on ground) are encouraged.

 

A well-designed monument sign with architectural base, side frames, and cornice top



 

b.       Sign background should not be a prominent feature of the monument sign. The sign copy should dominant the sign face.

c.       Between five to ten percent of the sign area should be dedicated to identification of the street address.

d.       Freestanding monument signs should be placed perpendicular to the street.

e.       Freestanding monument signs should be placed so that sight lines at entry driveways circulation aisles are not blocked.

 

Good example of monument signs with solid base and strong cornice



f.        Freestanding monument signs may be internally illuminated if the sign copy is the only portion of the sign face that is illuminated. The sign background or field should be opaque with a nongloss, nonreflective finish. Signs with individual backlit letters, or stenciled panels with three-dimensional push-through graphics are encouraged.

g.       Monument signs should be designed to create visual interest and compliment their surroundings. Signs should incorporate architectural elements, details, and articulation as follows:

i.        Provide a solid architectural base that supports the sign.

ii.       Provide architectural elements on the sides and top to frame the sign pane(s). Use columns, pilaster, cornices, and similar details to provide design interest.

iii.     Incorporate materials and colors into the sign support structures to match or be compatible with materials and colors of the development the sign serves.

iv.      Utilize “quality” materials. Avoid the use of lexan, sheet metal, or other materials prone to weathering.

v.       Keep the overall size of the sign in proportion with the development it serves.

h.       Each monument sign should be surrounded by a landscape planter.

i.        Multi-tenant monument signs. Signs with multiple tenant identification panels present a special challenge in delivering their message in a clear manner. To help overcome the problems associated with these types of signs, the following guidelines should be followed:

 

Freestanding monument signs, including multi-tenant signs, should minimize sign copy,
be well designed, and be landscaped along their base



 

i.        Individual tenant sign panels should be uniform in size recognizing that the major tenant or the name of the center may have a slightly larger sign panel.

ii.       The size, letter style, and number of tenant names should be developed to minimize the look of a “reader board” sign.

G.      Neon Signs and Architectural Lighting. The use of neon tubes for signs or architectural elements is encouraged throughout the Route 66 specific plan area, subject to the following guidelines.

1.       Neon signs are allowed for use as wall signs, window signs, and freestanding monument signs. They are not allowed for use as projecting signs.

2.       Neon tubing should not exceed one-half inch in diameter.

3.       Neon signs and architectural lighting adjacent to residential uses should not exceed one-half footcandle in brightness measured at the property line.

 

Good example of neon sign



 

4.       Neon tubing should not be combined with any reflective materials (e.g., mirrors, polished metal, highly-glazed tiles, or other similar materials) that would cause glare and increase the spread of light.

5.       When used as an architectural element, neon tubing should be used only to reinforce specific architectural elements of the structure and should be compatible with the architectural style of the building and the character of the overall development. Neon building trim is limited to thirty percent of the total building trim area.

6.       Neon lighting that completely surrounds a window, door, or similar element is strongly discouraged.

 

This use of neon is strongly discouraged



 

7.       Neon window signs should not overwhelm or over-obstruct the aggregate area of the window.

8.       Neon should not be the predominate material used on signs. The use of neon on signs should be limited to the business name, logo, design, or image. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.290 Design tools design review checklist.
This following checklist may be adapted and used by city staff and officials to conduct design reviews on proposed projects within the Route 66 specific plan area.

 

Route 66 Specific Plan Area Design Review Checklist

 

 

Checklist Prepared by:

Date Plan Received:

Date Checklist Prepared:

Date Presubmittal Conference:

Project Name

Applicant

Name:

Address:

Phone:

Property Owner

Name:

Address:

Phone:

Planner or Architect

Name:

Address:

Phone:

A. Land Use

1. Present Land Use:

Designation on Property:__________________________________________________

Overlay Districts: _______________________________________________________

2. Proposed Land Use:

3. Land Use Consistency—Proposed use(s) conform to permitted uses _____ Yes ____ No

Comments:

 

 

 

 

 

Follows Design Guidelines

Changes Recommended

Not
Applicable

Remarks

B. Site Design

 

 

 

 

1. Height and Setbacks—Building setback and height standards are satisfied.

 

 

 

 

2. Appropriateness of Concept—Development concept is consistent with site location and with surrounding properties.

 

 

 

 

3. Building Location—Buildings are located in a logical and pleasing manner on the site. Buildings are related reasonably to each other, to parking facilities, and to pedestrian areas. Siting protects pedestrian movement.

 

 

 

 

4. View Impacts—Project is designed to respect existing views by minimizing view obstruction and mitigating disruptive visual impacts of large building masses.

 

 

 

 

5. Buffering—Trash areas, loading docks, storage areas, service areas, transformer vaults, etc., are located and screened so as to minimize visibility from streets and from building entries.

 

 

 

 

6. Exterior Lighting—Exterior lighting design is unobtrusive, integrated with the project concept, and of low profile.

 

 

 

 

7. Parking—All parking space and space size requirements are satisfied. All interior and boundary parking area landscaping requirements are satisfied.

 

 

 

 

a. Parking areas are located and designed to minimize visibility from streets and to minimize visual detraction from new buildings.

 

 

 

 

b. Parking areas are designed to provide good internal circulation, street access, and proximity of spaces to building entrances.

 

 

 

 

c. Vehicular entry points to parking lots have received special paving accents where the drive crosses the public sidewalk.

 

 

 

 

d. Applicant has demonstrated an attempt to share entry and/or parking with an adjacent property.

 

 

 

 

C. Building Architecture

 

 

 

 

1. Building Form and Scale—Architectural concept is consistent with the predominant scale of adjacent buildings.

 

 

 

 

2. Façade Proportion—The visual composition of the façade respects the general proportion (height to width) of existing façades on the street.

 

 

 

 

3. 360° Architecture—Architectural details are provided on all elevations.

 

 

 

 

4. Consistency of Elevation—Design of walls, doors, and windows are consistent in styling materials, colors, and detailing on all elevations.

 

 

 

 

5. Articulation—The architectural concept avoids large unbroken wall surfaces.

 

 

 

 

6. Roof—The roof form is designed in conjunction with its mass and façade, so that the building and its roof form a compatible building composition within the district.

 

 

 

 

7. Rear Entry—Appropriate identification signage and architectural detail has been provided on the rear façade.

 

 

 

 

D. Storefront Design

 

 

 

 

1. Storefront Components—The storefront design maintains typical elements such as bulkheads, doors, display windows, awnings, or canopies that are appropriate to the proposed style/theme.

 

 

 

 

2. Wall to Opening Ratio—The storefront architectural concept maintains an appropriate wall to window ratio.

 

 

 

 

3. Storefront Accessories—All mechanical appurtenances are concealed.

 

 

 

 

4. Awnings—Awning design and color respects the scale, proportion, rhythm, and style of the building’s architecture.

 

 

 

 

5. Sign Placement—The storefront design provides a logical space for placement of a sign and building address.

 

 

 

 

E. Signs

 

 

 

 

1. Sign Type—Selected sign type is consistent with other signs on adjacent buildings or storefronts, and meets all applicable codes or approved sign program.

 

 

 

 

2. Location—Sign location on building is consistent with architectural style and other design standards.

 

 

 

 

3. Legibility—A simple typeface is utilized while color, illumination, and letter size are appropriate to the building architecture and scale.

 

 

 

 

4. Illumination—The sign is properly lighted and does not allow glare to spill beyond the sign face.

 

 

 

 

5. Safety—Placement of sign does not pose a safety hazard for motorists or pedestrians.

 

 

 

 

 

(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

Article VI. Land Use and Development Regulations
21.10.300 Purpose and intent.
A.      This article establishes the zoning subdistricts for the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area, the allowable uses (permitted and conditionally permitted) that apply within each zoning subdistrict, and the development and design standards that apply within each subdistrict. Together, the table of allowed use and the development and design standards prescribe the allowed development for the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area.

B.      The intent of the development and land use standards, together with the design standards is to implement the goals of the Route 66 Corridor specific plan.

C.      The land use regulations, development standards and design standards are consistent with the goals and policies of the general plan.

D.      Organization of this article.

1.       Section 21.10.300—Purpose and intent.

2.       Section 21.10.310—General provisions.

3.       Section 21.10.320—Establishment of zoning subdistricts.

4.       Section 21.10.330—Allowable land uses and permit requirements.

5.       Section 21.10.340—Nonconforming uses, structures, and parcels.

6.       Section 21.10.350—Zoning subdistrict development standards.

7.       Section 21.10.360—Standards for specific land uses.

8.       Section 21.10.370—Off-street parking and loading standards.

9.       Section 21.10.380—Landscaping, walls, and fences.

10.     Section 21.10.390—Signs.

11.     Section 21.10.400—Auxiliary structures, equipment, and utilities.

12.     Section 21.10.410—General operating standards.

13.     Section 21.10.420—Development incentives.

14.     Section 21.10.430—Development review procedures. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.310 General provisions.
A.      Minimum Requirements. The land use and development standards contained herein are minimum requirements. In reviewing individual projects requiring discretionary approval, more restrictive standards or conditions may be applied if deemed necessary to accomplish the goals and objectives of this specific plan.

B.      Applicability of Development Standards and Guidelines. The land use and development standards contained in this chapter shall apply to all new development, including additions to buildings, and changes in use, as provided for in Article VII (Implementation and Administration). The design standards contained in Article V, shall also apply. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.320 Establishment of zoning subdistricts.
Purposes of Land Use Subdistricts. This section provides purpose statements for the zoning districts to be applied within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan.

A.      BG (Barranca Gateway) Subdistrict. The Barranca gateway zoning district is intended to serve as the western gateway into the city of Glendora. The Barranca gateway zoning district seeks to provide the western “front door” to the city, through the establishment of distinctive architecture, streetscape, hardscape and other on-site and off-site amenities. The Barranca gateway zoning district is envisioned to capitalize on adjacent market potential introduced by Azusa Pacific University and Citrus College. The development of student housing and supportive retail uses in both horizontal and vertical mixed-use arrangements is strongly encouraged. A high-level of street-oriented development and pedestrian comfort is envisioned to attract nearby students and residents to this district. Uses appropriate for this zoning subdistrict include mixed use, retail sales, restaurants, offices, and other service uses that provide for the daily needs of local residents. The district is intended to promote stable and attractive commercial development that is compatible with adjacent residential use. Commercial uses are strongly encouraged at intersection locations.

B.      GCG (Grand Commercial Gateway) Subdistrict. The Grand Avenue gateway district is intended to enhance Grand Avenue’s function as a primary commercial/retail district within the city. The district is envisioned to serve as a primary southern gateway to the Route 66 Corridor through the provision of higher intensity commercial development catering to the local and regional market. Distinctive architecture and pedestrian amenities compatible with adjacent residences, is encouraged. The zoning subdistrict is intended to provide a wide range of retail sales, business and personal services primarily oriented to the automobile customer. The zoning subdistrict is envisioned as a primary node for serving the general commercial needs of the city through the promotion of stable and attractive retail development.

C.      TCMU (Town Center Mixed Use) Subdistrict. The town center mixed use district is intended to provide for a complementary mix of land uses and development types that are compatible with and reinforce pedestrian activity and transit utilization. The town center mixed use district will emphasize a complementary mix of development types, including multifamily residential, vertical and horizontal mixed-use, commercial uses and smaller-scale street-oriented retail development.

D.      GLG (Glendora Avenue Gateway) Subdistrict. The Glendora Avenue gateway district is intended to support hospital and medical uses, and encourages the consolidation of smaller parcels into a unified campus setting. The subdistrict is envisioned to support new housing in adjacent areas, pedestrian activity and transit utilization. The Glendora Avenue gateway is envisioned to serve the health care needs of the community through expanding the footprint of medical services in the subdistrict and increasing the daytime population with additional employment. The subdistrict may also include limited commercial such as small retail and professional offices.

E.       RSC (Route 66 Service Commercial) Subdistrict. The Route 66 service commercial is intended to provide for a variety of smaller-scale commercial, office and light industrial uses. Flexible commercial and low-intensity industrial development allowing for office/assembly and warehousing under one roof is encouraged. The district is envisioned as a primary node for locally-serving businesses and commercial activity. The Route 66 commercial district is envisioned to contribute to a positive visual image along Route 66 through the establishment of streetscape elements, landscaped buffers and quality site design.

F.       CRR (Central Route 66 Residential) Subdistrict. The central Route 66 residential district is intended to contribute to the mix of housing choices offered to Glendora residents and provide consistency with the Glendora general plan housing element, through the provision of multifamily residential development. Locally-serving retail at corner locations and other residential-compatible commercial uses that cater to nearby residents are encouraged within this zoning subdistrict. New residential development in this zoning subdistrict is envisioned to establish a positive visual image along the Route 66 Corridor and encourage pedestrian connections to adjacent trailways, transit stops, commercial uses, and public sidewalks.

G.      LHG (Lone Hill Gateway) Subdistrict. The Lone Hill gateway district is intended to serve as the eastern gateway of Glendora’s Route 66 Corridor. The Lone Hill gateway seeks to provide a welcoming “front door” through streetscape, quality architecture, views to the San Gabriel Mountains while promoting stable and attractive commercial development that is compatible with neighboring residential uses. The district is envisioned as a node for locally-serving retail uses catering to residents and the day-time population generated by adjacent employment. The subdistrict is envisioned to include a complementary mix of locally-serving retail, service commercial, and professional offices.

H.      TCO (Glendora Technology, Commerce and Office) Subdistrict. The Glendora technology, commerce, and office district is intended to serve as a primary employment center within the city. The zoning subdistrict is intended to promote uses including administrative, professional, research, and retail/service commercial uses limited to accessory uses. The zoning subdistrict is envisioned to promote strong internal and external pedestrian circulation that provides on-site amenities and enhanced connections to adjacent retail and commercial development.

I.        GRG (Grand/Route 66 Gateway). The Grand/Route 66 Gateway district has been established to ensure that this key gateway intersection provides the mass and scale and quality, well-designed architectural features including significant landscaping, courtyards and public plazas to establish a “sense of place” creating a unique Glendora theme of beauty, pedestrian scale, and enriched quality of life. The zoning subdistrict is intended to promote a mix of office/retail uses which enhance the gateway entry theme of the intersection as well as promote pedestrian comfort and scale. Excellence of architecture combined with pedestrian-oriented site planning including public courtyards and broad landscaped sidewalks are important features of the district. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.330 Allowable land uses and permit requirements.
Table 6-1 identifies the allowable land uses for the following zoning subdistricts that is exclusive to the Route 66 Corridor specific plan: BG (Barranca gateway) subdistrict, GCG (Grand Avenue Commercial Gateway), TCMU (town center mixed use) subdistrict, RSC (Route 66 service commercial) subdistrict, CRR (Route 66 residential) subdistrict, LHG (Lone Hill gateway) subdistrict, TCO (technology, commerce, office) subdistrict. To determine the allowed land uses and development standards in the zones that are not exclusive to the Route 66 Corridor, refer to the applicable chapters of this Glendora Zoning Code.

A.      Allowed Uses.

1.       Allowed Land Uses. Table 6-1 identifies the uses of land permitted by this specific plan, and the land use permit required to establish each use.

2.       Prohibited Land Uses. Any table cell with a “—” symbol indicates that the listed land use is prohibited in that specific zone.

3.       Applicable Sections. Where the last column in the tables (“see standards in section”) includes a section number, the regulations in the referenced section apply to the use; however, provisions in other sections of this specific plan or applicable section of the Glendora Municipal Code may also apply.

 

Table 6-1

Allowable Uses and Permit Requirements

Route 66 Specific Plan Subdistricts

 

Key to Table

 

MCUP

Minor Conditional Use Permit (See Section 21.10.410)

P

Permitted Use

CUP

Conditional Use Permit (See Section 21.10.410)

“—”

Use not allowed

 

Permit Requirement by District

 

Land Use

BG

GCG

GRG

TCMU

GLG

CRR

RSC

LHG

TCO

Notes:

Miscellaneous

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Alternative Fuels and Recharging Facilities

P

P

—

P

—

P

P

P

P

 

Broadcast and Recording Studios

—

P

—

—

—

—

P

P

P

 

Light Rail Passenger Terminals

—

—

—

CUP

—

—

—

—

—

 

Motor Vehicle Storage Facilities

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

 

Public Utility Service Yards

—

—

—

—

—

—

MCUP

—

—

See Section 21.10.410

Public Utility Structures and Service Facilities

—

—

—

—

—

—

MCUP

—

—

See Section 21.10.410

Public Works Maintenance Facilities and Storage Yards

—

—

—

—

—

—

MCUP

—

—

 

Satellite Dishes/ Antenna (Less Than 3 feet/2 meters in Diameter)

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

Education

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Community/Cultural Centers

—

—

—

MCUP

—

—

MCUP

—

—

 

Commercial Day Care Centers

MCUP

MCUP

—

MCUP

—

—

MCUP

MCUP

MCUP

 

Membership Organization Facilities—Lodges and Clubs

MCUP

MCUP

—

MCUP

—

—

—

—

—

See Section 21.10.410

Schools—K through 12, Private

CUP

CUP

—

CUP

—

—

—

CUP

—

 

Schools, Specialized Education and Training—Less Than 50 Students

P

P

—

P

—

 

P

P

P

See Section 21.10.410

Schools, Specialized Education and Training—More Than 50 Students

MCUP

MCUP

—

MCUP

—

 

MCUP

MCUP

MCUP

See Section 21.10.410

Studios—Art, Dance, Music, Photography, etc.

P

P

P

P

P

—

P

P

P

See Section 21.10.410

Universities/Colleges, Private

CUP

CUP

—

CUP

—

—

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Entertainment, Recreation, Public Assembly

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Adult-Oriented

Refer to Adult Business Ordinance

Dancing and/or Entertainment

CUP

CUP

—

CUP

—

—

CUP

CUP

—

Only as accessory to restaurant use

Health/Fitness Centers

MCUP

MCUP

—

MCUP

—

—

MCUP

MCUP

MCUP

Permitted in TCO subdistrict if ancillary to primary use

Indoor Amusement/ Entertainment/ Recreation Centers/ Arcades

CUP

CUP

—

CUP(3)

—

—

—

—

—

See Section 21.10.410

Places of Worship

CUP

CUP

—

CUP

—

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

See Section 21.10.410

Theaters, Auditoriums, and Meeting Halls

MCUP

MCUP

—

MCUP

—

MCUP

—

MCUP

MCUP

See Section 21.10.410

Manufacturing and Processing

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Chemical Products

—

—

—

—

 

—

—

—

—

 

Clothing Products

—

—

—

P(3)

—

—

P

—

P

See Section 21.10.410

Cosmetics

—

—

—

P(3)

—

—

P

—

—

See Section 21.10.410

Electronics and Equipment Manufacturing

—

—

—

MCUP(3)

—

—

P

—

—

See Section 21.10.410

Foam/Plastics Fabrication

—

—

—

—

—

—

P

—

P

See Section 21.10.410

Food and Beverage Product Manufacturing

—

—

—

P(3)

—

—

P

—

P

See Section 21.10.410

Furniture/Cabinet Shops

—

—

—

P(3)

—

—

P

—

—

See Section 21.10.410

Glass Products

—

—

—

P

—

—

P

—

P

See Section 21.10.410

Handicraft Industries, Small Scale Assembly (Pre-Manufactured)

—

—

—

P(3)

—

—

P

—

P

 

Hazardous Material Storage

—

—

—

CUP

—

—

CUP

—

—

 

Laboratories

P

P

—

P

—

—

P

—

P

 

Metal Products Fabrication

—

—

—

P(3)

—

—

P

—

P

See Section 21.10.410

Paper Products

—

—

—

P(3)

—

—

P

—

P

See Section 21.10.410

Pharmaceutical Manufacturing

—

—

—

P(3)

—

—

P

—

P

See Section 21.10.410

Plastics and Rubber Products

—

—

—

P(3)

—

—

P

—

P

See Section 21.10.410

Printing and Publishing

—

 

—

MCUP(3)

—

—

P

—

P

See Section 21.10.410

Recycling Facilities—Reverse Vending Machines

P

P

—

P

—

—

P

P

 

Accessory to grocery stores over 5,000 sq. ft.

Recycling Facilities—Small Collection Facility

P

P

—

P

—

—

P

P

—

Accessory to grocery stores over 5,000 sq. ft.

Research and Development

—

—

—

—

—

—

P

—

P

 

Structural Clay and Pottery Products

—

 

—

P(3)

—

—

P

—

—

See Section 21.10.410

Textile Products

—

—

—

P(3)

—

—

P

—

—

See Section 21.10.410

Warehousing, Wholesaling, and Distribution Facility, Incidental (Less Than 50% of Floor Area)

—

—

—

P(3)

—

—

P

—

P

See Section 21.10.410

Motor Vehicle and Related Retail Trade and Services

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Automated Car Washing

—

CUP(1)

—

CUP(1)(3)

—

—

CUP(1)

CUP(1)

—

See Section 21.10.410 Accessory to service station use

Car Wash, Full and Self Service

—

—

—

CUP(1)(3)

—

—

CUP(1)

—

—

 

Marine Sales, Indoor

P

P

—

P

—

—

P

P

—

See Section 21.10.410

Motor Vehicle Leasing, No On-Site Storage

P

P

—

P

—

—

P

P

—

 

Motor Vehicle Leasing, On-Site Vehicle Storage (Less Than 10 Vehicles)

 

—

—

—

—

—

MCUP(1)

MCUP(1)

—

See Section 21.10.410

Motor Vehicle Parts and Supplies Sales

P

P

—

P

—

—

P

P

—

See Section 21.10.410

Motor Vehicle Repair and Maintenance, MINOR, and Only When Conducted in an Enclosed Structure

CUP(1)

CUP(1)

—

CUP(1)(3)

—

—

CUP(5)

CUP(1)

—

 

Motor Vehicle Sales (New and/or Used), with Service Facilities

CUP(1)

CUP(1)

—

CUP(1) (3)

—

—

CUP(1)

—

—

 

Motor Vehicle Sales (New and/or Used), without Service Facilities, Storage or Outdoor Display

P(1)

P(1)

—

P(1)

—

—

—

P(1)

—

 

Motor Vehicle Window Tinting

MCUP(1)

MCUP(1)

—

MCUP(1) (3)

—

—

MCUP(1)

—

—

See Section 21.10.410

Service Stations

CUP(1)

CUP(1)

—

CUP(1)

—

—

CUP(1)

CUP(1)

—

 

Public

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Community/ Recreational Center

P

P

—

P

—

MCUP

P

P

P

 

Government Enterprises (Local, State, or Federal)

P

P

—

P

—

MCUP

P

P

P

 

Libraries/Museums, Public

P

P

—

P

—

MCUP

P

P

P

 

Parking Lots/Structures, Public

P

P

—

P

—

MCUP

P

P

P

 

Parks, Public

P

P

—

P

—

MCUP

P

P

P

 

Service Uses/Structures, Public

P

P

—

P

—

MCUP

P

P

P

 

Retail Trade

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Accessory Retail Uses

P

P

P

P

P

P(2)

P

P

P

Accessory retail must be incidental to a primary use

Antique Store

P

P

P

P

P

 

P

P

 

 

Art, Antiques, Collectibles, and Gifts

P

P

P

P

P

P(2)

P

P

—

 

Bakeries, Retail

P

P

P

P

P

P(2)

P

P

—

 

Big Box Retail Stores (greater than 30,000 sq. ft.)

—

P

—

—

—

—

—

P

—

 

Book Stores

P

P

P

P

P

P(2)

P

P

—

 

Building Material Stores/Yards

 

—

—

—

—

—

P

—

—

 

Candy Stores

P

P

P

P

P

P(2)

P

P

—

 

Catering Businesses, ONLY When Ancillary to a Restaurant

P

P

 

P

—

P(2)

P

P

—

 

Coin Dealer

P

P

 

P

—

 

P

P

 

 

Convenience Markets/Stores (under 5,000 sq. ft.)

MCUP

—

 

MCUP

—

MCUP(2)

—

—

—

See Section 21.10.410

Furniture, Furnishings and Equipment Stores

P

P

P

P

—

P(2)

P

P

—

 

Florist

P

P

P

P

P

P(2)

P

P

—

 

Garden Centers/Plant Nurseries

P

P

 

P

—

MCUP(2)

P

P

—

See Section 21.10.410

Grocery Stores, 5,000 sq. ft. and greater

P

P

 

P

—

—

—

P

—

 

Liquor Sales (Off-Site Consumption Only)

CUP

CUP

—

CUP

—

—

—

CUP

—

Only permitted for uses greater than 5,000 square feet that are component to grocery store use

Liquor Sales (Off-Site Consumption Only)—Beer and Wine Only

CUP

CUP

—

CUP

—

—

—

CUP

—

 

Liquor Sales (On-Site Consumption Only)—Restaurant

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

—

CUP

CUP

—

 

Meat Markets or Delicatessens

P

P

P

P

P

P(2)

P

P

—

 

Music Stores

P

P

P

P

P

P(2)

P

P

—

 

Outdoor Retail Sales

Refer to Title 5 of the Glendora Municipal Code

 

Pet Stores

P

P

 

P

 

P(2)

P

P

—

 

Pharmacies/Drug Stores

P

P

P

P

P

P(2)

P

P

—

 

Pharmacies/Drug Stores, with Drive-Thru Service

CUP

CUP

—

CUP

—

CUP(2)

CUP

CUP

—

 

Restaurants, Fast Food, with Drive-Thru Service

CUP

CUP

—

CUP

—

—

CUP

CUP

—

 

Restaurants, Fast Food, without Drive-Thru Service

P

P

—

P

P

—

P

P

—

 

Restaurants or Cafés (excluding Fast Food or Drive-Ins)

P

P

P

P

P

—

P

P

—

 

Retail Stores, General Merchandise

P

P

P

P

P

—

P

P

—

 

Secondhand Store

P

P

—

P

—

 

P

P

 

 

Shopping Centers (5 or More Tenants on Contiguous Parcel)

P

P

—

P

—

—

P

P

—

 

Temporary Uses/Activities

Refer to Title 5 of the Glendora Municipal Code

Thrift Store

P

P

—

P

—

 

P

P

 

 

Services

 

Automated Teller Machines (ATMs)

P

P

—

P

—

—

P

P

P(4)

Only in conjunction with operation of a bank or financial institution

Banks and Financial Services

P

P

P

P

P

P(2)

P

P

P

 

Beauty/Health Spa

P

P

—

P

—

P(2)

P

P

P

massage services prohibited without CUP

Business Support Services, Secretarial and Administrative

P

P

—

P

—

P(2)

P

P

P

 

Check Cashing

P

P

—

P

—

P(2)

P

P

—

 

Contractor’s Equipment Yards

—

—

—

—

—

—

CUP

—

—

See Section 21.10.410

Convalescent/Rest Homes

—

—

—

CUP

—

CUP

—

—

—

 

Equipment Rental Establishments

—

—

—

—

—

—

CUP

—

—

See Section 21.10.410

Fortunetelling

—

—

—

—

—

—

P

—

—

 

Hotels/Motels

CUP

CUP

—

CUP

—

—

CUP

—

—

 

Laundromats, Self-Service and Dry Cleaning, Drop-Off Only

P

P

—

P

—

—

P

P

—

 

Massage Therapy in Conjunction with a Beauty/Health Spa or Gym

CUP

CUP

—

CUP

—

CUP(2)

CUP

CUP

CUP

See Section 21.05.010.D.10

Massage Therapy in Conjunction with a Medical Office or Clinic

P

P

—

P

—

P(2)

P

P

P

P

Medical Services, Clinics

P

P

—

P

P

—

P

P

P

 

Medical Services, Laboratories

P

P

—

P

P

—

P

—

P

 

Offices, Professional

P

P

P

P

P

P(2)

P

P

P

 

Outdoor Active Activities (e.g., Walk-up Windows)

P

P

—

P

—

P(2)

P

P

—

 

Personal Services, General

P

P

P

P

P

P(2)

P

P

P

 

Photocopy/Printing/ Desktop Facilities

P

P

—

P

—

P(2)

P

P

—

 

Printing/Photo Developing/Printing Shops

P

P

—

P

—

P(2)

P

P

—

 

Photography Studio/Supply Shop

P

P

—

P

—

P(2)

P

P

—

 

Propane/Liquid Fuel (Storage and Sales)

—

—

—

—

—

—

P

—

—

See Section 21.10.410

Repair and Maintenance, Consumer Products

P

P

—

P

—

P(2)

P

P

—

 

Storage (Mini, Personal, and Self-Storage) Facilities

—

—

—

—

—

—

CUP

—

—

 

Travel Agencies

P

P

—

P

—

P(2)

P

P

P

 

Veterinarian Clinics and Animal Hospitals

P

P

—

P

—

—

P

P

—

 

Residential

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Accessory Uses and Structures

P

—

—

P

—

P

—

—

—

 

Multiple-Family Residential

P

—

—

P

—

P

—

—

—

Apartments/ Condominiums/ Townhomes

Assisted Living Facilities

CUP

—

—

CUP

—

CUP

—

—

—

More than 6 residents

Mixed-Use Developments Retail/Office and Residential

P

—

—

P

—

—

—

—

—

1 acre minimum lot size required

Residential Care Homes

CUP

—

—

CUP

—

CUP

—

—

—

More than 6 residents

Single-Room Occupancy Housing

—

—

—

—

—

P

—

—

—

See Section 21.10.360(H)

 

Notes:

(1)    Within the applicable subdistrict, Motor Vehicle and Related Retail Trade and Services uses indicated shall be restricted from locating on corner locations with frontage along Route 66.

(2)    Within the CRR subdistrict, use shall be permitted only on corner locations with frontage along Route 66.

(3)    Applies only to uses for parcels providing street frontage along Vermont Street south of Ada Avenue and north of Route 66. Use is not permitted on parcels that do not have street frontage along Vermont Street south of Ada Avenue and north of Route 66.

(4)    Drive-through lanes are permitted with approval of a conditional use permit.

(5)    Not permitted on corner locations which abut residential uses.

 

(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.340 Nonconforming uses, structures and parcels.
See Section 21.03.030 (Nonconforming lots, structures, improvements, and uses). (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.350 Zoning subdistrict development standards.
New land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land uses and structures, shall be designated, constructed, and/or established in compliance with the requirements in Table 6-2, below. Building setbacks are minimum requirements. Additional front, side, street side or rear setbacks may be imposed during the review process. Similarly, residential density, building height, and floor area ratios are theoretical maximums that may not be achievable for all projects and circumstances due to other development requirements and design guidelines.

 

Table 6-2

General Development Standards

Requirements by Individual Zoning Subdistrict

 

 

Development Feature

LHG Lone Hill Gateway

TCO Tech/Commerce/Office

Floor Area Ratio

0.30 FAR

0.35 FAR

Setbacks Required

 

 

Front (Building)

10 ft.

20 ft.

Front (Parking)

10 ft.

10 ft.

Side (each)

10 ft.; additional setbacks may be imposed during design review process

10 ft.; when abutting residential, 10 feet for first 2 stories above ground level. Thereafter, 5 feet for each additional story. Additional setbacks may be imposed during design review process

Street side

10 ft.

20 ft.

Rear(1)

10 ft.; when adjacent to residential, a minimum of 5 feet or one-half the height of the building wall adjacent to the rear property line (whichever is greater)

10 ft.; when adjacent to residential, a minimum of 5 feet or one-half the height of the building wall adjacent to the rear property line (whichever is greater)

Minimum Required Street Frontage

100 feet

100 feet

Maximum Height Limit

35 ft./2 stories, whichever is less

45 feet/3 stories; whichever is less(3)

Accessory Structures

See Section 21.10.400 (Accessory Uses and Structures)

Landscaping Requirements

See Section 21.10.380 (Landscaping Standards)

Parking

See Section 21.10.370 (Parking Standards)

Signs

See Section 21.10.390 (Sign Standards)

 

 

Development Feature

RSC Route 66 Serv. Comm.

TCMU Town Center Mixed Use

Floor Area Ratio

0.30 FAR

0.50 FAR (commercial);

 

 

1.0 FAR (mixed-use). Structured parking not included in FAR calculation

Dwelling Units (du/ac)

—

30 du/ac

Setbacks Required

 

 

Front (Building)

20 feet

15 feet

Front (Parking)

10 feet

5 feet; landscaping required

Side (each)

0 feet; when abutting residential, 10 feet. Additional setbacks may be imposed during design review process

0 feet; when abutting residential, 10 feet for first 2 stories above ground level. Thereafter, 5 feet for each additional story. Additional setbacks may be imposed during design review process

Street side

20 feet

15 feet

Rear(1)

0 feet; when abutting residential, 10 feet. Additional setbacks may be imposed during design review process

0 feet; when abutting residential, 10 feet for first 2 stories above ground level. Thereafter, 5 feet for each additional story. Additional setbacks may be imposed during design review process

Minimum Required Street Frontage

300 feet

150 feet

Maximum Height Limit

35 feet/2 stories; whichever is less

45 feet/3 stories; whichever is less(3)

Accessory Structures

See Section 21.10.400 (Accessory Uses and Structures)

Landscaping Requirements

See Section 21.10.380 (Landscaping Standards)

Parking

See Section 21.10.370 (Parking Standards)

Signs

See Section 21.10.390 (Sign Standards)

 

 

Development Feature

GCG Grand Commercial Gateway

BG Barranca Gateway

Floor Area Ratio

0.35 FAR

0.35 FAR (commercial); 0.75 FAR (mixed-use). Structured parking not included in FAR calculation.

Dwelling Units (du/ac)

—

20 du/ac

Setbacks Required

 

 

Front (Building)

20 feet; parcels providing frontage along Route 66 shall require 15 feet

15 feet

Front (Parking)

10 feet

5 feet; landscaping required

Side (each)

0 feet; when abutting residential, 10 feet. Additional setbacks may be imposed during design review process

0 feet; when abutting residential, 10 feet. Additional setbacks may be imposed during design review process

Street side

20 feet

15 feet

Rear (1)

0 feet; when abutting residential, 10 feet. Additional setbacks may be imposed during design review process

0 feet; when abutting residential, 10 feet. Additional setbacks may be imposed during design review process

Minimum Required Street Frontage

150 feet

150 feet

Maximum Height Limit

35 feet/2 stories; whichever is less

35 feet/2 stories; whichever is less

Accessory Structures

See Section 21.10.400 (Accessory Uses and Structures)

Landscaping Requirements

See Section 21.10.380 (Landscaping Standards)

Parking

See Section 21.10.370 (Parking Standards)

Signs

See Section 21.10.390 (Sign Standards)

 

 

Development Feature

CRR Route 66 Residential

Floor Area Ratio

0.30 FAR (commercial)

Dwelling Units (du/ac)

30 du/ac

Setbacks Required

 

Front (Building)

15 feet

Front (Parking)

5 feet; landscaping required

Side (each)

10 feet

Street side

15 feet

Rear (1)

10 feet for first 2 stories above ground level. Thereafter, 5 feet for each additional story. Additional setbacks may be imposed during design review process

Minimum Required Street Frontage

100 feet

Maximum Height Limit

45 feet/3 stories, whichever is less(3)

Accessory Structures

See Section 21.10.400 (Accessory Uses and Structures)

Landscaping Requirements

See Section 21.10.380 (Landscaping Standards)

Parking

See Section 21.10.370 (Parking Standards)

Signs

See Section 21.10.390 (Sign Standards)

 

 

 

Development Feature

GRG Grand/Route 66 Gateway

GLG Glendora Avenue Gateway

Floor Area Ratio (FAR)

0.35 FAR

0.50 FAR

Setbacks Required

 

 

Front (Building)

10 feet. The setbacks shall be landscaped as public space or garden space integrated into the gateway improvement program identified in the Route 66 specific plan

15 feet; landscaping required

Front (Parking)

10 feet. Landscape screening of parking lots facing streets is required. Parking is not permitted immediately adjacent to the intersection

5 feet; landscaping required

Street Corner (facing intersection of Grand Avenue and Route 66)

15 feet from the center of the corner radius. Using a 90 degree angle, the setback then meets the nearest front and street side property line (2)

 

Side (each)

0 feet; additional setbacks may be imposed during design review process

0 feet; when abutting residential 10 feet and 5 additional feet for each story over the first. Additional setbacks may be imposed during design review process

Street side

10 feet. The setbacks shall be landscaped as public space or garden space integrated into the gateway improvement program identified in the Route 66 specific plan

15 feet; landscaping required

Rear

0 feet; additional setbacks may be imposed during the design review process

0 feet; when abutting residential 10 feet and 5 additional feet for each story over the first. Additional setbacks may be imposed during design review process

Minimum Required Street Frontage

150 feet

150 feet

Minimum/Maximum Height Limit

35 feet/2 stories; whichever is less

45 feet/3 stories; whichever is less(3)

Accessory Structures

See Section 21.10.400 (Accessory Uses and Structures)

Landscaping Requirements

In addition to requirements identified in this table, see Section 21.10.380 (Landscaping Standards)

Parking

See Section 21.10.370 (Parking Standards)

Signs

See Section 21.10.390 (Sign Standards)

 

Notes:

(1)    Not required when rear property line is adjacent to flood control channels, railroads or public utility right-of-way.

(2)    Diagram A illustrates the corner radius concept.

(3)    No structure or any portion or appurtenance shall exceed 45 feet in height.

 

Diagram A: 15-foot corner radius “cutouts” and 10-foot front, street side and parking setbacks within the Grand/Route 66 Gateway.



 

(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.360 Standards for specific land uses.
A.      Equipment Rental Uses. Equipment rental and leasing businesses are allowed in compliance with Table 6-1 of this article and shall comply with the following standards.

1.       All outdoor equipment and machinery shall be stored in a neat and organized manner.

2.       Outdoor storage of inoperable vehicles/equipment shall not be allowed.

3.       Maintenance and repair of equipment and vehicles shall be performed in a completely enclosed building.

4.       Equipment and vehicles shall not be stored with their lifting arms, booms, blades, buckets, scrapers, etc. in a position higher than the main body of the equipment or vehicle (e.g., higher than the cab of the vehicle).

B.      Mixed-Use Development. For the purpose of this section, mixed-use projects are developments that combine both commercial retail/office and residential uses or structures on a single parcel, or as components of a single development.

1.       Mix of Uses. A mixed-use project shall combine residential uses with commercial/office uses. Mixed-use projects may provide commercial and/or office space on the ground floor with residential units above or horizontally on the same site.

2.       Parking—Mixed Use Projects.

a.       Residential Uses. Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to Section 21.03.020.

b.       Nonresidential Uses. Off-street parking for nonresidential uses shall be provided for each separate use in compliance with Section 21.03.020.

c.       Parking and Access Standards.

i.        All parking spaces required for the residential use shall be provided on-site.

ii.       Parking spaces to serve residential uses shall be specifically designated and shall be reserved for the exclusive use of the residents.

iii.     If structured parking is provided for the entire complex, separate dedicated and accessible areas shall be provided for residential and commercial uses.

iv.      Separate site access drives shall be provided for the residential uses and commercial uses whenever possible.

v.       Security gates shall be strongly encouraged for access to residential uses and residential parking areas, as well as for securing commercial parking areas when businesses are closed.

3.       Trash Collection Areas. Trash collection areas shall be contained within an enclosed structure. Trash collection areas shall be designed, located or screened so as not to be readily identifiable from adjacent streets.

4.       Loading and Storage Facilities. Loading areas and solid waste storage facilities shall be located as far as possible from the on-site residential units and shall be completely screened from view from adjacent residential portions of the project. The location and design of the solid waste enclosures shall account for potential nuisances from odors and noise from collection vehicles.

5.       Storage Space—Private. A minimum ninety cubic feet of private storage space shall be provided for each residential dwelling unit outside the unit unless a private attached garage, serving only the dwelling unit, is provided. Private storage space shall have a minimum horizontal surface area of twenty-four square feet and shall be fully enclosed and lockable.

6.       Exterior Lighting. Parking lot lighting and security lighting for the commercial uses shall be appropriately shielded so as not to spill over into residential areas. Residential units shall also be shielded from illuminated commercial signs.

7.       Exterior Equipment. All exterior mounted equipment shall be screened from view. Special consideration shall be given to the location and screening of noise generating equipment (e.g., air conditioning, exhaust fans, refrigeration units, etc.). Noise reducing screens and insulation may be required where equipment has the potential to impact residential uses.

a.       Satellite dish system must be roof mounted and screened from view.

8.       Outdoor Space for Residential Uses—Mixed Use Projects.

a.       A minimum outdoor space of one hundred square feet shall be provided for each dwelling unit.

c.       Outdoor space intended for use by “residents only” shall not be accessible from the commercial areas.

d.       Open space and courtyards located in the commercial areas may be accessible to residential occupants and visitors.

e.       Landscaping and seating shall be permanently integrated into all required outdoor spaces.

b.       Outdoor space may be provided as common or private space. Any common outdoor space shall have a minimum level surface dimension of twenty feet and a minimum area of four hundred square feet of open space.

9.       Hours of Operation. The reviewing body approving a mixed-use project or use may restrict the hours of operation of nonresidential uses to mitigate adverse impacts on the residential uses.

10.     Joint Owners’ Association. A joint tenant/owners’ association shall be formed to ensure the well being of each “tenant” on site. The association shall be formed of equal voting rights according to type of use (e.g., residential, commercial, office). The association’s bylaws shall include the following: determination of the maintenance and landscaping responsibilities, trash facility responsibilities, parking facility maintenance responsibility, assignment of parking spaces per each use, relationship between uses regarding association representation, voting procedures, and ways that problems are solved between the different uses. The association bylaws shall be subject to review by the city attorney.

11.     Building Design.

a.       Design Standards. A mixed-use project shall be designed and constructed to:

i.        Be compatible with and complement adjacent land uses;

ii.       Maintain or enhance the character of development in the immediate neighborhood;

iii.     Maintain or increase the existing number of residential units generally and specifically those for seniors and a variety of income levels; and

iv.      Mitigate glare, light, noise, traffic, and other potential environmental impacts to the maximum extent feasible.

The architectural style and use of materials shall be consistent throughout the entire project. Differences in materials and/or architectural details shall only occur on a structure where the intent is to differentiate between the residential scale and character of the structure and the commercial scale and character.

b.       Separate Entrances. When residential and commercial uses are provided in the same structure, separate entrances shall be provided for each use.

c.       Access to Dwelling Units. An elevator shall be provided to serve all stories in a building containing more than three dwelling units where the floor area of any dwelling unit is located only on the third story and other dwelling units are located on the first and second stories.

d.       Distance Between Dwellings. A minimum distance of ten feet shall separate exterior walls of separate buildings containing dwelling units on the same lot. The windows or window/doors of any dwelling unit shall not face the windows or window/doors of any other dwelling unit unless separated by a distance of ten or more feet except where the angle between the wall of the separate dwelling units is ninety degrees or more. Walls parallel to each other shall be considered to be at a zero degree angle.

e.       Sound Mitigation. Residential units shall be designed to be sound attenuated against present and future project noise. New projects, additions to existing projects, or new nonresidential uses in existing projects shall provide an acoustical analysis report, by an acoustical engineer, describing the acoustical design features of the structure required to satisfy the exterior and interior noise standards, as required by the Glendora Municipal Code.

f.        Rooftop Equipment. Rooftop equipment, except solar energy equipment, shall be completely enclosed on all sides or screened from view of public rights-of-way.

g.       Landscaping.

i.        All street setback areas and other areas not occupied by buildings, parking, driveways, walkways, and other incidental residential activities shall be fully landscaped with live plant materials and shall be permanently maintained in a neat and orderly manner.

ii.       A minimum of fifteen percent of the total lot area shall be permanently landscaped. If a parking area that is within a required setback is landscaped, the landscaped area may be counted toward meeting the minimum landscaping area requirement for the project.

iii.     For the purposes of this section, permanent landscaping shall consist of landscaped areas at the ground level.

iv.      The soil depth shall be increased to thirty inches minimum in the area where trees are to be planted.

v.       Decorative design elements (e.g., as fountains, sculptures, planters, rocks or other similar elements) may be permitted where they are integral parts of a landscape plan composed primarily of live plant materials.

vi.      Pedestrian walks and vehicular accessways shall be permitted in landscaped areas but shall not be counted as landscaped areas.

vii.    The street setback area shall not be completely paved.

viii.   Permanent and automatic irrigation facilities shall be provided in all permanent landscaped areas except potted containers.

ix.      Landscaping shall be permanently maintained in substantial conformance with the approved plan.

h.       Lighting.

i.        Lighting for uncovered parking areas, vehicle accessways and walkways shall not exceed a height of sixteen feet, except that the maximum height on the rooftop of any parking structure located on a lot adjacent to any residential zone shall not exceed a height of eight feet.

ii.       The overall height shall be measured from the paved parking area surface to the uppermost part of the light standard, including the light globe.

iii.     Lighting shall be directed onto the driveways, walkways and parking areas within the development and away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. Appropriate shields shall be incorporated into lighting fixtures to ensure lighting does not spill onto adjoining properties.

i.        Laundry Facilities.

i.        Laundry facilities shall be provided to serve all residential dwelling units on a lot.

ii.       Laundry facilities, constituting washer and dryer appliances connected to utilities, shall be provided in the individual dwelling units where there are three or fewer dwelling units on a lot.

iii.     Where there are more than three dwelling units on a lot, laundry facilities shall either be provided in the individual dwelling units or in common laundry room.

iv.      A common laundry room shall be in an accessible location and shall have at least one washer and one dryer for each ten dwelling units, maintained in operable condition and accessible to all tenants daily between the hours of seven a.m. and ten p.m.

C.      Outdoor/Sidewalk Dining.

1.       Applicability. Outdoor/sidewalk dining areas that encroach into the public right-of-way shall be subject to approval of the planning director and a public right-of-way encroachment permit.

2.       Standards. Outdoor/sidewalk dining areas shall be subject to the following standards:

a.       Outdoor/sidewalk dining must maintain a four-foot minimum clearance, exclusive of landscape areas, fire hydrants, streetlights, other street furniture or on-street auto overhang.

b.       Submit a brief description of the proposed encroachment and its proposed location in the right-of-way.

c.       Submit a properly scaled and dimensioned site plan showing local conditions, including street and sidewalk width, and the location and dimension of all street furniture and elements on the sidewalk.

d.       Specify the number of tables and seating requested and the maximum number of seating allowed.

e.       A permit issued for outdoor/sidewalk dining may be revoked by the city after a thirty-day notice.

f.        Sound amplification devices, musical instrument or sound reproduction devices shall not be used or operated with outdoor/sidewalk dining.

g.       Outdoor lighting shall comply with the standards set forth in the Glendora Municipal Code.

h.       Prior to the approval of any permit, a finding shall be made by the planning director or designee that the outdoor/sidewalk dining will not adversely affect the neighborhood or be detrimental to persons working, living or visiting the area.

i.        A liability insurance policy naming the city as additionally insured for a minimum of one million dollars shall be kept on file with the finance division.

D.      Outdoor Dancing and Entertainment Uses—Accessory to Restaurant Use Only.

1.       Applicability. This section provides locational, developmental, and operational standards for dancing and entertainment conducted outside of a fully enclosed building that is subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. Outdoor venues include but are not limited to attached or detached improvements such as accessory buildings, outdoor dining areas, open patios, sunrooms, and enclosed patios. These businesses shall comply with the following standards, in addition to any conditions imposed by the planning commission.

2.       Separation Requirements. Outdoor dancing or entertainment shall not be:

a.       Located within one thousand feet of another outdoor dancing or entertainment use;

b.       Located within five hundred feet of any public park, religious institution, school or residential use; or

c.       Occupied by an adult entertainment business.

3.       How to Measure the Separation. The distance between outdoor dancing/entertainment uses and between an outdoor dancing/entertainment use and a public park, religious institution, school, or residential use shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest property line of the subject use to the closest property line of another outdoor dancing or entertainment use, public park, religious institution, or school.

4.       Police Department Review Required. The conditional use permit application shall be reviewed by the police department before approval.

E.       Parking Structures/Garages.

1.       Applicability. The following standards shall apply to enclosed parking structures, including above grade and below grade.

2.       Site Organization.

a.       Where appropriate, parking garages shall incorporate ground floor retail adjacent to the public sidewalk.

b.       A minimum five-foot landscaped setback shall be provided on all sides of the parking structure except where ground floor retail space is provided. Landscaping must provide adequate facilities to ensure proper watering and maintenance.

3.       Access and Circulation.

a.       Vehicle stacking areas for entering and exiting traffic shall be of sufficient length to minimize vehicle stacking onto surrounding streets or within the parking structure. A minimum of two vehicle lengths of stacking distance shall be provided between the street and the control gate.

b.       One inbound lane shall be provided for a garage with a capacity of up to five hundred vehicles. At least two inbound lanes shall be provided for garages with a capacity of five hundred or more vehicles.

c.       Exit lanes shall be provided at a ratio of one lane for each two hundred to two hundred fifty vehicles. The maximum aisle length shall not exceed four hundred feet without providing a cross aisle.

d.       Ramp grades shall not exceed ten percent and parking areas shall not exceed a slope of four to five percent.

4.       Lighting and Security.

a.       A minimum of five footcandles of illumination shall be provided inside the structure and a minimum of three footcandles for exterior parking areas. Higher levels are recommended for remote areas subject to security considerations (e.g., stairways, elevators, and other pedestrian access points). Minimum illumination, levels measured from the adjacent finished floor, shall be as provided in Table 6-3:

Table 6-3 Minimum Illumination Levels

 

 

Facility

Illumination Level

Stairways and exits

5 footcandles

Interior driving aisles, centerline

5 footcandles

Interior parking areas at barrier railings

0.5 footcandles

Roof parking areas

0.5 footcandles

 

b.       Lighting fixtures shall be designed and placed to provide uniform illumination over all parking areas.

c.       Light sources shall be shielded so that the source of the illumination is not seen from outside the structure.

d.       The architectural design of the garage should eliminate possible hiding places and openings that could allow random pedestrian access.

e.       During periods when parking activity is substantially less than the garage capacity, as during night operations, there shall be a means of securing unused parking levels from use, including stairwells and elevators. If the garage is not operated on a twenty-four-hour basis the entire facility shall be secured from access during hours when the facility is closed to normal business activities.

f.        At a minimum, stair towers should include glass, or appropriate visually penetrable material running vertically the height of the tower. Elevators should be provided with glass-back cabs and shafts.

g.       Stairs and elevators should be located adjacent to a street on the exterior of the structure where lobbies can be exposed to outside view.

5.       Building Design.

a.       Parking garages shall be designed to help reduce the mass and scale of the garage and to ensure their compatibility with surrounding uses. The following design guidelines shall apply to parking structure design.

b.       Vehicles should be concealed from view through a combination of screen walls and plantings.

c.       The design of exterior and interior elevations shall provide an adequate level of design detail to reduce a monolithic appearance. This can be accomplished through a combination of the following methods:

i.        Minimize horizontal and vertical banding by balancing both horizontal and vertical elements;

ii.       Incorporation of simple, clean geometric forms, and coordinated massing. Step back upper levels of the garage;

iii.     Use of ground floor retail or other uses adjacent to setback;

iv.      Coordinate openings in the parking garage with the size and modulation of adjacent windows, structural bays, and storefronts if the parking garage contains other uses;

v.       Design openings in the parking garage to resemble architectural elements of the adjoining structure;

vi.      Use of masonry materials that are predominantly light in color. The use of unpainted concrete shall be minimized;

vii.    Avoid a sloping ramp appearance by providing level and uniform spandrels;

viii.   Visually define and differentiate between pedestrian and vehicular entrances through appropriate architectural detailing.

F.       General Applicability for Grand/Route 66 Gateway District. All references and tables in Section 21.10.360—Standards for specific land uses, Section 21.10.370—Off-street parking and loading standards, Section 21.10.380—Landscaping, walls and fences, Section 21.10.390—Signs, Section 21.10.400—Auxiliary structures, equipment and utilities, Section 21.10.410—General operating standards, Section 21.10.420—Development incentives, and Section 21.10.430—Development review procedures, shall also apply to the Grand/Route 66 Gateway district.

G.      Drive-Through ATM Development Standards.

1.       Definitions:

a.       General Definition. An “automated teller machine (ATM)” is a computerized telecommunications device that allows a financial institution’s customers a secure method of performing financial transactions in a public space without the need for a human bank teller or cashier or a clerk.

b.       “Wall mounted walk-up ATM unit” means an ATM permanently mounted into the wall of a main building structure or accessory building structure with pedestrian access to the unit.

c.       “Drive-through ATM unit” means an ATM unit permanently mounted into the wall of a main building structure or accessory building structure with automobile drive-through lanes to access the unit.

d.       “Portable ATM unit” means a vending machine which is a free standing unit that can be moved around to different locations. These units are usually mono-functional cash dispenser types of machines.

2.       Drive-through ATMs in the technology, commerce office (TCO) district of the Route 66 specific plan shall be permitted with approval of a conditional use permit approved by the planning commission pursuant to Section 21.01.030(E) of the Glendora Municipal Code subject to the following development standards:

a.       Minimum lot size to allow an ATM drive-through use is four acres.

b.       The ATM unit must be permanently attached to the exterior wall of a major building on the site consistent with all uniform building code requirements. The wall location must be perpendicular to the public right-of-way. ATM units shall not be located on the front of any building or structure facing the public right-of-way.

c.       The setback for the permanently wall mounted ATM unit shall be a minimum of one hundred thirty feet from the front property line.

d.       A two-car (not less than forty-five feet) stacking distance out of the main drive isle is required. The stacking distance is in addition to a twenty-five-foot space for a vehicle directly adjacent to the ATM unit.

e.       A canopy structure at least twenty-four feet long by seven feet wide shall be provided over the ATM unit. The canopy shall be no less than nine and one-half feet from finish surface of the drive isle in front of the ATM unit. The canopy shall be architecturally integrated into the design of the building.

f.        No new curb cuts shall be allowed to facilitate drive aisles for access to the ATM unit. Driveway circulation for the ATM shall be accommodated within the property where the drive-through ATM is proposed.

g.       The property proposing a drive-through ATM unit shall maintain all required off-street parking. Circulation to accommodate the ATM shall not reduce the required off-street parking for the development as a whole. Proposed circulation shall be designed by a qualified traffic engineering firm.

h.       If a property proposes a second main building to be constructed which will accommodate the drive-through ATM unit, the second building shall be architecturally compatible with the main building to provide an integrated, unified campus design. The new building shall meet all development standards and requirements of the TCO district of the Route 66 specific plan.

i.        The area of the drive-through ATM facing the public right-of-way shall be landscaped and screened. Landscaping shall enhance the overall aesthetic appearance of the development by providing screening, shade and artistic excellence such as art work or fountain features. Landscape plans shall be reviewed and approved by the planning department.

j.        The drive-through ATM unit shall provide adequate lighting and clear security visibility from the surrounding area. Location, lighting and visibility design shall be reviewed by the Glendora police department prior to consideration by the planning commission.

k.       Lighting shall be consistent with Section 9.36.010 of the Glendora Municipal Code and other applicable state requirements.

l.        Loud speakers are prohibited.

m.      Noise generated by the operation and use of the drive-through ATM unit shall not result in conditions which exceed existing ambient noise standards at the property line as established by Section 9.44.040 of the Glendora Municipal Code.

H.      Single-Room Occupancy (SRO) Housing.

1.       Density. Allowable density shall be the same for the CRR district.

2.       Parking. Parking shall be one space per unit and one space per employee/on-site manager. Guest parking shall be the same as required for multifamily zones.

3.       Storage. Fifty cubic feet of storage per unit.

4.       Street Frontage. As required in the CRR zone.

5.       On-Site Management Requirements. An on-site manager shall be present at all times. A written management plan addressing at a minimum staff training, security, neighborhood communication, client intake, loitering control, referral services, outdoor storage, refuse control, and facility maintenance shall be approved by the city. The management plan may be reviewed as needed by the city with revisions made by the operator. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.370 Off-street parking and loading standards.
A.      Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure that sufficient parking and loading areas are provided and properly designed and located in the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area. Every use, including a change in or expansion of an existing use or structure shall have appropriately maintained off-street parking and loading areas in compliance with the standards as described in this specific plan. For standards and provisions that are not explicitly stated, the standards and provisions of the Glendora Municipal Code shall apply.

B.      Regulations for Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking and loading for uses within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area shall be provided in accordance with Section 21.03.020 of the city of Glendora Zoning Code with the following modifications:

1.       Location of Parking. Required parking spaces for commercial or mixed uses shall be located on the same parcel or another parcel not further than four hundred feet from the parcel they are intended to serve. On-site parking areas shall be located as specified in Table 6-4.

 

Table 6-4

Parking Locations

 

P = permitted      “-” = not allowed

 

 

 

BG

GCG

TCMU & GLG

RSC

TCO

LHG

Front Setback

-

P

-

P

P

P

Side Setback

P

P

P

P

P

P

Rear Setback

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

2.       Shared Parking. The utilization of shared parking facilities within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan project area are encouraged. Shared parking standards are based on the assumption that patrons will use a single parking space for more than one destination in certain locations within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area and that one parking space will be open and available for short-term parking to serve different uses which may have different peak hours. Shared parking shall be provided in accordance with the following provisions.

a.       Eligible Development. The following categories of development shall be eligible to use shared parking standards to meet parking requirements:

i.        Commercial or mixed-use new construction. Residential development shall not be eligible for shared parking.

b.       Shared parking shall be subject to a shared parking agreement recorded against the affected parcels.

3.       On-Street and Common Loading. The following loading requirements may apply:

a.       Within the town center mixed use district (TCMU), multi-story mixed use development less than ten thousand square feet of gross leasable area may utilize on-street loading when demonstrated that the loading activity will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or adversely affect traffic patterns.

b.       Uses within a mixed use development within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area may utilize common loading facilities when demonstrated that the loading activity will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or adversely affect traffic patterns. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.380 Landscaping, walls and fences.
A.      Landscaping and Irrigation Required. All projects shall provide and maintain landscaping and irrigation in compliance with applicable sections of this specific plan and the Glendora Municipal Code. Standards for the provision of landscaping within the public right-of-way in conjunction with any private development shall be in compliance with the Glendora Municipal Code.

B.      Tree Preservation Required. All project applicants shall consult with the city prior to the removal or modification of any existing tree within private property. It is the intent of this section to preserve historically important trees within the project area and preserve significant tree resources within the community.

C.      Landscaping—Landscaping Adjacent to Streets. All street-adjacent landscaped areas shall include a combination of trees, shrubs, vines or ground cover.

D.      Walls and Fences.

1.       Height and Location. Perimeter fences or walls that are within a front yard setback shall not exceed a height of three feet unless specifically allowed to a height of six feet by the director of planning to achieve a specific screening purpose.

a.       Exception. Walls adjacent to mobile home sites that front the public right-of-way shall be allowed up to six feet, subject to the requirements of this section and with approval by the director of planning.

2.       Design. The design of walls and fences shall be consistent with the overall project design and/or adjacent streetscape.

3.       Perimeter walls and fences shall be articulated by providing a minimum three-foot deep by six-foot long recession for every fifty feet of continuous wall. The design of the wall shall include an appropriate mix of materials and landscaping.

4.       Chain link or similar fencing shall not be permitted within the public view. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.390 Signs.
Except as otherwise stated in this section, the signage standards and review procedures of applicable sections of the Glendora Municipal Code shall apply for all signs within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan project area.

A.      Monument Signs.

1.       Monument signs shall be allowed in the BG, GCG, RSC, CRR, LHG and TCO subdistricts.

a.       Exception. Monument signs shall not be permitted in the TCMU or GLG subdistricts except for those properties fronting on the public right-of-way in the TCMU or GLG subdistricts along Route 66 in compliance with this section.

2.       Signs Allowed. One monument sign per property frontage.

3.       Sign Height. Monument signs shall have a maximum height of six feet.

a.       Exception. Monument sign heights may exceed six feet to accommodate desirable architectural features or other elements that contribute to quality design. Any request for height in excess of six feet shall be subject to approval by the reviewing body as shown in Table E, in the appendix of the zoning code.

4.       Sign Area and Copy. A maximum of forty square feet of sign per face shall be allowed. Sign copy shall be limited to the name address, type of business, and any related trademark or logo, and/or other graphics used to identify the business.

5.       Illumination. Monument signs shall be permitted to be internally illuminated, provided only the sign copy is illuminated. However, external illumination of monument signs is the preferred method of sign illumination. External illumination shall only illuminate the monument sign and provide consistency with the architectural design of the primary structure on the site.

6.       Design. Monument signs shall be consistent with the Route 66 Corridor specific plan design guidelines.

7.       Spacing. There shall be a minimum of seventy-five feet between monument signs to ensure proper visibility for all signs. The planning director may waive this requirement in situations where its enactment may be impractical due to the location of signs on adjacent properties.

8.       Location. Monument signs shall not project over or into public property or easements. Monument signs shall not obstruct traffic site lines or create any visual obstruction that may create life, health or safety hazards.

9.       Landscaped Base Required. Signs shall be located with a landscaped area, with the base of the sign equal to twice the area of one face of the sign. A permanent irrigation system shall be provided and landscaping maintained to preclude obstruction of the sign copy.

B.      Signs for Shopping Centers, Office Complexes and Mixed Use Development. Integrated office complexes, commercial centers or mixed use development occurring in the BG, GCG, TCMU, GLG, RSC, LHG and TCO subdistrict with a minimum of two hundred feet of street frontage shall be subject to the following:

1.       One primary identification sign near the primary street entrance to the center identifying up to five primary tenants of the center.

2.       Sign copy shall display business name/identification only.

3.       A maximum of one hundred square feet per sign face.

4.       Maximum height of ten feet.

5.       Minimum streetside setback of ten feet.

6.       Signs shall be located within a landscaped area equal to twice the area of one face of the sign. A permanent irrigation system shall be provided and landscaping maintained to preclude obstruction of the sign copy.

7.       One additional secondary monument sign along each street frontage, except for the street on which the primary identification sign is located, in compliance with the following standards:

a.       Sign copy shall identify business name identification only;

b.       Signs shall not be located directly across from a residential use;

c.       Up to three tenants per sign;

d.       A maximum of fifty square feet per sign face;

e.       A maximum height of five feet;

f.        A minimum streetside setback of ten feet.

C.      Pole Signs. Pole signs shall not be permitted within the specific plan area.

D.      Awning Signs. Awning signs shall be permitted in all subdistricts subject to the following requirements.

1.       Awnings with signs shall be located only on structure frontages, including those fronting a parking lot or pedestrian way.

2.       Signs on awnings are limited to the ground level and second story only.

3.       A clear distance of eight feet shall be maintained from the lowest part of the awning sign to the ground.

4.       Maximum area of an awning sign shall be calculated in conjunction with the requirements for wall signs in Section 21.10.390(F), below.

Example of Projecting Sign



 

E.       Projecting Signs. Projecting signs shall be allowed in the BG, GCG, TCMU, GLG subdistricts subject to the following requirements:

1.       Signs shall be located only on the wall frontage with the primary ground floor entrance to the structure.

2.       A clear distance of ten feet shall be maintained from the lowest point of the projecting sign to the ground level. For projecting signs over public driveways, alleys and thoroughfares a clear distance of fifteen feet shall be maintained from the lowest point of the projecting sign to the ground.

3.       A sign shall be attached to the wall no more than two feet from the nearest point of the sign to the wall.

4.       All mounting hardware shall be architecturally compatible.

5.       No part of a sign shall be located within two feet of a curb.

6.       Signs may comprise or be configured as logos, symbols, or figures in addition to or instead of written words.

7.       The maximum area of each sign face shall be twenty square feet.

 

Example of Wall Sign



F.       Wall Signs.

1.       Wall signs shall be located only on walls having frontage along streets, alleys, parking lots, or on-site parking lots and not located directly across from a residential use. Wall signs for second story business shall be limited to one business with an interior entrance, or where an exterior second floor walkway exists, over the second story exterior entrance to the building or unit.

2.       Can signs shall not be permitted.

3.       Wall signs shall not project from the surface from which they are attached more than required for construction purposes and in no case more than six inches.

4.       Signs shall not project above the eave of a roof or parapet.

5.       Signs shall not be mounted in such a way as to obstruct any portion of a window or storefront, unless for window signs in compliance with Section 21.10.390(G), below.

6.       Wall signs shall have a maximum of two square feet of sign area per linear foot for ground floor storefronts with direct access to the street, alley or on-site parking lot.

7.       One address identification sign for the structure per street frontage to a maximum of fifteen square feet is permitted.

G.      Window Signs. Window signs shall be allowed in the BG, GCG, TCMU, GLG, RSC, CRR, LHG, and TCO zoning subdistricts, subject to the following requirements:

1.       Placement of window signs shall be reviewed and approved by the planning director.

2.       Signs shall be allowed only on the ground floor level and second story of a structure frontage.

3.       Signs shall not occupy more than twenty-five percent of the window area.

4.       The maximum area for window signs shall be calculated in conjunction with the requirements for wall signs in subsection F of this section.

H.      Neon Signs.

1.       The use of exposed neon signs shall be allowed within the BG, GCG, TCMU, GLG, RSC, RR, LHG and TCO subdistricts, subject to the following requirements:

a.       Neon signs shall contain no flashing or moving parts.

b.       Neon signs and linear tubing shall be UL (underwriters laboratory) listed with a maximum of twenty amps per circuit and be designed to accommodate an automatic dimmer in order to reduce the brightness of the neon.

c.       Neon tubing shall not exceed one-half inch in diameter.

d.       Neon lighting shall not be located within three hundred feet of a single-family residential property unless the neon lighting is not visible from the residential use. The distance shall be measured in a straight line from nearest point of the proposed sign.

e.       Neon tubing shall minimize reflection from any reflective materials in such a manner that it does not obscure the readability of the sign.

f.        Neon tubing shall not be used to line storefront windows. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.400 Auxiliary structures, equipment and utilities, limitations and outdoor storage.
A.      Auxiliary structures, equipment and utilities shall not be located directly adjacent to the street frontage of any property.

B.      All roof appurtenances including, but not limited to, air conditioning units and mechanical/electrical equipment shall be shielded and architecturally screened from view from on-site parking areas, adjacent public streets and adjacent properties. Screening should be designed to be compatible with the architectural design of the building.

C.      All ground mounted mechanical/electrical equipment, including heating and air conditioning units and refuse disposal areas shall be completely screened in a solid enclosed structure from surrounding properties by use of a wall, fence or landscaping, or shall be enclosed within a building.

D.      Outdoor storage in permitted subdistricts shall be minimized. Storage areas shall be enclosed by a solid architecturally compatible masonry wall with a height adequate to fully screen such areas from public view.

E.       Outdoor storage in permitted subdistricts shall not be located adjacent to any street-facing property line unless storage is the primary use of the site.

F.       Limitations and Exceptions to Permitted Uses and Structures.

1.       Limitation on Storage. No material or equipment shall be stored within the space between a street and setback line except for temporary storage during construction on the same premises. No required setback area shall be used to store any boat, camper, motor vehicle, or trailer, or parts thereof, equipment or any type of antenna except as provided for in this specific plan.

2.       Limitation on Outdoor Uses.

a.       All uses except outdoor eating areas, vehicle sales and rental, parking, growing plants, cut flowers, Christmas tree lots, pumpkin sales lots and similar uses, shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building which is attached to a permanent foundation.

b.       The outside storage of equipment, materials, supplies, or tools is not permitted.

c.       Outdoor wholesaling of goods and materials shall not be permitted. The retail sales of goods and materials to the general public on a temporary basis shall be permitted with the approval of a special events permit.

d.       All uses shall be conducted in a manner so as not to be objectionable to a person of normal sensitivity by reason of dust, fumes, noise, odor, smoke, vibrations, or other similar causes. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.410 General operating standards.
A.      Air Quality.

1.       Air Pollution. Sources of air pollution shall comply with rules established by the Environmental Protection Agency (Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40) and the California Air Resources Board. No person shall operate a regulated source of air pollution without a valid operation permit issued by the designated regulatory agency.

2.       Exhaust Emissions. Construction-related and business activity exhaust emissions shall be minimized by maintaining equipment in good running condition and in proper tune in compliance with manufacturer’s specifications. Equipment shall not be left idling for long periods of time.

3.       Odor Emissions. Noxious odorous emissions in a matter or quantity that is detrimental to or endangers the public health, safety, comfort or welfare is declared to be a public nuisance and unlawful and shall be modified to prevent further emissions release.

B.      Electrical Interference. Activities, processes and uses shall not operate in a manner that produces electric and/or magnetic fields that adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare of the community, including interference with normal radio, telephone or television reception from off the premises where an activity is located.

C.      Light and Glare. Lights, spotlights, floodlights, reflectors, and other means of illumination shall be shielded or equipped with special lenses in such a manner as to prevent any glare or direct illumination on any public street or other property.

D.      Noise. Activities, processes and uses shall not produce noise that may be considered a nuisance or hazard on any adjacent property.

E.       Vibrations. Uses that generate vibrations that may be considered a nuisance or hazard on any adjacent property shall be cushioned or isolated to prevent the generation of vibrations.

F.       Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage for commercial, industrial and manufacturing uses shall be utilized for the express purpose of the storage of material or equipment directly related to the use or activity on site. Outdoor storage for commercial, industrial and manufacturing uses must be fully enclosed by an opaque structure. The stored material shall be kept below the horizontal plane of the top of the storage structure. Outdoor storage shall not include manufacturing, assembly or construction of any equipment or material.

G.      Parking. Parking shall be designed to provide adequate space for access and adequate on-site maneuvering. Loading facilities shall not conflict with or obstruct the proper function parking facilities.

Off-street parking for one use shall not be considered as providing required off-street parking for any other use, except as expressly authorized by this section.

Parking facilities shall maintain adequate access and maneuverability for emergency vehicles.

H.      Outdoor Activities. Outdoor activities shall be limited to activities that are permitted within the zoning subdistrict in which it occurs. Outdoor activities shall not limit or obstruct the normal function of adjacent uses. Temporary outdoor activities shall be required to obtain a permit in compliance with the Glendora Municipal Code. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.420 Development incentives.
The following development incentives provide specific guidance for the granting of additional development potential. The development incentives contained within this section shall encourage the effective utilization and consolidation of parcels to encourage more viable development opportunities. Incentive bonuses shall be granted at the discretion of the city council. The following provisions apply to the specified land use subdistricts within the Route 66 specific plan.

A.      Lot Consolidation Incentives.

1.       Purpose. To provide incentives for the consolidation of adjacent parcels and new development that exceeds development standards with superior design.

2.       Incentives. The following incentives may be considered for development applications that consolidate two or more parcels and result in a conforming lot:

a.       Development Intensity (FAR) Bonus. Increased floor area ratio (FAR) bonus for the amount listed in Table 6-6. The bonus incentives shall apply to the gross square footage of a single parcel following consolidation.

 

Table 6-6

Lot Consolidation FAR Bonus—Applies to Commercial Only

 

 

Land Use Subdistrict

Base Intensity (FAR)

Allowable Bonus (FAR)

BG

0.35 FAR

0.10 FAR

GCG

0.35 FAR

0.10 FAR

TCMU

0.50 FAR

0.15 FAR

RSC

0.30 FAR

0.15 FAR

GLG

0.50 FAR

0.10 FAR

LHG

0.30 FAR

0.05 FAR

TCO

0.35 FAR

0.10 FAR

 

(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.430 Development review procedures.
Applicability. The procedures and regulatory provisions necessary to administer development review procedures for applicable properties, structures and uses within the specific plan project area shall be subject to the requirements as set forth in Chapter 21.02 of the Glendora Municipal Code in addition to the provisions as set forth in this article. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

Article VII. Implementation and Administration
21.10.440 Specific plan phasing.
The development and/or redevelopment of the Route 66 Corridor specific plan project area will be a multi-year effort. The preferred land use development concept and associated improvements necessary are envisioned to occur over a twenty-year period. Therefore, future development and/or redevelopment in the project area will be responsive to prevailing market conditions making forecasts of the timing and extent of future conditions challenging. Although a phasing plan is not appropriate for this type of project, the Route 66 Corridor specific plan will provide substantial guidance for future capital improvement programming and other city-initiated improvements. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.450 Applicability.
The provisions of this article are applicable to the considerations of development activity and land use within the boundary of the Route 66 Corridor specific plan and associated subdistricts.

The regulations, development standards and guidelines as contained in the specific plan shall apply in their entirety in the review of new development proposals. In the review of proposals involving the modification of existing development, however, it is recognized that existing site conditions may constrain the extent to which these development standards and guidelines can be met. Acceptable modifications for existing development are noted in their respective sections. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.460 General plan amendments.
In 2003, upon adoption of the specific plan, the city amended the Glendora General Plan to provide necessary modifications to provide consistency between the general plan and specific plan. The city adopted the following amendments to ensure consistency:

Amending the general plan (GPA03-04), creating a specific plan zone SP-3 (ZC03-03), adopting a specific plan (ZA03-05) and design guidelines (M03-17).

Concurrent with adoption of the 2017 revised specific plan, the following amendments are adopted: Amending the General Plan and Zoning Ordinance (PLN16-0045), (PLN17-0022). (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.470 Zoning code/map amendments.
The zoning classifications in the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area, prior to the adoption of the specific plan including C-3, R-3/MHP, PR, MS, CM, C-3/H, CM/MHP, C-2, C-3/MHP, R4, M1 and R-3 classifications were repealed within the specific plan project area, and the zoning map amendment shall indicate new Route 66 Corridor specific plan zoning classification “SP-3” including the BG, GMU, TCMU, RSC, CRR, LHG and TCO subdistricts.

In 2016, the city amended the boundaries of the TCMU subdistrict and rezoned certain areas to R-3 and MS (PLN16-0045). In 2017, the city amended the TCMU again modifying its boundaries pursuant to zone amendment (PLN17-0022).

All land use regulations, development standards, and other provisions of the Route 66 Corridor specific plan in its entirety shall apply as expressly stated in this plan. For development criteria and regulations that are not amended or superseded by this specific plan, the provisions of the Glendora Municipal Code shall prevail. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.480 Administration and enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the director of planning to enforce the provisions as set forth in the Route 66 Corridor specific plan. All officers, employees, and officials of the city who are vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform with the provisions of the Route 66 Corridor specific plan, and shall not issue any permit or license or approve any use or building which would be in conflict with the Route 66 Corridor specific plan. Any permit, license or approval issued that is in conflict with the requirements of the Route 66 Corridor specific plan shall be considered null and void. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.490 Relationship to zoning code.
The provisions contained in this specific plan constitute the primary land use and development standards for the project area. These regulations are applied in addition to the provisions as set forth in the Glendora Municipal Code. As part of the implementation of this specific plan, the Glendora Municipal Code shall be amended to include the Route 66 Corridor specific plan (“SP-3”) and associated subdistricts. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.500 Amendments to the specific plan.
The Route 66 Corridor specific plan may be amended utilizing the procedure by which it was originally adopted. In addition, the amendment shall demonstrate that it meets the intent of the specific plan’s goals and objectives or provide a finding that the amendment enhances the plan or is necessary to implement the goals and objectives. All sections or portions of the specific plan to be changed or that may be affected by the change must be included in the specific plan amendment. A concurrent amendment to the general plan would not be required provided the city council determines that substantive changes would not influence the goals, objectives, policies or programs of the Glendora general plan. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.510 Development review procedures.
The review and approval of projects and uses shall be subject to provisions contained within the specific plan and the Glendora Municipal Code. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.520 Specific plan EIR and mitigation monitoring.
A.      The Route 66 Corridor specific plan will be prepared in conjunction with a program-level EIR, which identifies potential impacts resulting from the proposed development and establishes mitigation measures that reduce them to a less than significant level, where feasible.

B.      As the lead agency, the city will implement a monitoring program for the approved mitigation measures. To assist in this monitoring effort, a mitigation monitoring program will be developed by the city as part of environmental findings and included in the final specific plan approved by the city council. The approved mitigation monitoring program shall comply with applicable sections of the Glendora Municipal Code.

C.      The Route 66 Corridor specific plan EIR will serve as the primary environmental document for the Route 66 Corridor specific plan and all future development undertaken within the plan area. The EIR is anticipated to be the definitive environmental document for project implementation within the specific plan area, including serving as a project EIR for purposes of infrastructure improvements. Developments that require discretionary review (i.e., projects subject to the approval of a special development permit) will be examined in consultation with the EIR to determine what additional environmental documentation must be prepared. Developments that do not require additional discretionary review will not be subject to additional environmental documentation. However, the project applicant will be required to submit documentation substantiating said development is allowed and in conformance with the specific plan, and the potential environmental effects are within the parameters and timeframe (year 2020) analyzed within the specific plan EIR.

D.      Future development projects proposed within the specific plan area may be required to prepare their own environmental documentation pursuant to state law. However, subsequent site-specific projects may use the “tiering” concept, as provided by Section 15385 of the State CEQA Guidelines. The tiering concept is a process by which the city, as lead agency, can adopt the programmatic EIR focusing on the “big picture,” and can then use streamlined CEQA review for subsequent individual development projects in the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area. This streamlined CEQA review may be used for each site-specific future development so long as the project is consistent with the decisions of the EIR, the mitigation measures described in the EIR, and the city’s general plan and zoning code. This tiering concept allows the city to address the broad environmental issues detailed in this EIR during the planning stages of the proposed specific plan. Future site-specific development projects are evaluated on a project-specific basis, and may be excused from repeating the broad environmental analysis examined in this comprehensive, programmatic EIR for the entire proposed Route 66 Corridor specific plan area. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.530 Severability.
If any portion of the Route 66 Corridor specific plan is, for any reason, held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and the invalidity of such provision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of the Route 66 Corridor specific plan. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.540 Public improvement financing strategy.
The public improvement financing strategy presented in this section is intended to provide a realistic estimate of the costs of implementing certain public improvements identified in the Route 66 Corridor specific plan. The identification of these improvements will allow the city to anticipate improvement needs and subsequently plan for funding and implementation. Provision of this financing strategy will assist the city in strategically positioning itself to compete for discretionary funding by having identified public improvements that directly relate to a comprehensive regulatory land use plan.

This section provides a summary of capital cost of the proposed improvement program as indicated in Article IV of this specific plan. Capital costs are based upon an assumed level of development occurring during the planning period 2003-2020. In addition, this section provides an overview of potential funding sources, inclusive of existing, discretionary and new funding/financing strategies. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.550 Estimated cost of improvements.
A.      Sewer Infrastructure Improvements. Sewer infrastructure costs included those costs associated with on-site and off-site improvements necessary to mitigate sewer infrastructure impacts associated with the proposed development plan. As discussed in Article IV of this specific plan, no immediate need for sewer infrastructure upgrades have been observed. The development plans suggests the periodic monitoring of sewer infrastructure facilities at various stages of redevelopment to ensure future demand does not exceed existing capacities.

B.      Domestic Water Infrastructure Improvements. Domestic water infrastructure cost estimates have been estimated based upon the portion of the existing water distribution system affected by development within the specific plan area. As shown in Exhibit 4-17 of this specific plan, domestic water system upgrades will be required throughout the corridor. Table 7-2: Domestic Water System Improvement Costs provides a summary of improvement costs.

 

Table 7-2

Domestic Water System Improvement Costs

 

 

Water Facility Description

Pipeline Diameter

Quantity (LF)

Unit Cost per LF

Estimated Construction Cost

PVC (C900)

8″

1532

$40/LF

$61,280

CMLNC

10″

504

$50/LF

$25,200

CMLNC

12″

9817

$60/LF

$589,020

CMLNC

14″

17,791

$70/LF

$1,245,370

CMLNC

16″

519

$80/LF

$41,520

TOTAL

 

 

 

$1,962,390

Notes:

         Unit Costs per lineal foot based upon general industry standards and included all cost associated with demolition and construction of new pipelines and support facilities.

 

C.      Stormdrain System Improvements. Stormdrain system improvement costs have been estimated based upon the portion of the existing stormdrain system affected by future development within the specific plan project area. As shown on Exhibit 4-20, the following recommended improvements will ensure adequate storm water conveyance.

Unit costs and quantities have been estimated based upon typical industry standards and consider complete improvement costs, including pavement removal and replacement, trenching, pipe, traffic control, and catch basins. Table 7-3: Stormwater Drainage Improvement Costs, provides a summary of improvement costs.

 

Table 7-3

Stormwater Drainage Improvement Costs

 

 

Water Facility Description

Pipeline Diameter

Quantity (LF)

Unit Cost per LF

Estimated Construction Cost (1)

Vermont Avenue/Route 66 Deficiencies

 

 

 

Option 1

 

 

 

 

RCP

30″

1700

$230/LF

 

Catch Basin

N/A

N/A

$5,000

 

 

 

 

TOTAL

$400,000

Option 2

 

 

 

 

RCP

24″

1700

$200/LF

 

Catch Basin

N/A

N/A

 

 

 

 

 

TOTAL

$350,000

Elwood/Route 66 Deficiencies

 

 

 

Option 1

 

 

 

 

RCP

30″

600

$230/LF

 

Catch Basin

N/A

N/A

$5000

 

 

 

 

TOTAL

$150,000

Option 2

 

 

 

 

RCP

30″

700

$230/LF

 

Catch Basin

N/A

N/A

$5000

 

 

 

 

TOTAL

$170,000

Note:

(1)    Estimated cost includes costs for mobilization, demolition and construction.

Source: RBF Consulting, July 2003.

 

D.      Streetscape/Community Design Improvement Costs. Streetscape/community design improvement cost estimates have been estimated based upon the recommended improvements identified in Article IV of this specific plan. Improvement costs for streetscape and community design improvements include costs associated with project mobilization (job site preparation), demolition, construction/hardscape, irrigation, planting and consultant design fees. The following tables provide a summary of improvement costs. More detailed, line item cost estimates are on file with the city of Glendora.

1.       Barranca Gateway.

Table 7-4 provides a summary of improvement costs for all improvements identified in Exhibit 4-4: Barranca Gateway Improvements.

 

Table 7-4

Barranca Gateway Improvements Opinion of Probable Construction Costs

 

 

Item #

Description

Quantity

Units

Unit Cost ($)

Total ($)

1

Mobilization

1

LS

$20,000.00

$20,000.00

2

Demolition

1

LS

$71,195.00

$71,195.00

3

Construction/Hardscape

1

LS

$231,200.00

$231,200.00

4

Irrigation

1

LS

$52,500.00

$52,500.00

5

Planting

1

LS

$54,395.00

$54,395.00

6

Consultant Design Fees

1

LS

$47,000.00

$47,000.00

 

Subtotal

 

 

 

$476,290.00

 

Contingency (25%)

 

 

 

$119,072.50

 

TOTAL

 

 

 

$595,362.50

 

Note: Since the LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT has no control over the cost of labor, materials, equipment or services furnished by others or over the Contractor(s)’ method of determining prices, or over the competitive bidding or market conditions, its Opinions of Probable Construction Cost provided herein are to be made on the basis of its experience and qualifications and represents its best judgment as an experience and qualified professional, familiar with the construction industry; but the LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT cannot and does not guarantee that proposals, bids or actual project or construction cost will not vary from its opinion of probable cost. If prior to the Bidding or Negotiation Phase, OWNER wishes greater assurance to Project Cost, it shall employ an independent cost estimator.

 

2.       Grand Avenue Gateway Improvement Costs.

Table 7-5 provides a summary of improvement costs for all improvements identified in Exhibits 4-7, 4-8 and 4-9.

 

Table 7-5

Grand Avenue Gateway Improvements Opinion of Probable Construction Costs

 

 

Item #

Description

Quantity

Units

Unit Cost ($)

Total ($)

1

Mobilization

1

LS

$75,000.00

$75,000.00

2

Demolition

1

LS

$283,515.00

$283,515.00

3

Construction/Hardscape

1

LS

$656,930.00

$656,930.00

4

Irrigation

1

LS

$248,500.00

$248,500.00

5

Planting

1

LS

$295,750.00

$295,750.00

6

Consultant Design Fees

1

LS

$170,000.00

$170,000.00

 

Subtotal

 

 

 

$1,730,895.00

 

Contingency (25%)

 

 

 

$432,723.75

 

TOTAL

 

 

 

$2,163,618.75

 

Note: Since the LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT has no control over the cost of labor, materials, equipment or services furnished by others or over the Contractor(s)’ method of determining prices, or over the competitive bidding or market conditions, its Opinions of Probable Construction Cost provided herein are to be made on the basis of its experience and qualifications and represents its best judgment as an experience and qualified professional, familiar with the construction industry; but the LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT cannot and does not guarantee that proposals, bids or actual project or construction cost will not vary from its opinion of probable cost. If prior to the Bidding or Negotiation Phase, OWNER wishes greater assurance to Project Cost, it shall employ an independent cost estimator.

 

3.       Glendora Avenue Gateway.

Table 7-6 provides a summary of improvement costs for all improvements identified in Exhibit 4-10: Glendora Gateway Improvements.

 

Table 7-6

Glendora Avenue Gateway Improvements Opinion of Probable Construction Costs

 

 

Item #

Description

Quantity

Units

Unit Cost ($)

Total ($)

1

Mobilization

1

LS

$70,000.00

$20,000.00

2

Demolition

1

LS

$259,795.00

$71,195.00

3

Construction/Hardscape

1

LS

$877,470.00

$231,200.00

4

Irrigation

1

LS

$113,500.00

$52,500.00

5

Planting

1

LS

$122,735.00

$54,395.00

6

Consultant Design Fees

1

LS

$150,000.00

$47,000.00

 

Subtotal

 

 

 

$1,593,500.00

 

Contingency (25%)

 

 

 

$398,375.00

 

TOTAL

 

 

 

$1,991,875.00

 

Note: Since the LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT has no control over the cost of labor, materials, equipment or services furnished by others or over the Contractor(s)’ method of determining prices, or over the competitive bidding or market conditions, its Opinions of Probable Construction Cost provided herein are to be made on the basis of its experience and qualifications and represents its best judgment as an experience and qualified professional, familiar with the construction industry; but the LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT cannot and does not guarantee that proposals, bids or actual project or construction cost will not vary from its opinion of probable cost. If prior to the Bidding or Negotiation Phase, OWNER wishes greater assurance to Project Cost, it shall employ an independent cost estimator.

 

4.       Lone Hill Gateway Improvement Costs.

Table 7-7 provides a summary of improvement costs for all improvements identified in Exhibit 4-10: Lone Hill Gateway Improvements.

Table 7-7

Lone Hill Gateway Improvements Opinion of Probable Construction Costs

 

 

Item #

Description

Quantity

Units

Unit Cost ($)

Total ($)

1

Mobilization

1

LS

$16,000.00

$16,000.00

2

Demolition

1

LS

$43,945.00

$43,945.00

3

Construction/Hardscape

1

LS

$192,135.00

$192,135.00

4

Irrigation

1

LS

$39,500.00

$39,500.00

5

Planting

1

LS

$38,235.00

$38,235.00

6

Consultant Design Fees

1

LS

$36,000.00

$36,000.00

 

Subtotal

 

 

 

$365,815.00

 

Contingency (25%)

 

 

 

$91,453.00

 

TOTAL

 

 

 

$457,268.00

 

Note: Since the LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT has no control over the cost of labor, materials, equipment or services furnished by others or over the Contractor(s)’ method of determining prices, or over the competitive bidding or market conditions, its Opinions of Probable Construction Cost provided herein are to be made on the basis of its experience and qualifications and represents its best judgment as an experience and qualified professional, familiar with the construction industry; but the LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT cannot and does not guarantee that proposals, bids or actual project or construction cost will not vary from its opinion of probable cost. If prior to the Bidding or Negotiation Phase, OWNER wishes greater assurance to Project Cost, it shall employ an independent cost estimator.

 

5.       Optional Items.

Table 7-8 provides a summary of line item improvement costs for various streetscape features, including those associated with screen wall treatments.

 

Table 7-8

Optional Items Improvements Opinion of Probable Construction Costs

 

 

Item #

Description

Quantity

Unit Cost ($)

1

Neighborhood rock monuments, including associated work

EA

$8,000.00

2

Acorn style pedestrian lights, including concrete footing

EA

$5,200.00

3

Metal bench

EA

$1,100.00

4

Metal trash receptacle

EA

$950.00

5

River rock veneer screen wall with precast concrete cap and rock veneer pilasters with precast concrete cap

LF

$150.00

6

River rock veneer screen wall with precast concrete cap, wood pickets and rock veneer pilasters with precast concrete cap

LF

$150.00

7

Sign with thematic banner attachments

EA

$800.00

8

Directional sign

EA

$650.00

9

Street sign

EA

$550.00

10

Pedestrian information sign

EA

$1,500.00

11

Parking lot entry sign

EA

$550.00

 

Note: Since the LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT has no control over the cost of labor, materials, equipment or services furnished by others or over the Contractor(s)’ method of determining prices, or over the competitive bidding or market conditions, its Opinions of Probable Construction Cost provided herein are to be made on the basis of its experience and qualifications and represents its best judgment as an experience and qualified professional, familiar with the construction industry; but the LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT cannot and does not guarantee that proposals, bids or actual project or construction cost will not vary from its opinion of probable cost. If prior to the Bidding or Negotiation Phase, OWNER wishes greater assurance to Project Cost, it shall employ an independent cost estimator.

(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.560 Potential funding and financing mechanism.
Funding and financing for projects identified in Section 21.10.540 of this article will require a comprehensive and creative financing approach through the utilization of a variety of financing mechanisms including debt financing, equity financing, loan guarantees and tax credits.

Table 7-9 provides a comprehensive listing of available funding and financing programs available from state and federal agencies, as well as private entities. It should be noted that funding and financing programs are dynamic and change according to available funds, changes in state and federal law among other factors. Table 7-9 should be supplemented when new programs become available.

 

Table 7-9

Potential Funding and Financing Mechanisms

 

State of California Programs

 

 

Financing/Funding Method

Description

Potential Uses of Funding

Real Estate Development

 

 

California Pollution Control Financing Authority (CPCFA)—California Recycle Underutilized Sites (Cal Reuse) Loans

Assistance to borrowers with the reuse and redevelopment of underutilized properties with real or perceived contamination issues (brownfields). Cal ReUSE addresses a funding and information gap in the redevelopment of brownfields to help bring these properties into productive reuse.

Reasonable and necessary brownfield project costs, including;

Site assessment

Technical assistance

Planning for the remediation of hazardous material

Obtaining access to privately held property to conduct an assessment

California Debt Limit Allocation Committee (CDLAC)—Tax-Exempt Private Activity Bond Debt Limit Allocation

Administers the annual tax-exempt private activity bond debt limit allocation program for California. The bonds issued are purchased by the private sector and are an obligation of the issuing entity (not the state or federal government). Agencies and organizations authorized to issue tax-exempt private activity bonds or mortgage credit certificates must receive an allocation from CDLAC.

A variety of programs are eligible for the issuance of tax-exempt private activity bonds:

Multifamily rental housing

Single-family housing

Extra credit teach home purchase program

Small-Issue industrial development bonds

Exempt facilities

California Public Employees’ Retirement System (CalPERS)—California Urban Real Estate (CURE) Investments

The CURE strategy is focused on addressing both the housing shortage as well as a lack of general development in urban infill locations throughout California.

Residential, office, retail, entertainment, hotel, and mixed-use projects.

Other projects that benefit certain economic groups or geographic areas, such as;

Low-income housing

Multifamily low-income housing

Economic development and redevelopment

Urban infill and “smart growth” strategy

Pooled Money Investment Account (PMIA)—Community Reinvestment Loan Purchases

The purchase of these loans provided original lenders with new capital to make additional loans to low- and moderate-income homeowners and to stabilize lower-income neighborhoods.

 

California Tax Credit Allocation Committee—Federal State Low-Income Housing Tax Credits

Encourages private investment in rental housing.

Tax credits can be allocated to new construction projects or for the acquisition and rehabilitation of certain projects.

 

 

Potential Funding and Financing Mechanisms

 

 

Financing/Funding Method

Description

Potential Uses of Funding

Business Development

 

 

California Pollution Control Financing Authority—California Capital Access Program for Small Business

Small business loan program that provides an important source of capital for small business that may otherwise have difficulty in obtaining funding. Provides incentives for a lender to make small business loans by establishing a loss revenue account as for of loan portfolio insurance.

Finance acquisition of land the construction or renovation of buildings, the purchase of equipment, working capital, and other capital projects. There are limitations on real estate loans and refinancing.

California Industrial Development Financing Advisory Commission—Tax-Exempt Industrial Development Bonds

Assist California manufacturing businesses in funding capital expenditures for acquisition or expansion. Allows business to borrow funds at competitive rates through the issuance of tax-exempt bonds enhanced by a letter of credit or as a private placement for small issues. Various subcategories of funding are available.

Acquisition of land, buildings, equipment, landscaping, design costs and permits.

Consumer Power and Conservation Financing Authority—Energy Financing Industrial Development Bonds

Encourage efficient use of energy resources, contribute to manageable energy costs, and support the manufacture and development of renewable technologies.

Acquisition of land, facilities and equipment.

Infrastructure

 

 

California Technology, Trade and Commerce Agency—Infrastructure State Revolving Fund Loans

Provides low cost financing to public agencies for a wide range of infrastructure projects.

Public infrastructure including, but not limited to; streets, drainage, transit, water distribution, sewage.

Industrial Development Bonds

Allows manufacturers and processors to finance acquisition and expansion projects at very low interest rates through tax-exempt bond issuance.

Acquisition and rehab.

Section 501(c)(3) Revenue Bonds

Tax-exempt revenue bond financing is available to non-profit corporations.

Capital expenditures, debt refinancing, expenditure reimbursement.

Other Programs—Stare, Federal and Private Entities

 

Economic Development Administration (EDA) Loans and Grants

Grants to communities for site preparation and construction of water and sewer facilities, access roads, railroad spurs, etc.

Construction of water and sewer facilities and access roads.

Federal Highway Administration Department of Transportation (DOT)

Provides funds to the states to develop and maintain recreational trails and trail-related facilities for both non-motorized and motorized recreational trail uses.

Recreational trails and trail-related facilities.

Transportation Efficiency Act for the 21st Century (H.R. 2400)

TEA-21 gives local governments unprecedented flexibility in developing a mix of highway corridor enhancements, with funds for such projects as public transit, bikeways, highway enhancements, recreation, historic preservation, scenic byways, and other alternatives to address transportation and community needs. Contact source for funding amounts. States and localities are permitted to use federal dollars (provided primarily from the gas tax) for more flexibly to meet their transportation needs. More comprehensive planning, taking into account such factors as desired land use patterns and environmental effects, is required as a prerequisite to federal funding.

Public transit, bikeways, highway enhancements to address transportation and community needs.

U.S. Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) Transportation & Community and System Preservation Pilot Program (TCSP)

Comprehensive initiative of research and grants to investigate the relationships between transportation and community and system preservation and private sector-based initiatives. States, local governments, and metropolitan planning organizations are eligible for these discretionary grants.

Grants to plan and implement strategies that improve the efficiency of the transportation system; reduce environmental impacts of transportation; reduce the need for costly future public infrastructure investments; ensure efficient access to jobs, services, and centers of trade; and examine private sector development patterns and investments that support these goals.

National Trails Endowment

The American Hiking Society manages a fund of money created by contributions to an annual endowment fund for trails. Money from the endowment will be made available to organizations for which foot trails are a primary focus.

Establish and maintain pedestrian foot trails.

Environmental and Mitigation Fund

The California State Department of Transportation (CALTRANS) has established this state fund for beautification improvements to roadsides to mitigate the effects of transportation projects.

Beautification improvements for roadsides.

Environmental Enhancement and Mitigation Program (EEMP) Grants (Prop111)

Three categories of projects are eligible, among them “highway landscaping and urban forestry.” The city can pursue this for the purchase, installation, and maintenance of street trees. Projects must be designed to mitigate the environmental impacts of modified or new public transportation facilities but do not have to be within the road right-of-way.

Provision of highway landscaping and urban forestry for roadsides and transportation facilities.

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Program Grants

Federal grants for various purposes including state and local program research, demonstrations, development, and implementation.

Research, demonstrations, development and implementation of various environmental based programs including water pollution, conservation, solid waste disposal, etc.

Infrastructure State Revolving Fund Program

The Infrastructure State Revolving Fund (ISRF) Program provides low-cost financing to public agencies for a wide variety of infrastructure projects. ISRF Program funding is available in amounts ranging from $250,000 to $10,000,000, with loan terms of up to 30 years. Interest rates are set on a monthly basis.

Eligible project categories include city streets, county highways, state highways, drainage, water supply and flood control, educational facilities, environmental mitigation measures, parks and recreational facilities, port facilities, public transit, sewage collection and treatment, solid waste collection and disposal, water treatment and distribution, defense conversion, public safety facilities, and power and communications facilities.

FTA Metropolitan Planning Program

Operated by the Federal Transit Administration (FTA), this program provides financial assistance, through the states, to Metropolitan Planning Organizations (MPO) to support the costs of preparing long-range transportation plans required as a condition of obtaining Federal Capital Program and Urbanized Area Formula Program grants for transit projects.

Planning, engineering, design, and evaluation of transportation projects. Technical studies relating to management, operations, capital requirements, innovative financing opportunities, and economic feasibility; evaluation of previously assisted projects; and other similar or related activities preliminary to and in preparation for the construction, acquisition or improved operation of transportation systems, facilities and equipment including the planning for “livability” features such as improved pedestrian and bicycle access to the station and shops and community services in the station area, incorporating arts and artistic design in stations and surrounding areas, and other improvements that enhance the usability and community-friendliness of the transit system environment.

Up to a maximum of 20 percent of the preliminary engineering and design costs for a transportation facility.

Transportation and Community and System Preservation Pilot Program

Comprehensive program to assist in planning, developing, and implementing strategies to integrate transportation and community and system preservation plans and practices.

Improve the efficiency of the transportation system, reduce environmental impacts of transportation, reduce the need for costly future public infrastructure investments, ensure efficient access to jobs, services and centers of trade, and examine development patterns and identify strategies to encourage compatible private sector development patterns.

California Infrastructure and Economic Development Bank (CIEDB)

The CIEDB was created in 1994 to promote economic revitalization, enable future development, and encourage a healthy climate for jobs in California. The CIEDB has broad authority to issue tax-exempt and taxable revenue bonds, provide financing to public agencies, provide credit enhancements, acquire or lease facilities, and leverage state and federal funds.

The Infrastructure Bank has broad authority to issue tax-exempt and taxable revenue bonds, provide financing to public agencies, provide credit enhancements, acquire or lease facilities, and leverage state and federal funds. The Infrastructure Bank’s current programs include the Infrastructure State Revolving Fund (ISRF) Program and the Conduit Revenue Bond Program.

Impact Fees and Exactions

Dedications of land and impact fees are exactions which lessen the impacts of new development resulting from increased population or demand on services.

Dedication of land and fees in lieu of dedication; subdivision reservation for public use; development architectural review; and fees.

City General Fund

It is not uncommon for cities that are seeking to revitalize their community to commit a certain amount of the general fund to the effort over a period of years.

Improvements and ongoing projects or programs which have general community-wide benefits.

General Obligation Bonds

Tax-supported bonds used to finance the acquisition and construction of public capital improvements.

Public buildings, roads, infrastructure improvements and community centers.

Development Fees

Counties and cities may impose development fees on landowners in a “benefit area” to pay for a proportionate share of the public facilities required to serve a development.

Used for “necessary public services” which include parks and open areas.

Development Incentive Programs

Incentives encourage the private sector to provide the desired public improvement.

Public improvements.

General Taxes

Taxes include excise taxes, utility user taxes, and property tax to generate revenue.

Various community improvements.

Other Private Donations

Private donations for a variety of different types of projects are generally available from foundations, institutions and corporations that have major interests in these areas.

Various depending upon interest of private donors.

Revenue Bonds

Debt undertaken wherein payback is tied to specific revenue streams. This form of debt does not require a public vote.

Common uses include industrial development, housing and social services.

EPA—Clean Water Revolving Fund

Low interest-loan program established by the Federal Clean Water Act

Loans for projects that address point and nonpoint sources of water pollution

State Waters Resources Control Board Nonpoint Source Water Pollution Control

Established by the federal Clean Water Act § 319, these grants are for the implementation of state nonpoint source pollution control programs. Each state passes through a portion of these funds to other entities for implementing specific NPS management practices. State Water Quality agencies are the lead agencies for these grant programs.

Projects that solve water quality problems.

Safe Drinking Water State Revolving Fund

Low-interest loan program established by the 1996 Safe Drinking Water Amendments. U.S. EPA provides funds to each state to establishing ongoing loan programs. The state administers the State Revolving Fund (SRF) and makes loans to drinking water systems for projects which will ensure that drinking water remains safe and affordable. States may also fund wellhead and source water protection projects.

Loans for drinking water systems.

Solid Waste Assistance Funds

Grants to fund program development or pilot projects which promote waste reduction, recycled-content products, markets for recycled materials, or assist in the development of solid waste management plans and the clean-up of open dumps.

Incorporate EPA initiatives and priorities with source reduction, product stewardship, reuse, recycling, composting, and/or recycled product procurement projects. Stimulate market for difficult-to-recycle materials such as tires, construction/demolition debris, green waste and electronics.

Water Quality 104(b)(3) Grants

Grants to support critical National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) water quality related projects.

Water quality projects.

Water Quality Assessment and Planning

Grants established by the federal Clean Water Act § 205/§ 604, these funds will support water quality assessment and planning projects which will lead to implementable actions that promote healthy aquatic ecosystems.

Projects which foster local watershed management efforts that protect and enhance aquatic environmental conditions. Projects which result in Total Maximum Daily Loads calculations for impaired waters on State Clean Water Act Section 303(d) list.

Tea-21 Job Access And Reverse Commute Grants

The Job Access and Reverse Commute grant program assists states and localities in developing new or expanded transportation services that connect welfare recipients and other low income persons to jobs and other employment related services. Job access projects are targeted at developing new or expanded transportation services such as shuttles, vanpools, new bus routes, connector services to mass transit, and guaranteed ride home programs for welfare recipients and low income persons. Reverse commute projects provide transportation services to suburban employment centers from urban, rural and other suburban locations for all populations.

Expand transportation services.

The National Endowment for the Arts Challenge America Leadership Initiative

The National Endowment for the Arts will make a limited number of grants for design competitions to stimulate excellence in design in the public realm. The goal is to invest in projects that promote and use design to make communities across the nation more livable. This initiative is intended to bring institutions from across the country together with the best design talent, to raise the expectations and aspirations for public work, and to increase popular awareness of the importance of design in daily life. The Endowment will consider competitions for projects in areas of design that include: architecture, urban planning, industrial design, and/or landscape architecture. Projects may include, but are not limited to, competitions for schools, museums, performing arts spaces, municipal buildings, parks, waterfronts, bridges, highway rights-of-way, public housing, emergency service vehicles, innovative building technologies, transportation facilities, or large-scale master plans.

For design competitions in the public realm. Funding is not for construction.

Adopt-a-Light Program (Tree, Bench, etc.)

The city can recover costs of public improvements.

As a unique method for paying for street lighting fixtures, or any other streetscape element, a small projected plaque sign could be affixed to the light pole with the name or logo of the local merchant/business/person/entity who purchased the fixtures. This program can also be applied to historic plaques, benches, trees, paving surfaces, and banners.

Business Improvement Areas (BIA)

Self-taxing business districts. BIAs include Business Improvement Districts (BIDs), Local Improvement Districts (LIDs) and other such financial districts.

Business and property owners pay for capital improvements, maintenance, marketing, parking, and other items as jointly agreed to through systematic, periodic self-assessment.

The Energy Foundation

The Energy Foundation will support regional transportation reform through analysis, policy research, regulatory work, and advocacy. The Foundation will explore policy options that promote alternatives to increased single occupancy vehicle use and to new highway construction. The foundation will also support analysis and advocacy to promote increased vehicle fuel efficiency.

Transportation policy analysis.

The Gunk Foundation Grants for Public Arts Projects

The Gunk Foundation aims to support the production of non-traditional public art projects related to public space. Support for artwork displayed in spaces of public transportation, city streets, or work places is given. Non-traditional, thought-provoking public work that is site specific.

Grants are provided for works of public art that are non-traditional and have a meaningful connection to the space they are in. The committee will not fund art education, art festivals, art therapy, mural projects, community gardens, restoration projects, architectural design projects, traditional commemorative sculpture/painting, or traditional theater projects.

American Greenways Eastman Kodak Grant Program

The program encourages action-oriented greenway projects. Keys to determining which projects will receive grants are the importance of the project to local greenway development efforts, how likely the project is to produce tangible results, and the extent to which the grant results in matching funds from other resources.

Grants to stimulate the planning and design of greenways.

Leaf-It-To-Us: Kid’s Crusade for Trees!

This tree planting grant program is a statewide campaign designed to provide opportunities to involve California’s primary and secondary school students to become more knowledgeable in the benefits trees play in providing for livable communities, improving the global environment, and making improvements to their local learning environment. The program provides funds for community tree planting projects initiated and undertaken by school kids in partnership with school volunteers for local governments to purchase trees, which are environmentally tolerant and high quality. Trees must be on public property, and projects must be completed within 18 months of project award. The city can apply and receive awards for up to four years in a row.

Tree planting.

Urban Forestry Grant Program: Trees for the Millennium

This program provides grants for local governments to purchase trees, which are environmentally tolerant and high quality. Trees must be on public property, and projects must be completed within 18 months of project award. The city can apply and receive awards for up to four years in a row.

Purchase trees.

Public Works and Economic Development Act of 1965—Grant

The basic grant rate may be up to 50 percent of the project cost. Severely depressed areas may receive supplementary grants to bring the Federal contribution up to 80 percent of the project cost; recognized Indian tribes may be eligible for up to 100 percent assistance. Additionally, eligible areas located within and actively participating in the operations of Economic Development Districts are, subject to the 80 percent maximum Federal grant limit, eligible for a 10 percent bonus on grants for public works projects. On average, EDA’s investment covers about 50 percent of project costs.

Project include: (1) Infrastructure for industrial park development; (2) port development and expansion; (3) infrastructure necessary for economic development (e.g., water/sewer facilities); (4) renovation and recycling of old industrial buildings; (5) construction of vocational-technical facilities and skill centers; (6) construction of incubator facilities; (7) redevelopment of brownfields; and (8) eco-industrial development. Investments in facilities such as water and sewer system improvements, industrial access roads, industrial and business parks, port facilities, railroad sidings, distance learning facilities, skill-training facilities, business incubator facilities, redevelopment of brownfields, eco-industrial facilities, and telecommunications infrastructure improvements needed for business retention and expansion. Eligible activities include the acquisition, rehabilitation, design and engineering, or improvement of public land or publicly-owned and operated development facilities, including machinery and equipment. Projects may also include infrastructure for broadband deployment and other types of telecommunications-enabling projects and other kinds of technology infrastructure. Eligible projects must fulfill a pressing need of the area and must: (1) improve the opportunities for the successful establishment or expansion of industrial or commercial plants or facilities; (2) assist in the creation of additional long-term employment opportunities; or (3) benefit the unemployed/underemployed residents of the area or members of low-income families. In addition, all proposed investments must be consistent with the currently approved Comprehensive Economic Development Strategy for the area in which the project will be located, and the applicant must have the required local share of funds committed and available. Also, the project must be capable of being started and completed in a timely manner.

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Sustainable Development Challenge Grants

This EPA grant program is designed to encourage people, organizations, governments and businesses to work cooperatively to develop flexible, locally-oriented approaches that link place-based environmental management with sustainable development and revitalization. The program funds projects that improve the environment, build sustainable futures for communities, help local economies and encourage partnerships among community groups, businesses, government and others. It looks for projects yielding the greatest environmental and economic benefits, and leverage the most community investment and resources.

The program could potentially fund the demonstration of a wide variety of environmentally and economically sustainable projects in all environmental media and program areas. These projects could help identify those practices which show promise of being truly sustainable and those which are not and should be avoided.

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Underground Storage Tank Trust Fund Program Grant

EPA’s Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response oversees two grant programs dealing with underground storage tanks. The State Underground Storage Tanks (UST) Program provides project grants to assist state governments in the development and implementation of underground storage tank programs, so as to build their capacity to operate their programs in lieu of the federal program. A high priority is to encourage owners and operators to upgrade or replace their tanks well in advance of the deadline. Owners and operators of UST systems have until December 22, 1998, to upgrade, replace or close substandard systems. The Leaking Underground Storage Tank (LUST) Trust Fund Program provides project grants (cooperative agreements) to support state corrective action and enforcement programs that address releases from underground storage tanks containing petroleum. Funds are used to provide resources for the oversight and cleanup of petroleum releases from underground storage tanks where owners and operators are unknown, unwilling or unable to take corrective actions themselves. States may also oversee responsible party cleanups. A ten percent state cost share is required.

The program can be used not only to solve the immediate problem of leaking underground petroleum storage tanks, but also to raise public awareness of the pollution threat to groundwater.

Water Recycling Facilities Planning Grant Program

These funds can be used by public agencies for low-interest loans for the design and construction of projects and grants for facilities planning.

Loans for Water recycling projects. Grants for planning studies.

Department of Water Resources Proposition 13 Water Conservation Program

The Water Bond 2000 measure, Proposition 13 (approved in March 2000), provides loan and grant funding for Urban and Agricultural Water Conservation, Infrastructure Rehabilitation (reduction in distribution system water losses), and Groundwater Recharge and Storage projects or feasibility studies.

Low interest loans and grants for construction projects, and grants for feasibility studies to public agencies and incorporated mutual water companies.

California Pollution Control Financing Authority Sustainable Communities Loan and Grant Program

The SCGL program has been designed to be flexible and encourage creativity. Funding will be awarded to communities that wish to implement policies, programs and projects using sustainable development principles. All projects must encompass sustainable development principles to be eligible for funding. Examples of eligible projects include: (1) Specific plans, or portions of specific plans that direct the nature of development and revitalization within the boundaries of a required general plan consistent with sustainable development principles. (2) Alternative transportation studies, urban design studies, finance plans, redevelopment plans and engineering studies that facilitate sustainable development. (3) Projects such as a community center, park enhancements, or infrastructure improvements that are key elements of a comprehensive community or neighborhood sustainable development plan. (4) Funding for local communities to hire individuals at various stages of planning depending on the needs of the community. An example would be hiring a new staff member or consultant to assist an individual community with the design and/or implementation of a particular plan for development or revitalization using sustainable development principles. (5) Funding for communities to hire technical experts to identify, assess, and complete applications for state, federal and private economic assistance programs that fund sustainable development and sound environmental policies and programs. Rather than focus on one prescriptive approach.

SCGL may fund specific plans, portions of specific plans, alternative transportation studies, finance plans, redevelopment plans, engineering studies, public projects and other projects that promote sustainable development principles.

 

(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.570 Implementation priorities.
Implementing the Route 66 Corridor specific plan entails partnerships between public agencies, residents, property owners, business representatives, and other interests for prioritization of opportunities that exist within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area. The purpose of this section is to set forth an initial set of implementation priorities pertaining to streetscape, land use and façade rehabilitation, that will help public and private interests to focus on immediate opportunities for revitalization of the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area. It is important that the implementation priorities are reviewed on an annual basis to ensure they reflect current trends and conditions.

A.      Streetscape Improvement Phasing. Streetscape improvements are prioritized using a two-tiered approach, the first of which focuses on immediate improvements applicable to the entire Route 66 Corridor specific plan project area, with the second focusing on specific subareas within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan project area.

1.       Immediate Priority Streetscape Improvement Projects.

a.       Priority #1: Banner Installation.

Discussion: As presented in Article IV, a banner program is recommended to help further identify and “brand” the Route 66 Corridor specific plan project area and strengthen the sense of place.

Action: Upon adoption of the specific plan, a banner design should be selected (see Exhibit 4-14: Route 66 banner concepts) and installed on existing light poles to quickly “brand” the corridor and immediately improve the image of Route 66. Banner installation may be subject to Southern California Edison approval.

b.       Priority #2: Screenwall Installation.

Discussion: Design concepts are presented in Article IV for screenwalls to provide the Glendora community with an ability to screen existing uses or facilities that may not contribute to the desired visual character of the Route 66 Corridor specific plan project area. Cost estimates for these improvements are provided in Table 7-8.

Action: Upon adoption of the specific plan, candidate locations for screenwalls within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan project area should be identified, followed by construction of the screenwalls. Placing an initial priority for this component will facilitate negotiation with property owners and identify necessary right-of-way acquisition.

B.      Priority Subareas for Phased Streetscape Improvements. As illustrated in Exhibit 7-1: Priority Subareas—Phased Streetscape Improvements, the following five subareas have been prioritized within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan project area to receive streetscape enhancements as funding and other resources become available.

1.       Priority Area #1: Grand Avenue Gateway.

Discussion: The Grand Avenue gateway provides the primary north/south gateway to the Route 66 Corridor. Streetscape enhancements are a top priority for the Grand Avenue gateway as it is envisioned to serve as the primary commercial/retail district within the city through the provision of higher intensity commercial development that caters to the local and regional market. Cost estimates for these improvements are shown in Table 7-5.

Action: Identify, pursue, secure, and allocate resources to the design and construction of streetscape improvements, corner treatments, neighborhood entries, rock walls, and other community design enhancements for the Grand Avenue gateway subarea.

2.       Priority Area #2: Barranca Avenue Gateway.

Discussion: The Barranca Avenue gateway provides the western “front door” into the city and is envisioned to provide a high-level of street-oriented development and strong pedestrian comfort for nearby college students and area residents. Cost estimates for these improvements are shown in Table 7-4.

Action: Following streetscape enhancements to the Grand Avenue gateway subarea, identify, pursue, secure, and allocate resources to the design and construction of streetscape improvements, corner treatments, gateway medians, and other pedestrian design details for the Barranca Avenue gateway subarea.

3.       Priority Area #3 Glendora Avenue Gateway.

Discussion: The Glendora Avenue gateway plays a central role in improving the functional and visual connection between the Route 66 Corridor and the Glendora Village area. Cost estimates for these improvements are shown in Table 7-6.

Action: Following streetscape enhancements to the Barranca Avenue gateway subarea, identify, pursue, secure, and allocate resources to the design and construction of streetscape improvements, corner treatments, gateway medians, and other community design details for the Glendora Avenue gateway subarea.

4.       Priority Area #4: Glendora Avenue Village Connection.

Discussion: The Glendora Avenue Village connection is a pivotal area for maintaining and enhancing a pedestrian-friendly zone between the Village, the future transit area and Route 66. Cost estimates for these improvements are shown in Table 7-6.

Action: Following streetscape enhancements to the Glendora Avenue gateway subarea, identify, pursue, secure, and allocate resources to the design and construction of streetscape improvements and other community design details for the Glendora Avenue Village connection subarea.

5.       Priority Area #5 Lone Hill Gateway.

Discussion: The Lone Hill gateway is the eastern gateway of Glendora’s Route 66 Corridor and serves to feature views to the San Gabriel Mountains while reinforcing attractive commercial development and neighborhood compatibility. Cost estimates for these improvements are shown in Table 7-7.

Action: Following streetscape enhancements to the Glendora Avenue Village connection subarea, identify, pursue, secure, and allocate resources to the design and construction of streetscape improvements, corner treatments, gateway medians, and other community design details for the Lone Hill gateway subarea.

C.      Priority Subareas and Target Sites for Reuse. The Route 66 Corridor specific plan project area contains many reuse opportunities for underutilized properties. As illustrated in Exhibit 7-2: Priority Subareas and Target Sites for Reuse, fifteen sites have been initially identified by the city as priorities for reuse based upon a variety of factors including strategic location, economic and market conditions, environmental considerations, and property owner interest. Of the fifteen target sites, ten are organized into five priority subareas to provide public and private sectors with an additional level of prioritization when considering resource allocation and implementation direction.

All target sites offer the Route 66 Corridor specific plan project area with opportunities to establish new design and land use precedents that carryout the Glendora community’s vision for the area. As such, all target sites will receive heightened focus by the city with respect to marketing and outreach, as well as special design review concessions and other reuse incentives.

D.      Priority Subareas for Façade Rehabilitation. The city currently administers a grant program for façade rehabilitation that it funds on a yearly basis. Based upon a visually evident need by existing buildings for façade improvements to reflect the image enhancement objectives embodied in the Route 66 Corridor specific plan, the following three façade rehabilitation priority subareas have been identified (as illustrated in Exhibit 7-3: Priority Subareas for Façade Rehabilitation).

1.       Priority Subarea A: The area generally located along Route 66, east of Glendora Avenue and west of Lorraine Avenue.

2.       Priority Subarea B: The area generally located along Route 66 and Vermont Avenue west of Glendora Avenue and east of Grand Avenue.

3.       Priority Subarea C: The area generally located along Route 66, west of Grand Avenue and east of Barranca Avenue.

The priority subareas include buildings that either show signs of blight, appear outdated, or that otherwise are not architecturally compatible with the design image presented in the Route 66 Corridor specific plan. Buildings within these subareas, especially those containing locally owned and operated businesses, will receive increased priority for façade rehabilitation grants made by the city. (Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.A Appendix—Exhibits
21.10.A.010 General plan consistency analysis.
A.      Introduction. This appendix reviews the goals and policies of the city of Glendora general plan that are the most relevant to the Route 66 Corridor specific plan project area. Goals and policies that are not directly applicable to the Route 66 Corridor specific plan have not been evaluated. The analysis below provides a discussion of consistency with the Glendora general plan and the Route 66 Corridor specific plan.

B.      Land Use Element. Goals and policies of the Land Use Element of the Glendora General Plan are provided below:

Goal 1: Compatible adjacent land uses throughout the community.

Specific Plan Consistency with General Plan: Article III, planning framework, identifies planning factors that encourage future development that is compatible with the existing community. The specific plan provides a planning framework over the next twenty years that would allow for higher density development with mixed uses to allow for development that is compatible with the surrounding area and which would provide required service development along with helping to meet the city’s housing needs. Article VI, land use and development regulations, establishes required setbacks and landscaping guidelines in order to ensure that there is sufficient buffering between adjacent land uses. Section 21.10.340, nonconforming uses, includes the provisions that nonconforming uses shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended and encourages the eventual abatement of all nonconformities.

Goal 2: Rational development and redevelopment of parcels throughout the city.

Specific Plan Consistency with General Plan: The Route 66 Corridor specific plan (specific plan) provides a policy and regulatory bridge between the city of Glendora General Plan and individual, project-level development. The specific plan provides area-specific land use regulations and development guidelines. The specific plan provides a comprehensive set of plans, guidelines and regulatory standards in addition to administrative and implementation programs designed to provide for high-quality development within the land use districts.

Goal 5: A diversified economic base with increased opportunity for desirable employment and consumer activity. Convenient, efficient and attractive commercial and industrial land uses which are concentrated into districts and centers to better serve the community.

Specific Plan Consistency with General Plan: A goal of the specific plan, as defined by guiding principle 1.0 is to, “increase and maintain an increased daytime employment and residential population.” In addition, Guiding Principle 3.0 encourages, “embracing flexible and diverse land uses that foster economic development opportunities for the Glendora community and contribute to a growing presence in the regional marketplace.” In conformance with these goals, the specific plan includes nine land use zoning subdistricts including: Barranca gateway, Grand Avenue Commercial gateway, town center mixed use, Route 66 service commercial, central Route 66 residential, Lone Hill gateway and Glendora technology, commerce and office. Barranca gateway would include a mix of uses including residential, commercial and retail development with an establishment of uses that capitalize on adjacent market potential. The Grand Avenue Commercial gateway is intended to enhance Grand Avenue’s function as a primary commercial/retail district within the city. The Route 66 service commercial district is intended to provide for a variety of smaller-scale commercial, office and light industrial/manufacturing uses. Finally, the Glendora technology, commerce and office district is intended to serve as a primary employment center within the city of Glendora. The goal of the specific plan for each of these districts is also to provide enhanced streetscape and specific development and design guidelines to ensure that development is attractive and will soften the appearance of the existing industrial uses.

Goal 6: Public and quasi-public facilities and services that efficiently and effectively serve the community’s needs.

Specific Plan Consistency with General Plan: In order to ensure adequate public facilities with development of the specific plan, the specific plan includes Objective INF-1 which states, “Ensure infrastructure capacity within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area meets future demands.” Therefore, the specific plan includes, Chapter 4.4, infrastructure plan, which describes the required infrastructure improvements necessary to accommodate the future build-out of the specific plan for the domestic water system, wastewater system and the storm drain system. Finally, Section 21.10.540, public improvement financing strategy, identifies certain public improvement needs and subsequent plan for funding and implementation.

C.      Housing Element. Goals and policies of the housing element of the Glendora general plan are provided below:

Goal 1: Preservation and improvement of the existing housing stock.

Specific Plan Consistency with General Plan: The specific plan provides incentives for rehabilitating existing housing stock. Guiding principal 10.0 of the specific plan encourages a coordinated and focused change rather than “remove and replace” transformation to enhance sense of place and promote aesthetic improvements. In addition, one of the planning factors of the specific plan is to enhance the condition of existing affordable housing (such as mobilehome parks located along Route 66).

Goal 2: Access to adequate housing by all segments of the community.

Specific Plan Consistency with General Plan: The specific plan provides for developing a variety of housing choices in order to accommodate a diverse range of income groups within the community and enhancing the condition of existing affordable housing. Section 21.10.420, density bonus for affordable housing, provides incentives for providing housing for very low, lower incomes or senior households.

Goal 3: Housing that meets existing and future needs.

Specific Plan Consistency with General Plan: The specific plan would provide for a net increase of five hundred thirty-seven residential units. In addition, as discussed in the housing element goal 1 and goal 2 consistency statements, the specific plan promotes preservation and rehabilitation of the existing housing stock and would also provide for a range of housing for various income groups and provides incentives for development of affordable housing.

D.      Circulation Element. Goals and policies of the circulation element of the Glendora general plan are provided below:

Goal 1: An efficient circulation system.

Specific Plan Consistency with General Plan: The specific plan objectives include objectives for circulation, parking and transportation. Specifically, objective CIR-2 wants to, “ensure potential transportation impacts of the Route 66 Corridor specific plan are identified and mitigated to the greatest extent feasible.” The specific plan also includes Section 21.10.160, circulation plan, which identifies existing conditions, forecasted future conditions and mitigation measures to address project-related significant impacts based upon a comprehensive traffic analysis. The approval of the specific plan includes a general plan amendment modifying the acceptable level of service (LOS) to “D” on roads and intersections.

Goal 2: Reduction of vehicle miles traveled (VMT).

Specific Plan Consistency with General Plan: In order to reduce vehicle miles traveled, the specific plan includes specific plan objective CIR-1, which works to, “ensure improved pedestrian mobility, safety, and comfort,” in order to foster pedestrian travel. In addition, specific plan objective CIR-4 states, “establish a correlation between development in high activity locations and access to existing and planned transportation modes.” Finally, Section 21.10.180, community design/streetscape plan, identifies specific measures for each of the seven districts for increasing pedestrian activity and connecting “nodes” of travel to future transit areas.

Goal 3: Aesthetically pleasing transportation corridors.

Specific Plan Consistency with General Plan: Section 21.10.180, community design/streetscape plan, establishes conceptual designs and guidelines for streetscape improvements within public rights-of-way along the Route 66 Corridor. The section presents gateway concepts, streetscape furniture, street trees and a wayfinding program intended to further the goals and objectives for community design for the Route 66 specific plan project area.

Goal 4: Adequate off-street parking and loading facilities.

Specific Plan Consistency with General Plan: Development within the specific plan area will provide off-street parking and loading facilities in accordance with Section 21.03.020 of the city of Glendora Zoning Code. The specific plan also provides for shared parking between sites under certain conditions delineated in Section 21.10.370 of the specific plan.

E.       Conservation Element. Goals and policies of the conservation element of the Glendora general plan are provided below:

Goal: Conservation of the natural resources of the community.

Specific Plan Consistency with General Plan: The specific plan objectives include three environmental objectives, as listed below.

Specific Plan Objective ENV-1: Ensure potential environmental effects of the specific plan are mitigated to a less than significant level where feasible.

Specific Plan Objective ENV-2: Adopt a program-level environmental clearance document to utilize in subsequent development within the Route 66 Corridor specific plan area.

Specific Plan Objective ENV-3: Establish methods and strategies for the conservation of resources, including water use and drought tolerant landscaping.

In conformance with specific plan objective ENV-2, the specific plan was prepared in conjunction with a program level environmental impact report (EIR) in which future projects would tier off of. The EIR identified significant impacts to traffic and air quality as a result of implementation of the Route 66 Corridor specific plan.

In conformance with specific plan objective ENV-3, Article VI, land use and development regulations, establishes water-conserving measures for landscaping and building design. Section 21.10.380(C)(2), specifically requires that all landscaping be installed and maintained to minimize irrigation demand and that ground cover shall include drought-tolerant features consistent with the California Department of Water specification.

F.       Noise Element. Goals and policies of the Noise Element of the Glendora General Plan are provided below:

Goal: Acceptable noise levels throughout the community.

Specific Plan Consistency with General Plan: Section 21.10.360, standards for specific land uses, specifies building location and design standards in order to limit noise impacts on sensitive receptors. Specifically, Section 21.10.360 establishes regulations prohibiting incompatible uses, limiting noise levels from loading and storage facilities and outdoor mechanical equipment, requiring building structures be designed to mitigate noise impacts and requiring that acoustical analysis be prepared for new development projects that verify that the project complies with the city’s noise ordinance. Section 21.10.410(D), noise, establishes the following guideline, “activities, processes and uses shall not produce noise that may be considered a nuisance or hazard on any adjacent property.”

G.      Hazardous Waste Element. Goals and policies of the hazardous waste element of the Glendora general plan are provided below:

Goal 2: Protect the health and safety of citizens and businesses within the city and surrounding communities.

Specific Plan Consistency with General Plan: The specific plan limits the storage of hazardous material to the Route 66 Service Commercial (RSC) subdistrict. The RSC is intended to accommodate light industrial/manufacturing uses. Hazardous material storage requires a conditional use permit to address conflicts with surrounding sensitive receptors.

 

(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.A.020 Exhibit 2-1—Regional location map.


(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.A.030 Exhibit 2-2—Project area map.


(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.A.040 Exhibit 4-1—Land use plan.


(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.A.050 Exhibit 4-2a—Study intersection locations.


(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.A.060 Exhibit 4-2b—Existing conditions study intersection geometry.


(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.A.070 Exhibit 4-4—Barranca Avenue entry gateway improvements.


(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.A.080 Exhibit 4-5—Grand Avenue (South) gateway improvements.


(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.A.090 Exhibit 4-6—Grand Avenue gateway improvements.


(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.A.100 Exhibit 4-7—Glendora Avenue entry gateway improvements.


(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.A.110 Exhibit 4-8—Glendora Avenue village improvements.


(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.A.120 Exhibit 4-9—Glendora Avenue pedestrian linkage improvements.


(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.A.130 Exhibit 4-10—Lone Hill entry gateway improvements.


(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.A.140 Exhibit 4-11—Route 66 furniture palette.


(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.A.150 Exhibit 4-12—Bus shelter concepts.


(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.A.160 Exhibit 4-13—Family of signs concept.


(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.A.170 Exhibit 4-14—Route 66 banner concepts.


(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.A.180 Exhibit 4-15—Family of signs concept.


(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.A.190 Exhibit 4-16—Existing domestic water system.


(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.A.200 Exhibit 4-17—Domestic water system improvements.


(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.A.210 Exhibit 4-18—Wastewater system.


(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.A.220 Exhibit 4-19—Existing storm drain system.


(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.A.230 Exhibit 4-20—Existing storm drain system improvements.


(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.A.240 Exhibit 5-1—Land use plan.


(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.A.250 Exhibit 7-1—Priority subareas for phased streetscape improvements.


(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

 

21.10.A.260 Exhibit 7-2—Priority subareas and target refuse sites.


(Ord. 2019 § 2, 2017)

Chapter 21.11 DIAMOND RIDGE SPECIFIC PLAN
21.11.010 Introduction.
A.      Specific Plan Area.

1.       Regional Location. The Diamond Ridge specific plan site is located on the northeast corner of Gladstone Street and Valley Center Avenue in the city of Glendora. The site is near the convergence of the Foothill (I-210) Freeway and State Route 210 (SR-210) (Figure 1.1). The city of San Dimas is located to the south across Gladstone Street. The approximately thirty-acre project is centrally located within Southern California, approximately twenty-one miles east of downtown Los Angeles, thirty-two miles west of downtown San Bernardino and twenty-seven miles north of Central Orange County.

2.       Project Site Location. The Diamond Ridge specific plan site is located west of the Foothill Freeway/Auto Center Drive interchange and northwest of the convergence of the Foothill and San Bernardino freeways. The project site is configured in an approximate rectangular shape (Figure 1.2). The site is bounded by Glendora Marketplace shopping center to the east, Gladstone Street to the south, Valley Center Avenue to the west and by the Glendora Sports Park/Louie Pompei Memorial Park and Los Angeles County Flood Control District (LACFCD) facilities to the north/northeast. The Foothill Freeway runs east-west north of the site and north-south east of the site.

B.      Purpose of the Specific Plan. A specific plan is a combination of policy statement and implementation tool that can be used to address a single project such as infill development. As a result, emphasis is on concrete standards and development criteria for use in the review of subsequent site plans. The California Government Code permits the use of specific plans to regulate site development, including permitted uses such as density, and building size and placement. Specific plans also govern the type and extent of open space, landscaping and roadways, as well as the provision of infrastructure and utilities. Since the development guidelines established in a specific plan focus on the unique needs of a specific area, specific plans provide for development on a comprehensive basis by using site planning techniques not permitted through the literal application of zoning and subdivision regulations and to produce an environment of stable, desirable character in harmony with existing and potential development in the surrounding area. Specific plans in Glendora are intended to achieve the following:

1.       To protect the public health, safety and welfare;

2.       To implement the goals, objectives, policies and programs of the general plan;

3.       To preserve environmental and natural resources;

4.       To attain the physical, social and economic advantages of comprehensively planned land uses;

5.       To ensure aesthetic development;

6.       To provide for appropriate amenities, facilities, infrastructure and services; and

7.       To provide a process for initiation, review and regulation of large-scale comprehensively planned development that affords the maximum flexibility in site planning within the context of an overall development program specific, phased development plans coordinated with the provision of necessary public services and facilities.

The purpose of the Diamond Ridge specific plan is to assist in the development of the site in a manner that will benefit local shoppers, the general public and the city of Glendora. The specific plan accomplishes these purposes by providing for the efficient use of land, and ensuring compatibility between existing and proposed land uses. The customized development regulations contained in the specific plan address the unique characteristics of the site and surrounding properties, as well as the needs of the commercial land uses proposed for the site. These efforts are intended to foster greater economic development and design opportunities than could be achieved through the use of conventional zoning and development standards. In addition to defining appropriate land uses for the project site, the Diamond Ridge specific plan provides a cohesive process for the review of individual development site plan proposals.

C.      Project Objectives. The objectives of the Diamond Ridge specific plan are as follows:

1.       Augment the city’s economic base by providing a variety of tax-generating uses.

2.       Allow for the development of the site in a manner which will provide a productive mix of commercial opportunities.

3.       Provide guidelines and procedures to govern development and the installation of the infrastructure that supports it.

4.       Ensure the consistent and rational development of the site in accordance with established functional and aesthetic standards.

5.       Establish a well-balanced and carefully planned collection of specialized and general retail outlets which can take advantage of the site’s established accessibility.

6.       Create employment-generating opportunities for the citizens of Glendora and surrounding communities.

7.       Expand the retail and service options for local consumers by providing daytime and nighttime shopping opportunities in a safe and secure environment.

8.       Recognize the location of school and residential uses along the south side of the Gladstone Street, and provide appropriate project access and design to minimize impacts on these uses.

9.       Implement the Glendora general plan.

D.      Authority. The Diamond Ridge specific plan has been prepared in accordance with California Government Code Sections 65450 and 66450 et seq., Glendora Municipal Code Section 21.06.060 of this title, and the applicable ordinances of the city of Glendora will constitute the zoning for the project site. Land use standards and regulations contained within this document shall govern future development within the boundaries of this specific plan.

E.       Plan Organization. The Diamond Ridge specific plan provides a framework for development of the specific plan area. The plan provides guidance for a review of the specific development proposals at the parcel map and site plan approval stages, and is the reference for determining permitted uses, intensity of use, and development standards and requirements.

The specific plan defines project objectives, as well as regulations and requirements for development of Diamond Ridge specific plan. The specific plan is organized as follows:

1.       Introduction. Section 21.11.010 of the specific plan gives the location and information regarding the purpose, legal authority and validity of the specific plan.

2.       Existing Conditions. Section 21.11.020 of the specific plan provides a summary of existing conditions affecting the future development of the specific plan area, including related planning efforts, and physical, environmental, and public facilities and services factors.

3.       Land Use. Section 21.11.030 of this chapter includes the overall concept of land uses proposed within the specific plan area; a description of each permitted land use, along with general development standards (minimum parcel sizes, building height limits, landscaping, parking, loading, signage and outdoor storage requirements); regulations for the distribution of land use within the project site; and standards for individual site development within the specific plan area.

4.       Public Services and Facilities. Section 21.11.040 of this chapter details plans for water, wastewater, storm drains, public utilities and community facilities. This section identifies the agencies, which will provide service and facilities, and provides information on the manner in which construction and continuing maintenance of facilities will be financed.

5.       Administration. Section 21.11.050 of this chapter describes the manner in which the specific plan will be implemented, including processing of individual developments and procedures for amending the specific plan.

Figure 1.1: Diamond Ridge Marketplace Specific Plan
Regional Location

 



Figure 1.2: Diamond Ridge Marketplace Specific Plan
Project Location

 



 

F.       General Requirements.

1.       General Plan Consistency. Implementation of the Diamond Ridge specific site plan is intended to carry out the goals and policies contained in the city of Glendora general plan, as amended, in an orderly and attractive fashion. Development within the Diamond Ridge specific plan area shall, therefore, be consistent with the provisions of the city of Glendora general plan.

2.       Relationship Between Specific Plan Development Standards/Criteria and the City of Glendora Municipal Code. Development regulations and requirements contained in this document will supplement or replace those of the city of Glendora Municipal Code as they might otherwise apply to lands within the Diamond Ridge specific plan area. Any regulations or requirements not specifically covered herein shall be subject to the regulations and requirements of the city of Glendora Municipal Code.

Unless otherwise specifically approved as part of this specific plan, all off-site improvements under the control of the city shall be subject to the city of Glendora regulations and requirements in effect at the time improvement plans are submitted. Other improvements not under the control of the city (e.g., storm drains, sewers) shall be subject to the regulations and requirements of the responsible agency.

If any provision of this document conflicts with the regulations or requirements of the city of Glendora Municipal Code, the provisions of this document shall take precedence.

3.       Conformance with Uniform Building and Fire Codes. All construction within Diamond Ridge specific plan shall be in compliance with the most recently adopted version of the Uniform Building Code adopted by the city of Glendora and all other ordinances adopted by the city pertaining to construction and safety features.

4.       Implementation of EIR Mitigation Measures. The mitigation measures contained in the certified final EIR for the Diamond Ridge specific plan have been incorporated into this document, and shall, as appropriate, be conditions of approval on all development within the specific plan area as determined by the city of Glendora pursuant to the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the city’s rules to implement CEQA.

Appendix C of this specific plan includes a listing of the mitigation measures contained in the EIR. Environmental assessment requirements for individual projects within the specific plan area shall focus on the subjects identified for such requirements in the Diamond Ridge specific plan EIR pursuant to CEQA guidelines.

5.       Traffic, Water, Sewer and Drainage. Specific requirements for infrastructure improvements are determined by the technical studies prepared for the Diamond Ridge specific plan area. The conclusions of these studies have been included as part of this specific plan. Technical studies and infrastructure plans may be amended over time to ensure the availability of adequate infrastructure and services to the project site, subject to approval of the city engineer, without the need to amend this specific plan.

6.       Severability. If any term, provision, condition, requirement or portion thereof of this specific plan is for any reason held invalid, unenforceable or unconstitutional, the remainder of this specific plan or the application of such term, provision, condition, requirement or portion thereof to circumstances other than those in which it is held to be invalid, unenforceable or unconstitutional, shall not be affected thereby; and each other term, provision, condition, requirement or portion thereof shall be held valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law. (Ord. 1825 § 1 (Exh. A), 2005)

 

21.11.020 Existing setting.
A.      Site Conditions and Existing Land Uses.

1.       Historical and Existing Land Uses.

a.       Previous Land Use. Until approximately 1992, the project site was used for agricultural purposes, most recently for growing strawberries.

b.       Existing On-Site Land Use and Zoning. Currently the site is fenced, and is generally not accessible to the public. The site is currently undeveloped.

The project site is currently zoned “SP” (specific plan) under the city of Glendora’s Zoning Code (Figure 2.1). In the instant case, the SP zone allows a wide range of commercial, retail and restaurant uses, and is intended to provide a flexible method to develop land as a unit while taking into consideration adjoining, sensitive land uses. This designation allows the use of site planning techniques that are not possible through the literal interpretation of zoning and subdivision regulations. The land use element of the city’s general plan recognizes the project site as “planned redevelopment” (Figure 2.2).

Figure 2.1: Diamond Ridge Marketplace Specific Plan
Existing Zoning

 



 

Figure 2.2: Diamond Ridge Marketplace Specific Plan
General Plan Use Designations

 



The zoning for the proposed project is intended to achieve all of the following:

i.        Promote the efficient use of the land;

ii.       Implement the policies and programs of the general plan and applicable specific plans;

iii.     Ensure an aesthetically pleasing and compatible development;

iv.      Attain the physical, social and economic advantages of comprehensively planned land uses;

v.       Provide for adequate amenities, facilities, infrastructure and services;

vi.      Protect the public health, safety and welfare.

The site is located within the boundaries of the Glendora Redevelopment Agency Project Area No. 1.

c.       Surrounding Land Use. Land uses surrounding the Diamond Ridge specific plan site are characterized by single-family residential development located to the south and west of the site with commercial located direct east and light industrial located east of Lone Hill Avenue. The properties located along the south side of Gladstone Street are within the city of San Dimas. Gladstone Elementary School is located between Shellman and Balton avenues southwest of the project site. The majority of the properties fronting the south side of Gladstone Street and the west side of Valley Center Avenue have been developed as single-family residences. Concrete block walls and/or fences separate the homes along Gladstone Street and Valley Center Avenue from each other. A Chevron service station is located at the southwest corner of Gladstone Street and Lone Hill Avenue. Land uses along the site’s eastern boundary are typified by commercial uses. Specific uses located east of Lone Hill Avenue include an auto body shop and low-rise manufacturing space.

Properties farther east and north of the site are more intensely developed with a wider range of commercial uses. Three car dealerships are located at, and to the east of, the northeast corner of Auto Centre Drive and Lone Hill Avenue. A Wal-Mart retail outlet is located southeast of this intersection. Directly east of the site lies the Glendora commercial center. Directly west, located along Valley Center Avenue, is typified by single-family residences. Public recreational facilities (the Louie Pompei Memorial Park) and flood control structures abut the site’s northern boundary. Residential uses extend north beyond the Foothill Freeway. A mix of residential, commercial and light industrial uses may be found in the areas east of the Foothill Freeway. Existing land uses within and adjacent to the proposed project site are illustrated in Figures 2.3 and 2.4.

 

Figure 2.3: Diamond Ridge Marketplace Specific Plan
Existing Off-Site Land Uses

 



 

Figure 2.4: Diamond Ridge Marketplace Specific Plan
Aerial View of Project Site

 



B.      Existing Circulation.

1.       Regional Circulation. The project site has excellent regional access. The Foothill Freeway, located approximately 0.50 miles to the north and east of the site, provides primary regional access to the site. In addition, the site is reasonably accessible to the San Bernardino (I-10), Orange (SR-57) and Corona (SR-71) freeways. These three freeways, located within four miles of the Diamond Ridge specific plan site, provide access to/from the greater Los Angeles metropolitan area, the Inland Empire and Orange County.

2.       Local Circulation. An extensive road network is available in and around the project site. The major north-south access to the site (listed from east to west) is San Dimas Avenue, Lone Hill Avenue and Sunflower Avenue. All these roadways intersect with the I-210, I-10 or both.

Important east-west arterials in the project area include (from south to north) Badillo Street/Covina Boulevard, Arrow Highway, Gladstone Street, Baseline Road, Route 66 and Foothill Boulevard. Badillo Street/Covina Boulevard, Arrow Highway, Baseline Road, Route 66 and Foothill Boulevard are classified as primary roads, acting as regional arteries that run through developed residential and commercial areas. Badillo Street/Covina Boulevard and Arrow Highway provide access to the I-210. Planned east-west access to the Diamond Ridge site will be via Lone Hill Avenue through the Glendora Marketplace shopping center.

Directly south of the Foothill Freeway, located adjacent to Lone Hill Avenue, is a park and ride facility operated by the California Department of Transportation.

C.      Existing Physical Conditions.

1.       Topography. The Diamond Ridge specific plan site is essentially flat, sloping to the southwest. Minimum elevation on the site is eight hundred thirty-five feet above mean sea level (amsl) in the southwestern corner of the property. The northeastern corner of the site reaches a maximum height of eight hundred fifty-five feet amsl.

2.       Hydrology. The water table in the main Glendora groundwater basin has been lowered over the years through domestic water production to where it is now one hundred to three hundred feet below the surface.

Neither natural watercourses nor open bodies of water exist on the project site. Runoff from the site will be conveyed via man-made drainage structures.

3.       Soils. Soils present in a majority of Glendora’s valley area (and the project site) fall within the Hanford association of soils. The soils of this association occur on gently sloping alluvial fans between elevations from near sea level to three thousand five hundred feet. Hanford soils are over sixty inches deep, are well drained and have moderately rapid subsoil permeability. They have pale brown, coarse sandy loam surface layers about eight inches thin, underlain by light yellowish brown, coarse sandy loam and coarse gravelly loam sand substratum.

Excavation limitations of soils in the majority of the city (and thus the project site) are considered “slight,” meaning there is a general absence of cobbles, stones or a water table which could significantly affect excavation and construction activities. Subsidence and/or expansive soils are not known geologic hazards which may affect the project site.

4.       Seismicity. Generally, it can be anticipated that any development in Southern California will have the potential to be adversely impacted by seismic activity. The degree to which the development is impacted is dependent on numerous variables, such as (but limited to) distance to the nearest active fault, bedrock structure, water content in the soil, and type and quality of construction materials. It is anticipated that the site has the potential to be impacted by seismic events throughout the life of the project.

Overall, Southern California is part of the most seismically active region in the United States. Seismic activity associated with regional fault zones has been the source of large historic earthquakes, and is likely to be the source of future earthquakes that will affect development in the city. The San Andreas, Elsinore, Newport-Ingelwood and San Fernando faults generated M-6+ earthquakes in 1907, 1910, 1933 and 1971. Notable historic earthquakes in the region include: M8.25 Fort Tejon earthquake (1857); M6.3 Long Beach earthquake (1933); M5.9 Whittier Narrows earthquake (1987); M5.8 Sierra Madre earthquake (1991); M6.1 Joshua Tree (1992); M7.5 Landers (1992); M6.0 Big Bear earthquake (1992); and M6.7 Northridge earthquake (1994).

Glendora is located at the foot of the San Gabriel Mountains on an upper alluvial fan of the San Gabriel Valley. The dominant geologic feature in the city is the Sierra Madre fault zone which branches along the foot of the San Gabriel Mountains. The San Fernando fault zone is now considered potentially active, meaning that group rupture could occur along the system’s surface traces. The Diamond Ridge specific plan site would be exposed to seismic activity during any future seismic event on the Sierra Madre fault system.

Lower groundwater level, caused by domestic water production, has reduced the potential for seismically induced liquefaction and subsidence in the area.

5.       Wildlife/Vegetation. The original natural state of the site has been modified by agricultural uses. The project site consists of undeveloped fallow fields covered with low-lying nonnative vegetation consisting primarily of perennial weeds, grasses and shrubs. A few mature trees are scattered about the site. The site does not harbor any rare or threatened plant species. Because of the disturbed nature of the site, the majority of the animal species expected to reside on the site are mammals and birds that can tolerate close human contact. No notable or threatened species of animal has been identified on the site.

6.       Climate. The project site has a moderate climate with warm to hot summers and generally mild winters. The strength and location of a semipermanent, subtropical high-pressure cell over the Pacific Ocean strongly influences the area’s climate. Climate is also affected by the moderating effects of differential heating between the land area of California and the adjacent Pacific Ocean. Warm to hot summers, mild winters, limited precipitation, moderate daytime on-shore breezes and moderate humidities characterize local climate conditions. Although annual and seasonal fluctuations are common, the climate of the project area is generally pleasant. The annual average daily maximum temperature is seventy-six degrees while the average minimum is forty-seven degrees.

Precipitation is seasonally variable. Summers are often completely dry, with frequent periods of up to five months with no rain. In winter, an occasional storm from high latitudes may sweep across the coast, bringing rain. Annual rainfall is lowest in the coastal plain and inland valleys, higher in the foothills, and higher in the mountains. Annual precipitation averages approximately eleven inches, ninety-five percent of which occurs November through April.

Wind patterns in Glendora are similar to those in the remainder of the basin. During the day, the on-shore flow reaches inland across the coastal plain. Winds are generally from the west and have average speed of thirteen miles per hour. During the night, surface radiation cools the air in the surrounding mountains and hills. The air then flows into the valleys and meanders to the coast, producing a gentle land breeze. During the summer, the nighttime land breeze nearly disappears. Conversely, the daytime sea breeze is weaker and of shorter duration in the winter. Santa Ana winds are occasional winds blowing from the northeast between the months of October and March.

D.      Existing Utilities.

1.       Water. The city of Glendora’s water division will provide water service for the Diamond Ridge specific plan site. The water division obtains sixty-five percent of its water from three local, underground basins: the Upper San Gabriel Basin, the Main San Gabriel Basin and the Glendora Basin. This groundwater withdraw is supplemented by water purchases from the Metropolitan Water District through its local retailer, the Three Valleys Municipal Water District.

Water lines available, laid in adjacent streets, include the following:

a.       A fourteen-inch water main in Gladstone Street,

b.       An eight-inch line in the adjoining Glendora Marketplace development.

2.       Wastewater. Los Angeles County Sanitation District No. 22 serves the entire eastern San Gabriel Valley area. This agency is responsible for transporting sewage to treatment plans in Carson and Whittier which are part of a regional treatment system. Some local sewer mains are the responsibility of the city, others are under county jurisdiction. In new developments, the developer pays for the cost to install sewer lines.

Wastewater facilities on or adjacent to the site include a fifteen-inch trunk sewer line in Gladstone Street which has a peak capacity of 5.2 million gallons a day (mgd) and conveyed a peak flow of 0.8 mgd when last measured in 1996.

3.       Drainage. Maintenance of storm drains within public rights-of-way is the responsibility of the Los Angeles County Flood Control District. A sixty-six inch reinforced concrete pipe storm drain is located adjacent to the site in Gladstone Street.

4.       Solid Waste Disposal. The city contracts with a private company, Athens Disposal Service, for refuse collection and household recycling. There are no sanitary dumps or landfills in the city of Glendora. The nearest solid waste disposal facilities are in Azusa, Irwindale and the city of Industry.

5.       Natural Gas. The Gas Company will provide natural gas service to the Diamond Ridge specific plan site.

6.       Electricity. Edison International will provide electrical service to the project site.

7.       Telephone. Verizon will provide telephone service to the Diamond Ridge specific plan site. (Ord. 1825 § 1 (Exh. A), 2005)

 

21.11.030 Land use plan.
A.      Land Use Concept. The overall land use concept for the Diamond Ridge specific plan site is to create an integrated retail-shopping complex which can take advantage of the site’s excellent highway access and visibility. The project will dramatically improve the aesthetic and commercial landscape of the surrounding area by allowing for the transformation of vacant acreage into an attractive and productive blend of retail and service establishments. The development concept for the project site involves a regional retail center with a build out potential of approximately four hundred thousand square feet of building space, including major retail tenants, divisible retail space, freestanding uses, theater, restaurant and other compatible uses permitted by the following land use regulations. These uses will generate both local revenue and employment opportunities for the surrounding community.

Figure 3.1 illustrates proposed building areas and the maximum anticipated square footage of uses within each building area. The southern half of the project site is primarily intended for two major anchor retailers occupying up a total of two hundred seventy thousand square feet of retail space. Smaller commercial/retail enterprises will occupy land to the north and east of these major tenants. General retail areas, including those for major anchors and smaller retailers are designated in Figure 3.1.

 

Figure 3.1: Diamond Ridge Marketplace Specific Plan
Proposed Building Areas

 



 

Figure 3.2 illustrates proposed site plan with retail/shops/theater/pads tenants indicated.

 

Figure 3.2: Diamond Ridge Marketplace Specific Plan
Proposed Site Plan w/ Theater

 



 

An alternative site plan (Figure 3.3) utilizing the building envelopes indicated in Figure 3.1 is also provided to indicate an all-retail project. In this scenario, a parking structure would not be required. Additional surface parking and retail buildings would replace the theater and parking structure improvements.

 

Figure 3.3: Diamond Ridge Marketplace Specific Plan
Proposed Site Plan—All Retail



 

1.       Permitted Uses. Table 21.11.030-A establishes the uses which are permitted or prohibited (not permitted) within the Diamond Ridge specific plan site:

P = Permitted use

ACUP = Administrative conditional use permit

* = Prohibited use (not permitted)

 

Ancillary and accessory uses will be reviewed concurrently with each land use proposal. Ancillary and accessory uses, which are not specifically listed as permitted, may be approved subject to a determination of substantial conformance.

 

Table 21.11.030-A
Permitted Uses

 

 

Land Use Types

Area

COMMERCIAL USE TYPES

 

Administrative and Professional Offices. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, executive management, administrative or clerical uses of private and public utility firms. Additional activities include the provision of design advice, information or consultation of a professional nature. Uses typically include, but are not limited to, corporate headquarters; branch offices; data storage, financial records, and auditing centers; architect’s, lawyer’s, doctor’s, dentist’s, insurance sales and claims offices; financial planners; and accountant’s offices.

P

Alcohol Sales, On-Site (On-Sale). Activities typically include the sale, subject to required license, of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. Uses typically include restaurants which serve alcohol as part of their menu. Bars (taverns, pubs, etc.), which serve alcohol as a primary use, are not permitted.

ACUP

Alcohol Sales, On-Site (Off-Sale). Activities typically include the sale, subject to required license, of alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises as an incidental use. Typical uses may include alcohol sales within markets and “big box” retail stores. Liquor stores, wine merchants and retail liquor outlets, which sell alcohol as a primary source (75 percent or more of gross floor area devoted to alcohol sales), and which have a gross leasable area of less than 5,000 square feet, are not permitted.

ACUP

Animal Care Facility. Activities typically include the care and treatment of domesticated animals. Typical uses may include veterinarian, animal hospital, animal grooming salons, and, as an ancillary use, kennels. For the purposes of this section only, the term “ancillary use” is defined as a use which requires no more than 30% of the total square footage of the general space of which the ancillary use is a part.

P

Automotive Audio Service/Installation—General. In addition to the types of repair operations included as part of automobile and light truck audio service/installation—light activities typically include, but are not limited to, installation of major and minor audio accessories.

P

Automotive Cleaning. Activities typically include the washing and polishing of automobiles. Uses typically include automobile laundries; car washes, excluding self-service washes; and automotive detailing.

*

Automotive and Light Truck Repair—Minor. Activities include, but are not limited to, automotive and light truck repair, retail sales of goods and services for automobiles and light trucks, and the cleaning and washing of automobiles and light trucks. Uses typically include, but are not limited to, general auto repair shops, brake and muffler ships, and car washes.

*

Automotive and Light Truck Repair—General. In addition to the types of repair operations included as part of automobile and light truck repair—light, activities typically include, but are not limited to, automotive body work, painting, installation of major accessories, automobile customizing and towing facilities.

*

Automotive Rental Agencies. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, the rental from the premises of motor vehicles, with provision for incidental maintenance services.

*

Automotive Sales. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, the retail sale of predominantly new, used or vintage vehicles together with their incidental maintenance. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, automobile and recreational vehicles sales agencies. Typical accessory uses include, but are not necessarily limited to, storage, washing, detailing, preparation, painting and repair of vehicles; administrative and finance offices; retail sales of parts and accessories; and automobile rental.

*

Automotive Service Station. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, the sale from the premises of goods and the provision of services normally required in the daily operation of motor vehicles, including the principal sale of petroleum products, the incidental sales of replacement items and the performance of minor repairs. Also included is the washing of automobiles and light trucks.

*

ATM Banking. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, monetary transactions, (e.g., deposits, withdraws and transfers)

P

Building Maintenance Services. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, maintenance and custodial services, window cleaning services, disinfecting and exterminating services, and janitorial services.

P

Building Supplies and Sales. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, the retail sale or rental from the premises of goods and equipment, including, but not limited to, tools and equipment, paint, glass, hardware, fixtures, electrical supplies, yard and garden supplies, swimming pool supplies, and lumber and hardware sales. Also included are sales and rental of household and yard tools and equipment, nursery stock and garden supplies, as well as sales of building materials, such as brick, block, sand and gravel. Outdoor storage of such goods may be permitted subject to screening requirements.

*

Building Supply Retail and Services. Activities, typically include, but are not limited to, retail sales; rental or repair from the premises of office equipment; office supplies, stationery and similar office goods.

P

Business Support Services. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, firms rather than individuals of a clerical, employment or minor processing nature, including multi-copy and blueprint services. The printing of books, other than pamphlets and reports for another firm, is excluded from this use type.

P

Communication Services. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, broadcasting and other information relay services for individual commercial uses accomplished primarily through use of electronic and telephone mechanisms. Rooftop dishes for business use of commercial tenants are permitted; however, rooftop displays of dishes for sale or rent are not permitted.

P

Convenience Sales. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, the retail sales of frequently needed, small personal convenience items and professional services which are frequently used. Uses typically include, but are not limited to, drug stores, beauty and barber shops, and dry cleaning establishments.

P

Day Care. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, the daytime, temporary care of preschool children and the daytime, after-school care of elementary school aged children. Uses typically include, but are not limited to, preschools and day care facilities.

*

Drive-Through Sales and Services. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, the retail sale from the premises of food or beverages for off-site consumption and the provision of services. Uses typically include, but are not limited to, drive-through restaurants, quick-service food windows and service stations, pharmacies, remote tellers and ATM machines at financial institutions and photographic processing.

P

Durable Goods Sales/Big Box Retail/Department Stores. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, the retail sale from premises. Uses typically include, but are not limited to, furniture, piano and organ, major appliance (e.g., refrigerator, and carpet and flooring stores). Also included are “big box retail” and department stores. “Big box retail” is typically defined as large-scale discount retailing with square footages in excess of 50,000 square feet.

P

Eating and Drinking Establishments. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, the retail sale from the premises of food or beverages prepared for on-premises consumption. Uses typically include, but are not limited to, restaurants, fast food facilities, candy and confectionaries shops, delicatessens, donut shops and coffee sales.

P

Financial Institutions. Uses typically include, but are not limited to, banks, savings and loans, and credit unions.

P

Food and Beverage Sales. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, retail sale from the premises of food and beverages for off-premises consumption. Uses typically include markets, catering services and retail bakeries. Liquor stores, wine merchants and retail liquor outlets, which sell alcohol as a primary use, and which have a gross leasable area of less than 5,000 square feet, are not permitted.

P

General Retail. Activities typically include, but are limited to, retail sale of a variety of household and personal goods. Uses typically include drug stores, large-scale discount retailers and department stores.

P

Health/Fitness Clubs and Spas. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, sport and health-related activities performed either indoors or outdoors. Users typically include, but are not limited to, health clubs, spas, beauty spas, tanning salons, gyms, racquet clubs and tennis clubs.

P

Nurseries. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, sales of indoor and outdoor plants, including, but not limited to, trees, shrubs, ground covers and grass sod, as well as seeds, pots and potting supplies, and growing supplies. Outdoor storage may be permitted subject to applicable screening requirements.

P

Personal Services and Sales. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, retail sales of small personal convenience items and professional services which are used frequently by the business community. Uses typically include, beauty and barber shops, florist shops, photography studios, private postal service, travel agencies, tailors, shoe repairs, video sales and/or rental, apparel laundering and dry cleaning agencies.

P

Specialized Retail. Activities typically include, but are limited to, the retail sale of specialized goods. Such specialized sales may include, but are not limited to, stamps and coins, consumer electronics, hobbies and crafts, antiques, apparel and accessories, books and magazines, firearms, sporting good (sales and rental), pets and pet supply, photography and stationery sales.

P

Theaters. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, ticket sales for the viewing of movies/screenings/special events and the retail sale from the premises of food or beverages prepared for on-premises consumption (no alcohol).

P

CIVIC USE TYPES

 

Civic Administration. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, management, administration or clerical services performed by public, quasi-public and utility agencies.

P

Cultural Facilities. Activities typically include, but are not limited to, those performed by public and private museums and art galleries, and public and private libraries.

P

B.      Site Development Standards.

1.       General Development Standards. Table 21.11.030-B represents the general development standards for the Diamond Ridge specific site plan.

 

Table 21.11.030-B
General Development Standards

 

 

Feature

Area

Minimum Parcel Size

20,000 s.f.

Maximum Building Height(1)

70 ft.

Minimum Parking and Building Setbacks from:(2), (3)

 

       Public Right-of-Way (for buildings)

 

          Valley Center Avenue

50 ft.

          Gladstone Street

30 ft.

       Interior Side Property Lines

0 ft.

 

        Notes:

         (1) Building height shall be measured from the finished pad elevation to the top of the parapet.

         (2) Setbacks shall be measured from the edge of right-of-way.

         (3) The setback area along Gladstone Street shall be landscaped according to applicable requirements of this document.

 

2.       Modifications to General Development Standards.

In order to achieve superior development to that which can be achieved through the standards contained above, as part of its review of individual development projects within the specific plan area, the planning agency may modify the following standards:

a.       Minimum parcel sizes;

b.       Parking and landscape setbacks for interior side and rear parcel lines;

c.       Building setbacks for interior side and rear property lines;

d.       Parking and landscaping requirements for individual parcels, except for required landscaping along public streets and private drives;

e.       Where modified standards are permitted by the planning agency, all required setbacks along public street frontages shall be met;

f.        Where modified standards are permitted by the planning agency, innovative designs such as “postage stamp lots” may be utilized. Each approved increment of development shall contain the required amount of landscaping and number of parking and loading spaces. Where common parking and/or landscape areas are proposed, appropriate easements and covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs) shall be established to ensure adequate access throughout the site and to ensure ongoing maintenance of common facilities;

g.       Individual buildings and parcels need not have direct access to a public street; however, sufficient easements and/or reciprocal access agreements shall be recorded to ensure that adequate ingress and egress are available to each lot and building.

C.      Specific Use Development Standards.

1.       Automotive Audio Service/Installation. Automotive audio service/installation areas shall comply with the following standards in addition to the other provisions of this specific plan and the Glendora Municipal Code:

a.       General Maintenance. The premises shall be kept in a neat and orderly condition at all times, and all improvements shall be maintained in a condition of good repair and appearance.

No used or discarded automotive or truck parts or equipment or permanently disabled, junked or wrecked vehicles may be stored on the site. Vehicles waiting to be serviced may be stored temporarily but not overnight.

b.       Location of Activities. All repair and service activities shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed service building.

c.       Orientation of Buildings. Buildings, housing, automotive audio service/installation facilities shall be oriented so that openings do not face public streets or are screened by a solid opaque wall which is architecturally compatible with the other buildings on the site.

d.       Noise. Outdoor public address systems are not permitted.

e.       Signs. In addition to the signs otherwise permitted pursuant to this specific plan, one sign with a maximum of ten square feet shall be permitted on buildings directing retailers to automotive audio service/installation areas.

2.       Drive-Through Facilities and Drive-Up Windows. Drive-through facilities and drive-up windows shall conform to the following standards in addition to the other provisions of this specific plan:

a.       General Standards.

i.        The design and location of the facility and queuing lane shall not contribute to increased congestion on public streets or private property adjacent to the facility.

ii.       The design and location of the facility and queuing lane shall not impede access to or exit from project area parking facilities.

iii.     A maximum of one fast food restaurant with drive-through facilities may be permitted. The maximum floor area of fast food restaurants having drive-through facilities shall be four thousand five hundred square feet, exclusive of play areas.

b.       Specific Design Requirements.

i.        Directional signage not exceeding one and one-half square feet per face and thirty inches in height may be provided at one site entrance and the drive-through lane entrance.

ii.       Drive-up windows and remote tellers shall provide at least one hundred twenty feet of reservoir space for the stacking of vehicles as measured from the service window or unit to the entry point into the drive-up lane.

iii.     Location may not impede on-site circulation.

iv.      Drive-up windows and remote tellers shall not be considered as justification for reducing the number of parking spaces, which are otherwise required.

v.       No direct access to any major street may be provided.

3.       Theater/Cinema/Movie Theater. Theater/cinema/ movie theater areas shall comply with the following standards in addition to the other provisions of this specific plan and the Glendora Municipal Code:

a.       Rest Rooms. Theater/cinema/movie theaters shall provide men’s and women’s public rest rooms, which are accessible to the general public, including physically disabled persons, during all hours that the theater/cinema/movie theater is open to the public.

b.       Operational Standards.

i.        Hours of operation (ten a.m. to two a.m.).

ii.       Video games are permitted with a maximum total count of twelve.

iii.     The city of Glendora must review and approve on-site security staffing for theater.

D.      General Design Concepts.

1.       Within the Diamond Ridge specific plan, the site design addresses the nature and function of uses, buildings or features being considered. Architectural design and details are to be oriented to areas within public view. Landscaping is provided to highlight positive visual features, to screen negative ones and to provide a pleasant outdoor environment. Designs within the Diamond Ridge specific plan shall meld function and form, not one to the exclusion of the other. Consequently, each development plan submittal will be reviewed for its overall design, with allowances for individuality and special functional needs.

To facilitate design integrity between the varieties of uses within the Diamond Ridge specific plan, the following shall be considered:

a.       Placement of buildings shall consider the existing context of the commercial area, the location of residential land uses and the location of major traffic generators.

b.       The architecture (height, scale, style) of each building within the specific plan area shall be compatible with other structures within the specific plan. Building sites shall be developed in a coordinated manner to provide order and diversity and avoid disorderly development.

c.       Buildings within the specific plan site shall be typical of other large-scale retail operations. Developers may incorporate “prototype” architectural standards in the design and development of structures within the specific plan area. Buildings shall maintain simple rectangular forms which may be broken up by creating horizontal emphasis through the use of reveals, trellises, landscaping, trim, windows, eaves, cornices, complementary colors or other architectural and design services.

d.       Large smooth, unarticulated surfaces shall be avoided. A mixture of smooth and textured block for concrete walls is encouraged. Exterior materials requiring high-maintenance responsibilities such as clapboard or shingles shall be avoided. Large areas of dark colors shall be avoided. Bright colors shall only be used for trim and/or specialized uses (store identification, etc.).

e.       Exterior mechanical equipment shall be screened from public view.

f.        Wall-mounted items such as roof ladders and electrical panels shall not be located adjacent to public rights-of-way, unless secured to prevent public access.

g.       Service areas (areas for loading/unloading, unpacking of goods, etc.) shall be simple and efficient, and shall not interfere visually or physically with other building operations.

h.       All new gas, telephone lines, and electrical lines of twelve kilovolts or less within the project shall be placed underground.

i.        All ground-mounted utility appurtenances shall be located away from public view or adequately screened. Screening should be of a material complementary to the structure and/or heavy landscaping and berming.

j.        No utility appurtenances shall be permitted directly within a pedestrian area.

Figures 3.4 and 3.5 illustrate elevations for proposed uses within the specific plan area.

2.       Landscaping. Landscaping that will be provided within the specific plan site is intended to give structure and identity to the overall project.

a.       Prior to issuance of construction permits, as applicable, landscape and irrigation construction drawings in conformance with the Diamond Ridge specific plan shall be submitted for review by the planning agency. Landscaping shall be installed prior to final building occupancy.

b.       Permanent automatic irrigation systems shall be provided in all landscaped areas. Landscape and irrigation design shall comply with the city of Glendora’s water-efficient landscape ordinance.

 

Figure 3.4
Diamond Ridge Marketplace Specific Plan
Proposed Building Elevations

 



 

Figure 3.5
Diamond Ridge Marketplace Specific Plan
Proposed Building Elevations

 



 

c.       Plant materials within individual landscaped areas shall be of varieties which utilize like amounts of water.

d.       Sprinkler heads located immediately adjacent to parking areas should be of the “pop-up” variety instead of risers.

e.       The irrigation system shall be designed so that overspray onto structures, streets, sidewalks, windows, walls and fences is minimized.

f.        All landscaped areas shall be maintained in a healthy and thriving condition, free from weeds, trash and debris.

g.       Building setbacks which are not used for drive entries, parking, loading or approved outdoor uses shall be fully landscaped. All unpaved areas within developed portions of the site shall be landscaped.

h.       Separate water meters for landscape irrigation will be provided.

i.        No landscaping shall be required adjacent to the portions of the buildings where loading doors and customer pick-up areas are located.

j.        A minimum of five percent of the total parking area shall be landscaped. For purposes of this requirement, “parking area” shall not include boundary landscaping. The parking lot landscaping shall include a minimum of one tree for every five parking spaces and appropriate ground cover. Such landscaping shall be located throughout the parking area.

k.       Planters shall have a minimum clear landscape width of five feet. Within parking areas, and unless “diamond planters” are used, planters shall also have a minimum length not more than six inches less than the longest abutting parking stall, exclusive of curbing, and shall have sufficient room to accommodate tree growth. Diamond planters will thus have a minimum dimension of five feet by five feet interior clear area (six feet by six feet with curbing).

l.        Turf areas shall be limited to thirty percent of total landscaped area.

m.      All shrub areas shall be underplanted with groundcover.

n.       Tree plantings alongside Gladstone Street and Valley Center Avenue shall be designed to screen long building façades along Gladstone Street and Valley Center Avenue.

o.       Where deciduous trees are planted along Gladstone Street and Valley Center Avenue perimeter, evergreen trees shall also be planted in a number and location to sufficiently screen the southern and western façades of buildings during periods of seasonal leaf loss.

p.       In addition to turf and trees, flowering shrubs and ground cover shall be planted along the length of the Gladstone and Valley Center Avenue perimeter. Such landscaping shall be designed to complement the pattern established by the tree planting.

q.       Enhanced landscape features (e.g., trees with groundcover and/or flowers) shall be installed along the southern edge of the intersection of Gladstone Street and Shellman Avenue.

r.        Landscaping along public rights-of-way shall be designed to aesthetically screen and soften blank walls, parking areas, storage areas, utility boxes and other nonaesthetic items.

s.       The planting of ivy or hedge shrubs along exterior structure and screen walls is encouraged to deter potential graffiti.

t.        All landscaped areas shall be delineated with a minimum six-inch-high and six-inch-wide concrete curb or equivalent.

u.       Mulch shall be applied in a two-inch layer in all shrub and groundcover areas.

v.       Certified arborists to determine the disposition for future protection, relocation or removal as recommended shall inspect the single existing oak tree located on the corner of Gladstone Street and Valley Center Avenue.

w.      Soil testing shall be conducted to acquire an accurate appraisal of fertilizer application and amendment requirements.

x.       Prior to occupancy of any business within the specific plan area, all perimeter landscaping shall be planted along Gladstone Street and Valley Center Avenue.

y.       Landscaping, of a manner dictated by applicable sections of this document, shall be planted concurrent with individual site development within the specific plan area.

z.       All trees used within required landscaping areas, including parking areas, shall have a minimum size of fifteen gallons. A minimum of thirty-five percent of all trees planted shall be a combination of twenty-four, thirty, thirty-six and forty-eight inch box trees.

aa.     All trees within the specific plan area shall be staked or provided with guy wires.

bb.     Tree species selected for the landscape scheme shall ensure (upon maturity) adequate screening of the southern façade(s) of structures located along the Gladstone Street and western façade(s) of structures located along Valley Center Avenue boundary of the specific plan area.

Figure 3.6 depicts the conceptual landscape plan for the specific plan area.

 

Figure 3.6
Diamond Ridge Marketplace Specific Plan
Proposed Landscape—Retail w/ Theater

 



 

Figures 3.7 and 3.8 illustrate roadway and landscape cross sections at various points along the site.

 

Figure 3.7

Diamond Ridge Marketplace Specific Plan

Cross Section Key Map

 



 

Figure 3.8
Diamond Ridge Marketplace Specific Plan
Cross Sections



 

E.       On-Site Circulation, Parking and Loading.

1.       Circulation. The following on-site circulation standards within the Diamond Ridge specific plan site shall be implemented to ensure the efficient and safe passage of vehicles and pedestrians to and from the various commercial uses within the specific plan site. In addition, these standards shall provide for the simple and efficient transition from local streets to interior roadways.

a.       On-site construction shall provide for efficient vehicular and pedestrian movement. On-site circulation systems should be logical and easily understood by visitors. For example, where one-way movement is necessary, the design of the circulation system should discourage individuals from entering an exit. In addition, service access routes should not conflict with other on-site circulation routes.

b.       The circulation system shall include adequate directional signs for entrances, exits, parking areas, loading areas and other uses.

c.       One of two proposed entry driveways will provide access from Lone Hill Avenue through the Glendora Marketplace to the Diamond Ridge specific plan area. Another proposed driveway that is aligned across with Shellman Avenue will provide access to the Diamond Ridge specific plan area from Gladstone Street.

d.       Truck access routes shall be established for uses within the specific plan area. Figure 3.9 depicts proposed specific plan truck routes.

 

Figure 3.9
Diamond Ridge Marketplace Specific Plan
On-Site Truck Route

 



 

e.       Public transportation shall not circulate through the specific plan area, except for mini-bus service provided by the city of Glendora.

f.        Site lines required for safe automobile movement should be kept clear. Screens and structures should not be located where they would block such site lines, both entering and leaving the individual developments, and the project site.

g.       Easterly access on Gladstone Street will be for deliveries only.

h.       The design and location of entries (curb cuts) for individual development sites should be such that the driver has ample time to perceive them when approaching the site. Intersections and driveway approaches should be kept clear of obstructions such as traffic signal standards and landscaping and signage.

i.        Adequate pedestrian amenities such as benches and shade structures (or shade trees) shall be installed at or near building entrance(s) or at the curbside/sidewalk adjacent to buildings within the specific plan area.

j.        Pedestrian walkways shall be constructed of enhanced paving materials (such as cobblestone or brick) or otherwise distinguished from the surrounding paved areas.

k.       On-site pedestrian walkways should provide direct, safe and adequate movement paths between parking areas and building entrances.

2.       Parking. Parking configurations within the specific plan area shall include the following guidelines:

a.       Parking spaces shall be provided in the number and manner specified in the city of Glendora Zoning Code, except as stated otherwise in the specific plan.

b.       Parking spaces and drive aisles shall have the following minimum sizes:

 

 

Standard space

9' x 18'

Parallel space

10' x 25'

Compact space

8' x 17'

 

c.       Drive aisles for parking areas with ninety-degree parking stalls shall be twenty-six feet.

d.       A maximum of twenty-five percent of the parking stalls may be compact stalls. All such compact stalls shall be clearly marked “COMPACT.”

e.       Parking spaces shall be oriented to ensure visibility of pedestrians, bicyclists and other motorists while entering, leaving or circulating within a parking area.

f.        Parking areas shall be provided with curbs, bollards or similar permanent devices where necessary to prevent parked vehicles from bumping buildings, landscaping or perimeter walls.

g.       Specific Use Parking Requirements:

Health Clubs—three spaces per one thousand square feet of gross building area.

h.       All aisles, approach lanes and turning areas shall be clearly marked with directional arrows and lines as necessary to provide for safe traffic movement.

i.        Parking areas shall have lighting capable of providing adequate illumination for safety and security. Such lighting shall comply with standards included in this document.

j.        Handicapped parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements and standards specified by the state of California.

k.       Parking spaces of a number and size specified by this specific plan and applicable city of Glendora regulations shall be installed for each incremental stage of development within the specific plan area (Scheme 1—Figure 3.10 and Scheme 2—Figure 3.11).

 

Figure 3.10
Diamond Ridge Marketplace Specific Plan
Parking Facilities—Theater Scheme

 



 

Figure 3.11
Diamond Ridge Marketplace Specific Plan
Parking Facilities—All Retail Scheme

 



 

l.        Parking Structure Development—Depending on the mix of retail uses built on the site, the property owner may elect to construct up to a five-story parking structure in the northeast corner of the site, north of the main project driveway extending from the planned access east of the Glendora Marketplace.

Development of a parking structure is subject to development plan review approval by the planning commission pursuant to Section 21.02.040 of the Glendora Municipal Code except that no notice shall be required. The commission shall approve, deny or conditionally approve any parking structure development subject to the following criteria:

i.        The design of the structure includes safety barriers, protective bumpers, curbs and directional markings, adequate lighting and security features to ensure pedestrian/vehicular safety.

ii.       The design of the structure provides for the visibility of pedestrians and vehicles when entering individual parking stalls, when circulating within the parking structure, and when entering or leaving the parking structure.

iii.     The design of the structure provides circulation patterns and the location and direction of access drives shall be designed and maintained in accordance with accepted principles of traffic engineering and traffic safety.

3.       Loading.

a.       Loading areas shall be designed to provide for backing and maneuvering on site and not from or within a public street. Direct loading from a public street shall not be permitted.

b.       Loading spaces shall be a minimum of ten feet by sixty feet.

c.       Loading and maneuvering areas shall not encroach into parking setback areas.

d.       Loading areas may be permitted adjacent to a public street or parking area. All such loading areas shall be maintained in a clean and orderly condition.

e.       When visible from a public right-of-way and where practical, screen walls and wing walls shall be provided adjacent to loading doors and loading areas and shall be of a compatible material with adjacent buildings, and shall be of sufficient height to provide adequate visual screening.

f.        On-site truck maneuvering to and from loading areas shall be provided to accommodate the turning radius of a sixty-six foot extra-large semitrailer (WB-62). With the approval of the planning agency, a greater or lesser turning radius may be required based upon review of a site-specific analysis.

4.       Outdoor Storage*.

a.       Refuse storage and disposal areas, other than trash compactors, shall be provided within trash enclosures which are screened on at least three sides from public view by a solid wall which is not less than six feet in height. The fourth side shall consist of a solid metal gate painted to match or coordinate with the building (slatted chain link is not acceptable). For in-line shop space, these areas shall be located to the rear of building areas out of public view.

i.        Refuse bins shall be provided in sufficient number, and shall be placed in convenient location(s).

ii.       All trash shall be deposited in the trash enclosure, and the gate leading thereto shall remain closed except when in use, and shall remain in good working order.

iii.     Trash areas shall not be used for storage. The premises shall be kept in a neat and orderly condition at all times, and all improvements shall be maintained in a condition of good repair and appearance.

b.       Adequate shopping cart storage shall be provided within parking areas and adjacent to buildings. Cart storage shall be provided adjacent to buildings and screened by a forty-two inch high wall.

*           Outdoor storage provisions do not apply to outdoor sales areas and sidewalk sales. Sidewalk sales on patios immediately adjacent to commercial buildings (“on-curb”) are permitted. Sales within parking areas (“off-curb”) are subject to the city’s outdoor display and special outdoor display permits.

5.       Walls and Fencing. Walls and fences shall not be used, unless needed or required for screening, security or buffering land uses. Within the Diamond Ridge specific plan site, walls and fences may be used to screen parking areas, loading and storage areas, refuse receptacles and utility structures. The intent is to keep the walls as low as possible while still performing their screening function.

Walls and fences shall be designed to complement the design, color and materials of adjacent buildings. Landscaping shall be used in combination with walls when possible.

6.       Materials.

a.       Walls and fencing constructed within the Diamond Ridge specific plan site shall be on durable materials, and shall be maintained in good condition at all times.

b.       Walls shall be constructed of concrete block, masonry, brick or other similar materials. Decorative fencing may also be constructed, provided that, where it is located adjacent to public street or will be visible from a public right-of-way, it is screened with landscaping.

7.       Configuration.

a.       Where linear walls or fences in excess of one hundred feet are needed, a combination of wall/fence along a landscaped berm shall be used.

b.       When required, screen walls for loading areas shall be located behind parking setback lines.

c.       Screen walls along Valley Center Avenue shall have a maximum height of eight feet (as measured from highest finished grade). Other screen walls within the specific plan area shall have a maximum height of eight feet.

d.       Walls and fencing within the specific plan area shall be designed with variations in plan, such as plane shifts, and the installation of pilasters. Walls and fences shall include such variations no less than every one hundred feet.

8.       Signage. Signage and graphics will be an important element within the Diamond Ridge specific plan. It is the intent of this sign program to provide individual tenants maximum sign exposure in a manner which that will complement the overall image of the project. Compatibility of sign size and quality is desired, along with a varied palette of style and character. This combination will enhance the individuality and personality of each individual development within the project area. Policies regarding signs within the specific plan area include:

a.       Signage installed along Gladstone Street shall be designed, oriented, installed and maintained in a manner which enhances this roadway and avoids impacting residential uses across the street.

Figures 3.12 and 3.13 illustrate perspective views of the proposed retail portion of Diamond Ridge specific plan area.

 

Figure 3.12
Diamond Ridge Marketplace Specific Plan
Retail Perspective

 



 

Figure 3.13
Diamond Ridge Marketplace Specific Plan
Retail Perspective

 



 

To ensure the continuity in quality and aesthetics, individual development projects within the Diamond Ridge specific plan shall be permitted identification signs in accordance with applicable standards of the following sign standards:

b.       Each tenant will be responsible for providing his or her own building signs. All tenant identification signs shall be constructed and installed at the tenant’s expense. Each tenant is responsible for obtaining all required sign and building permits from the planning agency. Each tenant shall be responsible for all fees required.

c.       Tenant wall signs shall be limited to internally illuminated signs with individual channel letters, a Plexiglas face, and sheet metal returns and trim caps. Logos and corporate slogans need not consist of individual letters.

d.       The size and number of signs for identification of individual development sites within the specific plan area shall be governed by applicable standards stated in this section of the Diamond Ridge specific plan. The criteria in this sign program shall be strictly enforced. Signs as outlined in this program are the only signs allowed.

e.       Any requested deviation from the approved sign program shall require the approval of the planning agency. Tenants shall be responsible for substantial conformance with this program and all city codes and requirements.

f.        Each tenant sign must be submitted to the planning agency for approval. The drawings to be submitted must clearly indicate sign size, color, construction material, location, message and typeface per specifications identified in this program.

g.       Signs should be of materials which are compatible with exterior building colors, materials and finishes, and shall be of a high-quality fabrication.

h.       No animated, flashing or audible signs will be permitted.

i.        No exposed lamps will be permitted. Neon signs may be allowed in tenant storefront windows subject to approval of the developer and the planning agency.

j.        A theater tenant may be permitted to have neon lighting and animated sign as a part of their exterior lighting. Exterior lighting shall avoid impacting residential uses on Valley Center Avenue and Gladstone Street.

k.       All signs and their installation shall comply with all local building codes and this program. The name of the business shall be depicted on the sign.

l.        Signs are to be free of all labels and fabricator’s advertising except for those required by code.

m.      No portable signs are permitted.

n.       All ground-mounted signs (i.e., monument and pylon signs) must be set back from the ultimate curb face and positioned so as not to create a hazard for either pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Permanent ground signs shall be fabricated of sturdy, quality materials.

o.       Billboards are prohibited.

p.       Grand opening and/or promotional signs shall comply with the Glendora sign ordinance and shall be approved by the developer prior to installation. Such signs shall not be permanent and must be removed immediately upon developer’s request.

q.       All building-mounted signs shall be constructed so as not to have exposed wiring, raceways, ballasts, conduit and transformers. Cabinets, conductors and other equipment shall be concealed. Architecturally appealing raceways may be permitted on a case-by-case basis.

r.        All wall-mounted signs shall be constructed of sturdy, quality materials. The height of such signs shall not exceed the height of the parapet wall.

s.       All signs and their supporting structures shall be constructed of metal, wood or comparable weatherproof material and shall be enclosed as to provide against their infestation by birds and vermin.

t.        No sign shall be installed which will impede minimum, safe sight-stopping distance as per Caltrans Highway Design Manual.

u.       Except for buildings which provide a rear elevation facing Gladstone Street, all building signage shall be located on building frontage only. No building signage shall be allowed facing Valley Center Avenue. For buildings within three hundred feet of Gladstone Street with signage facing Gladstone Street, the following standards for rear building wall signage shall apply:

 

 

Allowable area:

One and one-half square foot of sign are per linear foot of the leased premises at the rear elevation.

Maximum area:

One hundred fifty square feet of total sign area per tenant.

Illumination:

None allowed. Neither on nor off-site ambient lighting shall be construed as an illumination source for the purpose of this provision.

Height:

The maximum sign height shall be forty-eight-inches.

Length:

The maximum sign width shall be no greater than seventy five percent of the width of the leased premises at the rear elevation.

Secondary signs:

One sign on a rear building wall not to exceed twenty-five percent of the allowable area which identifies ancillary services and departments.

 

For the purposes of this section, a rear building wall or elevation is the exterior wall opposite the main pedestrian building entrance. Except as noted above, all other requirements for signage in the Diamond Ridge specific plan shall apply.

The following discussion identifies the type, dimensions and style of signs allowed within the Diamond Ridge specific plan site. Figure 3.14 identifies the location of the proposed signs.

 

Figure 3.14
Diamond Ridge Marketplace Specific Plan
Location of Monument Signs



 

9.       Project Identification Signs. All pylon signage information and specifications are contained within this Diamond Ridge specific plan as depicted in Exhibit 3.15.

 

Figure 3.15
Diamond Ridge Marketplace Specific Plan
Proposed On-Site Pylon Sign

 



10.     Monument/Pylon/Directional Signs. Up to two monument signs, two pylon (located on-site) signs and five directional signages may be installed by the developer. Monument signs shall be situated in a manner and location, which enhances the streetscape along Gladstone Street and the entrance from Glendora Marketplace. These signs will be located along Gladstone Street and along the entrance road from the Glendora Marketplace, adjacent to the site, and will be used to identify the following:

a.       The tenants of the building area along Valley Center Avenue north of the main project entry and adjacent to Memorial Park.

b.       The tenants of the building area along Valley Center Avenue south of the main project entry.

c.       The tenants of the building area at the intersection of Gladstone and Shellman Avenue.

Components of pylon signs (located on-site) shall be architecturally compatible with surrounding uses. These signs shall be a maximum of thirty feet in height with eighty square feet of sign face per side (Figure 3.15).

Components of monument signs shall be architecturally compatible with surrounding uses. These signs shall be a maximum of eight feet in height with thirty-two square feet of sign face per side (Figure 3.16).

 

Figure 3.16
Diamond Ridge Marketplace Specific Plan
Proposed Monument Sign



 

Components of directional sign shall be architecturally compatible with surrounding uses. These signs shall be a maximum of six feet in height with twenty-four square feet of sign face per side.

11.     Major Tenants. Major tenants (retail uses with ten thousand square feet or more) shall be allowed signs with a maximum letter height of eight feet and a maximum sign area of five hundred square feet. Major tenants, upon submittal of development plans, shall follow the usual and customary signage programs for their respective operations. Wall signs shall not be installed facing Gladstone Street or Valley Center Avenue.

12.     Nonmajor Tenants in Multiple-Tenant Building. Signs for nonmajor tenants in a multiple-tenant building shall not exceed seventy percent of the width of the storefront, and must be centered on the width of the storefront. Letters or logos shall be a maximum of three feet in height for signs containing upper case letters. The maximum height for signs containing upper and lower case letters, or with unequal heights (e.g., script) shall not exceed eighteen inches. Tenants with multiple frontages, defined as a wall with storefront glass, will be allowed with one identification sign along each building face fronting either a parking area or roadway. These signs must conform with this sign program and the city of Glendora sign ordinance for the specific plan area.

13.     Pad Building(s). Pad buildings are defined as those which house only one tenant, and are “freestanding” on the site. Each pad building is allowed three wall-mounted tenant identification signs in accordance with this sign program “Fast food” pad buildings are allowed an additional menu board of a maximum area of thirty square feet.

This sign is to advertise menu selections only, and not to provide tenant identification. Actual locations and designs of signs shall be indicated on the tenants sign application drawings and are subject to approval by the developer and the planning agency.

14.     Noise. No operation or activity shall create exterior noise levels in excess of the standard stated in the city of Glendora noise ordinance at the nearest residential dwelling to the specific plan area. Should existing ambient noise exceed this level at the time of development, no operation or activity shall be permitted to create more than a three decibel increase in CNEL noise levels beyond that level which existed prior to development. The use of outdoor public address systems shall be prohibited within the specific plan area.

The following sources are exempt from the provisions of this section:

a.       Safety devices and warning signals;

b.       Motor vehicles and trains;

c.       Emergency equipment, vehicles, devices and activities;

d.       Temporary construction, maintenance or demolition activities conducted between the hours of seven a.m. and six p.m.

The following operating standards:

 

 

7 a.m. to 7 p.m.

7 p.m. to 10 p.m.

10 p.m. to 7 a.m.

65 dBA

65 dBA

60 dBA

 

All operations within the Diamond Ridge specific plan will comply with Noise Ordinance Chapter 9.44.

F.       Lighting.

1.       Public Area Lighting. Public area lighting refers primarily to street lights along public streets. Street lights shall be as approved by the city, both in type and location.

2.       Site Lighting. The following section addresses illumination of on-site areas for purposes of safety, security and nighttime ambience, including lighting for parking areas, pedestrian walkways, graphics and signage, architectural and landscape features, shipping and loading areas, and any additional exterior areas:

a.       A comprehensive lighting plan shall be prepared prior to, or in conjunction with, the submittal of building plans to the planning agency. Such plan shall be approved pursuant to area CC&Rs prior to issuance of building permits.

b.       Site lighting shall be metal halide.

c.       Lighting sources shall be shielded, diffused or indirect in order to avoid glare to pedestrians and motorists. Lighting fixtures should be selected and located to confine the area of illumination to within the site boundaries. To minimize the total number of freestanding light standards, wall-mounted lights should be utilized where feasible and consistent with building architecture.

d.       Parking areas should be provided with a minimum of one footcandle of illumination. Within two hundred feet of Gladstone Street, light standards shall be limited to twenty feet in height. Light standards shall not be used within two hundred feet of Valley Center Avenue. All other light standards shall not exceed forty-five feet in height.

e.       Shields provided for security lights shall be painted to match the surface to which the fixture is attached. These fixtures shall not project above the fascia or rooflines of the adjacent buildings. Exterior lights should be used to accent entrances and special features. All illumination elements shall have controls to allow their selective use as an energy conservation measure.

f.        Wall-mounted illuminators shall be integrated within the architectural design of buildings.

g.       Light fixtures on the western façade of buildings located along Valley Center Avenue shall be located below the height of the screen wall. These fixtures shall include the use of shielding over the light source which directs light downward and prevents the light source from being visible from Valley Center Avenue. Light fixtures on the southern façade of buildings located along Gladstone Street shall include the use of shielding over the light source, which directs light downward.

G.      Performance Standards.

1.       Applicability. The performance standards contained herein shall be applied to all development and land uses within the Diamond Ridge specific plan site. These performance standards do not, however, apply to the operation of motor vehicles.

2.       Air Quality. Any operation or activity that might cause the emission of any smoke, fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, gases or other forms of air pollution, which can cause damage to human health, vegetation or other forms of property, or can cause excessive soiling on any other parcel shall conform to the requirements of the SCAQMD.

3.       Electrical or Electronic Interference. No operation or activity shall cause any source of electrical or electronic disturbance that adversely affects persons or the operation of any equipment on any other parcel, and which is not in conformance with the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission.

4.       Hazardous Materials Management. All uses involving the use, storage, handling, transportation or disposal of hazardous materials are required to comply with the provisions of the Los Angeles County hazardous waste management plan; the most current amendments to the California Code or Regulations, Titles 22 and 27; applicable requirements under the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES); applicable requirements of the Los Angeles County consolidated fire districts; and any other applicable city, county, state or federal standard relating to the use, storage, handling, transportation or disposal of hazardous materials.

The storage of hazardous materials in quantities less than fifty-five gallons shall follow applicable state regulations governing the use, handling, storage and disposal of these substances. Quantities of hazardous materials exceeding fifty-five gallons but less than two thousand gallons shall require approval of the Los Angeles County department of public works (review of hazardous materials underground storage) and the Los Angeles County fire department (review of business plan). Hazardous materials in excess this amount shall require additional environmental review and specific approval by the city.

5.       Light and Glare. With the exception of on-site lighting which is specifically approved by the planning agency to exceed the following standard, and except for project identification signage, no operation, activity, or lighting fixture shall create illumination exceeding one-half footcandle outside of the specific plan area, whether the illumination is direct or indirect light from the source.

6.       Liquid and Solid Wastes. In order to avoid contaminating water supplies, interfering with bacteriological processes in sewage treatment, or otherwise creating a public health hazard, all discharges of materials into any public or private street or storm drain, shall be in accordance with the adopted standards of the city, the California Department of Health Services and other governmental agencies having legal jurisdiction.

a.       Liquid waste disposal and runoff control shall be conducted within the guidelines of the Los Angeles County sanitation district.

b.       Disposal of liquid waste must also meet the applicable guidelines of the County department of environmental health services.

c.       Hazardous waste handling, transportation, recovery, and disposal shall comply with applicable federal and state laws, as well as with Glendora’s hazardous waste management plan.

d.       Solid waste disposal shall comply with applicable federal and state laws, and shall be regulated as per city ordinance.

e.       Other than trash cans located for the convenience of visitors, refuse storage and disposal areas shall be provided within trash enclosures screened on at least three sides from public view, by a solid wall not less than six feet in height. The fourth side shall consist of a solid metal gate, as approved by the planning agency. Other architectural features may be required as well.

i.        Refuse bins shall be provided in sufficient number, and shall be placed in convenient locations.

ii.       Other than trashcans located for the convenience of visitors, all trash shall be deposited in the trash enclosure, and the gate leading thereto shall remain closed except when in use, and shall remain in good working order.

iii.     Trash areas shall not be used for storage. The premises shall be kept in a neat and orderly condition at all times, and all improvements shall be maintained in a condition of good repair and appearance.

7.       Odors. No operation or activity that emits odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable to a level that is detectable with or without the aid of instruments at or beyond the property within which the odor is created shall be permitted.

Uses shall conform to the applicable requirements of the SCAQMD.

8.       Vibration. No operation or activity shall be permitted to cause an earth-borne vibration beyond the property within which the vibration was originally created which produces a particle velocity greater than 0.2 inch per second measured at or beyond the property line.

Vibration velocity shall be measured with a seismograph or other instrument capable of measuring the recording displacement and frequency, particle velocity or acceleration. Readings are to be made at points of maximum vibration along any lot line.

Ground vibration caused by moving vehicles, trains, aircraft, or temporary construction or demolition is exempted from this requirement, as is ground vibration caused by emergency equipment, vehicle, devices and activities, as well as from temporary construction, maintenance or demolition activities conducted between the hours of six a.m. and seven p.m.

9.       Water Quality. For any on-site improvements installed which partly or wholly contribute to the specific plan area’s compliance with the city of Glendora’s stormwater and runoff pollution control ordinance (Glendora Municipal Code Section 21.03.090), the owner(s) shall maintain all drainage systems, including but not limited to catch basins, pipes, curb drains, catch basin filter inserts, paved swales, roof drains or other improvements as shown on the city of Glendora approved grading plan for this site and in any SUSMP Report submitted to the city of Glendora. All facilities are to remain in good functional condition to safeguard the property owners and adjoining properties from damage and pollution and to minimize the discharge of pollutants to the MS4 system as defined by Section 21.03.090 of the Glendora Municipal Code.

The owner(s) shall conduct maintenance inspections of all structural and treatment control BMPs on the property at least once a year and retain proof of all inspections. Maintenance inspections shall include the verification of the legibility of any required stenciling on all catch basins. Stenciling shall be repainted and labeled as necessary.

(Ord. 1983 § 14, 2014; Ord. 1831 § 1, 2006; Ord. 1825 § 1 (Exh. A), 2005)

 

21.11.040 Infrastructure and grading.
The Diamond Ridge specific plan identifies those facilities that will be required to serve development of the project site. Infrastructure master plans address the potential for development of the various planning areas within the site. The following sections describe the backbone infrastructure systems required to serve the project site:

A.      Utilities.

1.       Water Facilities. Water service to the Diamond Ridge specific plan site will be provided by the city of Glendora’s water division. The water division obtains sixty-five percent of its water from three local, underground basins: the Upper San Gabriel Basin, the Main San Gabriel Basin and the Glendora Basin. This groundwater supply is supplemented by water purchases from the Metropolitan Water District (MWD) through the Three Valleys Municipal Water District.

Water lines within adjacent streets include a fourteen-inch water main in Gladstone Street and a six-inch water main in Valley Center Avenue. The Valley Center Avenue water main will not be used for the Diamond Ridge development. Given the size of the existing water main, adequate capacity and water pressure will be available for the project site including average daily and peak daily use and fire flows.

Based on maximum building area, land use and water consumption factors, it is estimated that the proposed project will require one hundred twenty-four thousand nine hundred eighty gallons of water per day (gpd) average with a peak of three hundred twelve thousand four hundred fifty gallons per day.

The water system for the project site will be designed to deliver a minimum of four thousand gallons per minute, per Los Angeles County Fire Department (LACFD) fire flow requirements for fully sprinkled buildings. This flow is greater than that which is needed to accommodate the domestic water demands of the land uses proposed within the project site. All buildings within the specific plan area will be provided with fire sprinkler systems. The placement of hydrants and other fire suppression facilities/devices shall conform to LACFD standards.

Water will be provided on site via the looped system. The primary loop will connect to an existing fourteen-inch line within Gladstone Street; the six-inch line within Valley Center Avenue will not be used but a new sixteen-inch main on Valley Center Avenue will be available.

The water supply required by the proposed development will be provided by additional purchases from the MWD, as is the case for all new development in the city. MWD has indicated that as long as population increases within the city are within Southern California Association of Government’s (SCAG) projections, the city will be able to purchase additional water to serve additional development. Because the project site has long been planned and zoned for commercial use, the proposed project’s water requirements will be adequately met by water purchases from MWD.

All on-site water lines will be located within public utility easements, and will be maintained by the city of Glendora’s water division. All water system improvements needed to serve the project site will be constructed by the developer.

2.       Wastewater Facilities. Los Angeles County Sanitation District (LACSD) No. 22 serves the entire eastern San Gabriel Valley area, including the city of Glendora and the project site. This agency is responsible for conveying sewage to regional treatment plants, providing sewage treatment and disposing of effluent and solids. The existing sewer mains in Lone Hill Avenue and Gladstone Street are maintained by LACSD No. 22. The project developer will pay for the cost and installation of all sewer lines needed to serve the site.

Wastewater from the proposed project will discharge from an on-site sewer system into LACSD Sunflower Trunk Sewer, Section 3, which is located in Gladstone Street. This fifteen-inch diameter trunk has a peak capacity of five million two hundred thousand gallons a day (mgd) and conveyed a peak flow of 0.8 mgd when last measured in 1996. Additional sewer structures include an eight-inch sewer line in Valley Center Avenue. The project developer will obtain appropriate permits to connect to the existing fifteen-inch trunk line on Gladstone Street. If there is not an existing lateral serving this site, then the main will need to be saddled. A permit will be required from both the sanitation district and the city.

The wastewater generated by the proposed project will be treated at the San Jose Creek Water Reclamation Plant (WRP), located adjacent to the city of Industry. This facility has a design capacity of one hundred million gallons per day (mgd) and is currently processing ninety mgd. This facility currently has a ten-mgd surplus capacity. Wastewater flows which exceed the capacity of the San Jose Creek WRP, and all sludge are diverted to and treated at the Joint Water Pollution Control Plan (JWPCP) located in the city of Carson.

Based on an average rate of four thousand one hundred sixty-six gallons per acre, the project site will generate approximately one hundred twenty-four thousand nine hundred eighty gallons of wastewater per day. Peak wastewater flows will average three hundred twelve thousand four hundred fifty gallons per day, based on a peaking factor of two and one-half.

The size sewer line required for new development is regulated by Los Angeles County department of public works (LACDPW). LACDPW determines pipe size based on a formula which factors the size and slope of the area to be served.

Based on LACDPW standards, eight-inch sewer lines will be constructed. All buildings located within the Diamond Ridge specific plan will be connected to the existing fifteen-inch line in Gladstone Street.

3.       Storm Drains. The construction of structures and parking areas within the project site will increase the amount of impermeable surfaces, resulting in reduced absorption rates and increased surface runoff.

Storm flows from the project site have been estimated at one hundred cubic feet per second (cfs) during a ten-year storm event and one hundred eighty-five cfs during a one hundred-year storm event. On-site storm drain facilities will ultimately convey flows to the southwest corner of the project site where it will drain to the existing sixty-six inch RCP in Gladstone Street (to be verified upon final civil submittal). There are no off-site contributions to project storm runoff. Stormwater flows shall be metered where the on-site storm drain system connects to the sixty-six inch Gladstone Street line (depending on where connection is along Gladstone Street is determinant to whether it is a sixty-six inch RCP or sixty-nine inch RCP; subject to field verification) to limit peak flows to eighty-five cfs per the 1964 Bond Issue hydraulic system.

As noted above, ten- and one hundred-year surface runoff generated by the proposed site will exceed this allocation. Thus, on-site stormwater detention is required. A system of buried thirty-six inch maximum pipes will be installed to temporarily detain storm flows in excess of the eighty-five cfs allowed (Figure 3.2). This detention facility will be installed in the center of the project site east of the proposed building area along the west edge of the site. The capacity of this proposed facility will total approximately one hundred twenty-two thousand cubic feet (cf) of storage. The stormwater detained in this facility will be discharged at a time and in a manner that will not exceed the eighty-five cfs allocated to the project site. Manhole access to this detention facility will be provided to allow for ongoing maintenance. Storm drain facilities within the Gladstone Street right-of-way will be maintained by the LACFCD, while on-site storm drains, detention facilities and storm drain inlets will be maintained by the project owner.

4.       Solid Waste Disposal. The city of Glendora contracts with a private company, Athens Disposal Service, for refuse collection and household recycling. There are no sanitary landfills in the city of Glendora. The nearest sold waste disposal facilities are located in Azusa, Irwindale, and the city of Industry.

5.       Natural Gas. The gas company will provide natural gas service to the Diamond Ridge specific plan site.

6.       Telephone. Telephone service to the Diamond Ridge specific plan site will be provided by Verizon.

All wires, conductors, cables, raceways and conduits for electrical, telephone and similar services that provide direct service to any property shall, within the boundary lines of the property, be installed underground. Associated equipment and appurtenances such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, meters and service cabinets may be placed above ground when screened and located behind the front setback of such property with appropriate path of travel (sidewalk area) to meet ADA requirements.

B.      Project Access. Primarily, access to the project site will be proved by westerly extension of the primary east-west internal roadway (drive aisle) serving the adjacent Glendora Marketplace. Secondary access will be via access along Gladstone Street, approximately six hundred sixty feet east of Valley Center Avenue aligned across from Shellman Avenue. Project signage, along the Foothill (I-210) Freeway will be designed to emphasize the Lone Hill Avenue access point. Secondary monument signs will be placed at the entrance along Gladstone Street to allow access traffic from Sunflower Avenue and traffic overflow from Lone Hill Avenue.

As noted above, physical configurations of the proposed Gladstone Street driveway aligned with Shellman Avenue allows access. Truck traffic shall follow the routes established in Figure 3.8.

Internal circulation will be a continuation of the east/west drive cut from the Glendora commercial center. The internal drive which begins as a four-lane drive and then narrows down to two lanes, will gradually transfer circulation from an east/west to a north/south movement. A secondary two-lane drive will travel north/south. Both circulation drives will provide access to each of the main parking areas both the on-grade parking as well as the parking structure.

C.      Grading. The proposed project will result in changes to topography and ground surface features. The current blend of nonnative vegetation and perennial weeds will be removed during grading operations for the thirty-acre site. A significant portion of the site will be covered with building pads and/or parking areas. On-site grading will require eighty thousand cubic yards (to be verified upon final grading) of import to accommodate the current building/site configuration for the Diamond Ridge development.

The project will be required to comply with SWPPP requirements. The regional board is required to review all thirty-acre sites. A copy of the NOI and the SWPPP will be submitted to the city of Glendora along with a permit number from the regional board prior to grading.

D.      Public Safety. In order to enhance and promote public safety within the specific plan area, the safety program described below will be implemented. The purpose of the program is to enhance the safety of improvements within the specific plan area and those who visit/shop at the Diamond Ridge project. The program is intended to assist the city of Glendora’s public safety personnel by providing preventive patrols and by providing appropriate improvements allowing for unhindered responses to emergency situations.

Public safety programs within the specific plan area shall consist of the following:

1.       One uniformed unarmed (no firearms) security guard shall be on duty during all hours when any business is open. The Glendora police department chief of police shall have the right to require additional security based on calls for police service to the project, and to request changes to security services if it is ineffective or uncooperative.

2.       On certain days, which the Glendora police department chief of police determines are peak shopping days, or are special Diamond Ridge event days, the chief of police reserves the right to require the additional security guards for those specified time periods.

3.       Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in a manner, which does not restrict visibility for public safety personnel within the project.

4.       All businesses in the specific plan area shall install and have a functioning alarm system. The alarm system must be able to signal and distinguish between robbery and burglary alarms. All businesses shall obtain an alarm permit from the city of Glendora police department prior to business operations.

5.       At least two parking spaces within the specific plan area shall be designated for police vehicle only parking. The chief of police shall approve the location of the two designated parking spaces to ensure they allow parking for effective police responses. (Ord. 1825 § 1 (Exh. A), 2005)

 

21.11.050 Administration.
A.      Master Development Plan. Oversized maps of the master development plan for the Diamond Ridge specific plan area (both the theater with retail scheme and the all-retail scheme) are on file with the city clerk (also see Figures 5.1 and 5.2). Development of the entire thirty-acre project area or any portion thereof which is consistent with the provisions of this document and with the master development plan may proceed directly to construction plans and building permit review. Upon adoption, the master development plan, which is consistent with the specific plan, will be deemed to be consistent with the Glendora Development Code.

Construction of the first increment of development of the specific plan area shall be commenced within two years of the effective date of this specific plan. If such first development increment encompasses less than the entire project site, each subsequent increment of development shall be commenced within one year of the start of construction of the previous increment. If construction work is not begun within the required time frames and carried diligently to completion, the master development plan shall become voidable at the option of the department of planning and redevelopment. The reviewing authority shall have the authority to extend the time limit in the case of unavoidable delay. The applicant must submit a written request to the reviewing body for a time extension before the original time limit expires.

The reviewing authority for subsequent modifications of the master development plan shall be the director of planning and redevelopment.

 

Figure 5.1
Diamond Ridge Marketplace Specific Plan
Master Development Plan w/Theater and Parking Structure

 



 

Figure 5.2
Diamond Ridge Marketplace Specific Plan
Master Development Plan—All Retail

 



 

B.      Substantial Conformance. The purpose of substantial conformance is to provide a mechanism which provides for interpretation of the specific plan, and which would allow flexibility in implementing the specific plan and developing the site pursuant to the master development plan. Substantial conformance allows for determining the appropriateness of land uses not listed in Section 21.11.030 of this chapter, as well as for nonsubstantial modifications to the approved specific plan and master development plan, which do not modify the effect of the approval on surrounding property. Substantial conformance is not required for uses listed as permitted in Section 21.11.030 of this chapter. Substantial conformance may include, but is not limited to, inclusion of land uses not listed in Section 21.11.030 of this chapter or the specific plan; modifications that might be necessary to comply with final conditions of approval; or modifications affecting infrastructure, public services and facilities, landscape palette; minor adjustments to the master development plan; and other issues except those affecting compliance with adopted development regulations.

Except as otherwise provided below, substantial conformance shall not include modifications in the basic design of the project, significant changes to the height or bulk of the approved uses, or increases in the density or intensity of the approved uses.

1.       Guidelines for Determination of Substantial Conformance. The director of planning and redevelopment or his or her designee shall make a determination of substantial conformance.

2.       Permitted Land Uses. Land uses not listed as permitted in Section 21.11.030 of this chapter of this specific plan may be permitted, subject to a determination of substantial conformance, provided that:

a.       The proposed use is compatible with the uses permitted described in Section 21.11.030 of this chapter of this specific plan;

b.       The proposed use will not create any significant environmental impacts, which were not previously addressed in the EIR for the Diamond Ridge specific plan;

c.       The proposed use will not substantially increase the severity of any significant environmental impacts which were previously addressed in the EIR for the Diamond Ridge specific plan; and

d.       The proposed use is similar to, and results in no greater environmental impact than the other permitted uses within the specific plan area.

3.       Master Development Plan. Specific provisions of the master development plan review; architectural details; landscape palette; building size, height, bulk and orientation; parking lot layout; and other plan details may be revised utilizing substantial conformance provisions. In making such a determination, the director of planning and redevelopment or his or her designee shall be required to find that the revisions requested under substantial conformance are consistent with the provisions of the specific plan, and do not create impacts which were not recognized and addressed in the original approval. Modifications to lot coverage, dimensions or area; setbacks; floor area (other than maximum allowable with the project site); antenna development standards; fence and wall heights; required parking spaces; and provision of open space shall not exceed the limits set forth in Section 21.02.035 of the Glendora Zoning Code.

4.       Infrastructure. Modifications to the alignment of interior access roads; parking lot configurations; or adjustments to individual infrastructure facilities such as drainage, sewer and water shall be subject to substantial conformance determinations. Prior to the approval of substantial conformance modifications of specific plan infrastructure, the director of planning and redevelopment or designee shall confer with the public works department, and shall make the finding that the proposed modification will not result in any significant impacts which were not previously addressed and resolved in the processing of the specific plan.

5.       Landscaping. Revisions to the plant palette provided in Section 21.11.030 of this chapter may be approved by the planning agency as a substantial conformance item.

C.      Amendments to the Master Development Plan.

1.       Purpose. This section provides procedures whereby the master development plans can be modified to ensure orderly development, aesthetic design, safe and harmonious placement, and:

a.       To prevent or minimize adverse impacts on property in the area;

b.       To implement the general plan and the specific plan;

c.       To protect the public health, safety and welfare;

d.       To site structures and other improvements in a manner that is in harmony with the vicinity’s existing development;

e.       To encourage and promote energy-efficient design.

All proposed development within the specific plan area which is consistent with the provisions of this specific plan, but is not consistent with the master development plan, and for which a finding of substantial conformance cannot be made, shall require an amendment to the master development plan.

2.       Application. Applications to amend the master development plan shall be made on forms provided by the director of planning and redevelopment (director) and shall be accompanied by a filing fee, as established by (city) council resolution. The owner of the property for which the approval is sought, or an authorized agent, shall make applications.

3.       Hearing. No public hearing shall be required for amending the master development plan.

4.       Action by Reviewing Authority. The reviewing authority for amending the master development plan, the director of planning and redevelopment or designee, shall take action by providing written notice to the applicant approving, conditionally approving or denying approval of the amended master development plan. The action of the director shall be final unless appealed as prescribed in Section 21.01.030(F) of Glendora’s Municipal Code.

5.       Findings. In approaching an amendment to the master development plan, the reviewing authority (director or designee) shall first make all of the following findings:

a.       The amended master development plan will comply with all development requirements set forth in the Diamond Ridge specific plan, as well as the city of Glendora Development Code, as modified by this specific plan, and development standards adopted by the city council, as modified by this specific plan, and not result in any additional environmental impacts not addressed in the EIR for the Diamond Ridge specific plan.

b.       The physical characteristics of the site have been adequately assessed in the amendment to the master development plan, and proposed building sites are of adequate size and shape to accommodate proposed uses and all other features of development.

c.       There is supporting infrastructure, existing or available, consistent with the designated improvement level and requirements of the Diamond Ridge specific plan, to accommodate the proposed amended master development plan without significantly lowering service levels.

d.       The proposed amendment to the master development plan, as conditioned, will not have substantial adverse effects on surrounding property or the permitted use thereof, and will be compatible with the existing and planned land use character of the surrounding area.

e.       The improvements required per the conditions of the master development plan, as amended, and the manner of development adequately address all natural and man-made hazards associated with the proposed development and the project site including, but not limited to, flood, seismic, fire and slope hazards.

6.       Conditions of Approval. The reviewing authority may impose such conditions as it deems necessary to ensure that the amended master development plan will meet the development standards of the specific plan and the purpose and intent of this section.

D.      Specific Plan Amendments. Amendments to the specific plan shall be required for revisions which are beyond the scope of substantial conformance determinations and amendments to the master development plan. Specific plan amendments are governed by the California Government Code Section 65500 and the city of Glendora Zoning Code. Any specific plan amendment proposed for the Diamond Ridge specific plan will require review by the city of Glendora planning commission, and approval by the Glendora city council.

E.       Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, part or portion of this specific plan is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this specific plan. The city council declares that it would have adopted this specific plan and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, part or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases, parts or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 1907 § 1, 2008; Ord. 1825 § 1 (Exh. A), 2005)

 

21.11.A Appendices
21.11.A.010 Appendices on file with city clerk.
          Appendix A, Master Development Plan, Scheme 1: Retail, Theater, and Parking Structure (oversized map) and Appendix B, Master Development Plan, Scheme 2: All Retail (oversized map) are on file in the city clerk’s office.

 

21.11.A.020 Appendix C—EIR Mitigation Monitoring Plan.
 

APPENDIX C

4.0 EIR MITIGATION MONITORING PLAN

 

4.1     Introduction.

To ensure that the mitigation measures contained in this EIR are properly implemented, a monitoring program has been developed pursuant to state law. This mitigation monitoring plan (MMP) identifies measures incorporated in the project which reduce its potential environmental effects; the entities responsible for implementation and monitoring of mitigation measures; and the appropriate timing for implementation of mitigation measures. As described in CEQA Section 15097, this MMP employs both reporting on, and monitoring of, project mitigation measures.

The objectives of the MMP are to:

A.      Assign responsibility for, and ensure proper implementation of mitigation measures;

B.      Assign responsibility for, and provide for monitoring and reporting of compliance with mitigation measures;

C.      Provide the mechanism to identify areas of noncompliance and need for enforcement action before irreversible environmental damage occurs.

Mitigation monitoring and reporting procedures incorporated in the project are presented in the following Section 4.2. Specific mitigation measures incorporated in the project, mitigation timing, and implementation and reporting/monitoring responsibilities are presented within this section in Table 4.2-1.

 

4.2     Mitigation monitoring and reporting.

Mitigation Monitoring and Responsibilities. As the lead agency, the city of Glendora is responsible for ensuring full compliance with the mitigation measures adopted for the proposed project. The city will monitor and report on all mitigation activities.

If during the course of project implementation, any of the mitigation measures identified herein cannot be successfully implemented, the city shall immediately inform any affected responsible agencies. The city in conjunction with any affected responsible agencies will then determine if modification to the project is required and/or whether alternative mitigation is appropriate.

 

Table 4.2-1
Diamond Ridge Specific Plan
Mitigation Monitoring Plan

 

 

Mitigation Measure(s)

Mitigation Timing

Implementation Entity

Monitoring/ Reporting Entity

Monitoring/
Reporting Frequency

4.1 Land Use.

4.1.1 Prior to site plan approval, proposed configuration of the new roadway through the marketplace site, and any alteration of marketplace parking areas and circulation plans shall be reviewed and approved by the city in coordination with marketplace property owners and tenants. Prior to issuance of the first certificate of occupancy, the proposed new roadway shall be completed and accepted for maintenance by the city.

Prior to site plan approval

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department

At final site plan approval

4.1.2 A construction management traffic plan shall be prepared for the proposed marketplace roadway. This plan shall identify roadway construction scheduling and interim circulation and parking plans for the marketplace site for the duration of roadway construction activities. The plan shall be reviewed and approved by the city prior to the issuance of grading/ encroachment permits.

Prior to the issuance of grading/ encroachment permits

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

At issuance of grading/ encroachment permits

4.1.3 A minimum of two weeks prior to commencing construction of the proposed marketplace roadway, notification of pending roadway construction activities shall be provided to affected marketplace property owners and tenants. Such notification shall be provided in a manner acceptable to the city. The notice shall provide the time and dates of proposed construction, and identify interim parking plans and circulation plans consistent with Mitigation Measure 4.1.1. Potential effects to parking and circulation shall also be identified.

A minimum of two weeks prior to commencing construction of the proposed marketplace roadway

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department

Verification of required notification concurrent with issuance of encroachment permits

4.1.4 Any marketplace properties, improvements or utilities that may be damaged during construction of the proposed roadway shall be restored and/or repaired to the satisfaction of the city and affected utilities purveyors. Restoration /repair shall be realized prior to issuance of the first certificate of occupancy within the project site.

Prior to issuance of the first certificate of occupancy within the project site

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

Verification of required restoration/ repairs prior to issuance of the first project certificate of occupancy

4.2 Traffic, Circulation and Parking.

4.2.1 Prior to the issuance of the first building permit within the project site, the project proponent shall contribute fair share fees toward the addition of one eastbound right-turn lane at Lone Hill Avenue/Route 66.

Prior to the issuance of the first building permit

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

At issuance of the first building permit

4.2.2 Prior to the issuance of the first building permit within the project site, the project proponent shall contribute fair share fees toward the addition of one northbound left-turn lane at Lone Hill Avenue/I-210 Westbound Ramps.

Prior to the issuance of the first building permit

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

At issuance of the first building permit

4.2.3 Prior to the issuance of the first building permit within the project site, the project proponent shall contribute fair share fees toward the addition of one eastbound right-turn lane at Lone Hill Avenue/I-210 Eastbound Ramps.

Prior to the issuance of the first building permit

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

At issuance of the first building permit

4.2.4 Prior to the issuance of the first building permit within the project site, the project proponent shall contribute fair share fees toward the addition of one northbound left-turn lane, one northbound through lane, one southbound left-turn lane, and one southbound through lane at Lone Hill Avenue/Gladstone Street.

Prior to the issuance of the first building permit

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

At issuance of the first building permit

4.2.5 Prior to the issuance of the first building permit within the project site, the project proponent shall contribute fair share fees toward the addition of one northbound through lane at Lone Hill Avenue/Auto Centre Drive.

Prior to the issuance of the first building permit

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

At issuance of the first building permit

4.2.6 Prior to the issuance of the first building permit within the project site, the project proponent shall contribute fair share fees toward addition of one southbound right-turn lane at Lone Hill Avenue/Glendora Marketplace access.

Prior to the issuance of the first building permit

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

At issuance of the first building permit

4.2.7 Prior to the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy within the project site, the project proponent shall construct a traffic signal at Lone Hill Avenue/Kenoma Street.

Prior to the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

At issuance of the first certificate of occupancy

4.2.8 Prior to the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy within the project site, the project proponent shall install a traffic signal at Shellman Avenue/Gladstone Street.

Prior to the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

At issuance of the first certificate of occupancy

4.2.9 One of the following mitigation measures shall be implemented. Refer also to EIR Section 4.2.

 

 

 

 

4.2.9.a Prior to the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy within the project site, the project proponent shall replace, or shall cause the replacement of the current all-way stop control at the intersection west of Coco’s Restaurant within the marketplace with a traffic signal.

Prior to the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

At issuance of the first certificate of occupancy

4.2.9.b Prior to the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy within the project site, the project proponent shall convert, or shall cause the conversion of, the drive aisle south of the affected intersection to one-way southbound operations.

Prior to the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

At issuance of the first certificate of occupancy

4.2.9.c Prior to the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy within the project site, the project proponent shall develop and implement a city-approved traffic management plan addressing the project’s potential circulation impacts within the adjacent Glendora Marketplace.

Prior to the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department, police department

At issuance of the first certificate of occupancy

4.3 Air Quality.

4.3.1 To the extent feasible, the construction contractor shall select the construction equipment used on-site based on low-emissions factors and high-energy efficiency.

Throughout construction activities

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

Throughout construction activities

4.3.2 The construction contractor shall ensure that construction or grading plans include a statement that all construction equipment will be tuned and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications.

Required statement(s) to be incorporated concurrent with preparation of grading plans

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

At issuance of grading permits

4.3.3 To the extent feasible, the construction contractor shall utilize electric- or diesel-powered equipment in lieu of gasoline-powered engines. The construction contractor shall ensure that construction or grading plans include a statement that work crews will shut off equipment when not in use.

Required statement(s) to be incorporated concurrent with preparation of grading plans. To the extent feasible, the construction contractor shall utilize electric- or diesel-powered equipment in lieu of gasoline-powered engines throughout construction activities

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

Statement(s) verified at issuance of grading permits, equipment use monitored throughout construction activities

4.3.4 To the extent feasible, the construction contractor shall time the construction activities so as not to interfere with peak-hour traffic and to minimize obstruction of through-traffic lanes adjacent to the site. A flagperson shall be retained to maintain safety adjacent to existing roadways.

Throughout construction activities

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

Throughout construction activities

4.3.5 The construction contractor shall support and encourage ridesharing and transit incentives for the construction crew.

Throughout construction activities

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

Throughout construction activities

4.4 Noise.

4.4.1 Recognizing potential disturbance to vicinity-sensitive receptors, construction and related activities at the project site are restricted to a greater degree than the minimums required by the city noise ordinance. To this end, the delivery of materials and equipment and the outdoor use of equipment, hammers and power tools shall be limited to the hours between 7:00 a.m., and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, with no work allowed on Saturdays, Sundays or federal holidays, with the exception of interior work. Outdoor yard work is permitted as long as it does not involve heavy equipment or noise-producing equipment.

Throughout construction activities

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

Throughout construction activities

4.4.2 During all site excavation and grading, the project contractors shall equip all construction equipment, fixed or mobile, with properly operating and maintained mufflers consistent with manufacturers’ standards.

During all site excavation and grading

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

During all site excavation and grading

4.4.3 The project contractor shall place all stationary construction equipment so that emitted noise is directed away from sensitive receptors nearest to the project site.

Throughout construction activities

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

Throughout construction activities

4.4.4 The construction contractor shall locate equipment staging in areas that will create the greatest distance between construction-related noise sources and noise-sensitive receptors nearest to the project site.

Throughout construction activities

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

Throughout construction activities

4.4.5 Construction of perimeter sound walls, as required under Mitigation Measure 4.4.6, shall be realized in the first increment of construction, and as early as feasible.

Within the first increment of construction

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

Prior to, or concurrent with, issuance of building permits for the first occupied facility

4.4.6 A minimum 6-foot-high block wall, or equivalent-height combined wall and berm, shall be constructed along the project’s westerly boundary. This sound wall shall be constructed as early as feasible during project implementation, and shall in any case be completed prior to issuance of the first certificate of occupancy. Sound wall design and location shall be reviewed and approved by the city prior to issuance of grading permits.

Sound wall design and location shall be reviewed and approved by the city prior to issuance of grading permits. Sound wall shall be constructed as early as feasible during project implementation, and shall in any case be completed prior to issuance of the first certificate of occupancy.

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

Sound wall design and location approval at building permit. Sound wall completion at issuance of the first certificate of occupancy

4.5 Cultural Resources.

4.5.1 A professional archaeological monitor shall be available on-call or on-site during site excavation and grading activities, particularly in the areas of the previous historic structures. The monitor shall be equipped to salvage and record the location of archaeologic and/or historic resources as they may be unearthed to avoid construction delays. The monitor shall be empowered to temporarily halt or divert equipment to allow removal of abundant or large specimens or finds and to allow the preparation of recovered resources to a point of identification. Any discovered or recovered resources shall be evaluated in accordance with CEQA guidelines.

Throughout excavation/ grading activities

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

Throughout excavation/ grading activities

4.5.2 If evidence of prehistoric cultural resources is found during site construction, a Native American monitor shall be available on-site to observe in coordination with the archaeological monitor.

Throughout excavation/ grading activities

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, Native American monitor

Throughout excavation/ grading activities

4.6 Cumulative Impacts.

4.6.1 Prior to the issuance of the first building permit within the project site, the project proponent shall contribute fair share fees toward the addition of one westbound right-turn lane at Lone Hill Avenue/Auto Center Drive.

Prior to the issuance of the first building permit

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

At issuance of the first building permit

4.6.2 Prior to the issuance of the first building permit within the project site, the project proponent shall contribute fair share fees toward the addition of one northbound left-turn lane at SR-57 NB Off-Ramp/Auto Center Drive.

Prior to the issuance of the first building permit

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

At issuance of the first building permit

4.6.3 Prior to the issuance of the first building permit within the project site, the project proponent shall contribute fair share fees toward the addition of one southbound through lane; and addition of one eastbound left-turn lane at Lone Hill Avenue/Glendora Marketplace access.

Prior to the issuance of the First building permit

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

At issuance of the first building permit

4.6.4 Prior to the issuance of the first building permit within the project site, the project proponent shall contribute fair share fees toward the addition of one westbound right-turn lane at Lone Hill Avenue/Arrow Highway.

Prior to the issuance of the first building permit

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

At issuance of the first building permit

Police Department.

PD-1 The Diamond Ridge developer/ property management shall maintain one uniformed unarmed (no firearms) security guard on duty during all hours when any business is open. The chief of police shall have the right to require additional security based on calls for police service to the project, and to request changes to private security services, if these services are determined by the Glendora police department to be ineffective or uncooperative.

Throughout project operations

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, police department

Throughout project operations

PD-2 On certain days, which the Glendora police department chief of police determines are peak shopping days, or are special Diamond Ridge event days, the chief of police reserves the right to require the developer/property management to provide additional security guards for those specified time periods. This is to enhance the safety of the stores and those who visit/shop at the Diamond Ridge project.

Throughout project operations, days and times as determined by the city of Glendora police department chief of police

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, police department

Throughout project operations, days

PD-3 The shrubbery on the property shall be installed and maintained in such a condition as to not restrict visibility while driving through the project and not allow for persons to easily conceal themselves. This condition will assist police personnel to provide preventive patrols and respond to emergency situations.

Throughout project operations

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, police department

Throughout project operations

PD-4 All businesses in the Diamond Ridge project shall install and have a functioning alarm system. The alarm system must be able to signal and distinguish between robbery and burglary alarms. All businesses shall obtain an alarm permit from the police department.

Alarms to be installed and permits to be obtained prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy for the affected business

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department, police department

At issuance of certificate of occupancy for the affected business

PD-5 The developer/property management shall provide and designate two parking spaces for police vehicle only parking. The chief of police shall approve the location of the two designated parking spaces to ensure they allow parking for effective police responses.

Prior to issuance of the first certificate of occupancy

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department, police department

At issuance of the first certificate of occupancy

Earth Resources/Geologic Hazards (carried forward from initial study, EIR Appendix A)

GH-1 The project applicant shall comply with all applicable Uniform Building Code standards, and with the recommendations and performance standards set forth in the geotechnical investigation prepared for the project. Additionally, prior to issuance of any building permits, the project applicant shall provide verification to the city of Glendora department of planning and redevelopment that a licensed geotechnical engineer has reviewed foundation plans with respect to site geotechnical conditions to ensure that the foundation plans are designed to specifically address site soil and geotechnical conditions, consistent with the Uniform Building Code (UBC). Recommendations shall be incorporated into the foundation plans prior to issuance of building permits and the commencement of construction.

Prior to issuance of the first building permit

Project proponent

City of Glendora planning and redevelopment department, public works department

At issuance of the first building permit

 
Chapter 21.12 WILLIAM LYON HOMES ARBORETA SPECIFIC PLAN
Article I. Executive Summary
21.12.010 Purpose and objectives.
A.      The Arboreta specific plan document is intended to provide for the orderly and efficient development of the specific plan area in accordance with the provisions of the city of Glendora general plan. It contains development standards and design guidelines which apply only to property within the specific plan area that are intended to implement the goals, objectives and policies of the city’s general plan. In developing the Arboreta specific plan, the land development concept has been designed with the following goals in mind:

1.       To implement applicable general plan policies by presenting more detailed direction for future development.

2.       To transform the existing manufacturing/research and development uses into an aesthetic living environment, more compatible with the surrounding residential character and adjacent schools.

3.       To provide for single-family detached and attached housing opportunities responsive to local and regional needs, while enhancing local property values and residential character.

4.       To establish zoning standards and implementation mechanisms applicable solely to the Arboreta project.

5.       To provide a desirable residential community that offers a mix of housing types, open space amenities, including a linear public park, private neighborhood pool, tot lot and oak preservation, as well as privately maintained streets and landscaping.

6.       To establish a compatible interface with adjacent land uses.

B.      Implementation of the Arboreta specific plan provides the parameters to establish a cohesive infill development. This will be achieved by coordinating the land use, intensity, scale and aesthetic characteristics of development with the goals and policies of the general plan. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.020 Public benefits.
The specific plan process allows for modification of city standards, if superior design quality is achieved, benefiting the local community and city. The Arboreta project offers the following public benefits:

1.       Linear public park site;

2.       Preservation of existing oak trees;

3.       Private maintenance of streets and interior open spaces;

4.       Additional housing opportunities;

5.       High quality architectural design and product mix, enhancing surrounding property values;

6.       Creation of a compatible residential land use, buffering railroad noise impacts from existing residences and schools;

7.       Additional property tax revenue to the city. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.030 Authority for specific plans.
A.      The Arboreta specific plan is prepared and established under the authority granted to the city of Glendora in accordance with the requirements of the California Government Code, Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 3, Article 8, Sections 65450 and 65457. The California Government Code authorizes cities to adopt specific plans by resolution or by ordinance. A public hearing is required, after which the specific plan must be adopted by the Glendora city council for final approval.

B.      The Arboreta specific plan is the regulatory document which will serve as the zoning regulations for the property. Some elements of the development program will also be enforced through conditions, covenants and restrictions (CC&Rs) established in conjunction with the subdivision map for the property. If there is a conflict found between this specific plan and the city’s Municipal Codes, the contents of this specific plan shall prevail. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.040 Relationship to CEQA.
A.      Environmental documentation (EIR) was prepared for the Arboreta site. Many land use alternatives were evaluated for their environmental impacts, consistent with the California Environmental Quality Act. Mitigation has been adopted which will reduce identified impacts to a level of “less than significant.”

B.      Additionally, a general plan amendment (GPA04-01), zone amendment (ZA04-03), zone change (ZC04-02), subdivision (SUP04-02), development plan review (DPR04-24), development plan review(DPR04-31) and miscellaneous (M05-71) are processed for a development agreement. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.050 Project location.
A.      The project site is located within the city of Glendora in Los Angeles County, in Southern California, as shown in Exhibit 1, Regional Location Map, and Exhibit 2, Local Vicinity Map. The city of Glendora is generally located twenty-one miles northeast of downtown Los Angeles, and is bounded by the cities of Azusa to the west, Covina to the south, and San Dimas to the east, as well as unincorporated portions of Los Angeles County.

 

Exhibit 1
REGIONAL LOCATION MAP

 



 

Exhibit 2

LOCAL VICINITY MAP

 



 

B.      The 27.6-acre specific plan site lies within the southwest portion of Glendora. The site is bordered on the south by the MTA Railroad right-of-way, single-family detached residential, and the Rain Bird manufacturing facility; on the west by North Barranca Avenue, Monrovia Nurseries operations and single-family detached residential; on the north by single-family detached residential, La Fetra Elementary School and Sandburg Middle School and on the east by North Grand Avenue, single-family detached residential, and commercial uses, as shown on Exhibit 4, Existing/Surrounding Land Use. Access to the site from the surrounding region is provided by the 210 Freeway via Grand Avenue. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.060 Project overview.
The Arboreta community concept would transform the current manufacturing/research and development uses on the site into a gated residential community with approximately one hundred forty homes on 27.6 acres. Primary access will be provided from Grand Avenue. Planned residential uses account for the majority of the community, approximately 21.6 acres of the total 27.6 gross acre site with the balance being improved as a linear public park along the entire southern boundary and MTA right-of-way. Approximately sixteen existing oak trees in the central portion of the site will be preserved in a 1.4-acre passive open space area. The product mix includes fifty-three single-family detached homes, on average four thousand six hundred square-feet lots and floor plans ranging from two thousand two hundred ninety-eight square feet to two thousand five hundred forty-eight square feet in size. Twenty-six of the fifty-three single-family detached homes (forty-nine percent) are single story homes. In addition, the product mix also includes eighty-seven attached homes included in twenty-nine townhome buildings. Small, interior residential neighborhoods will be accessed from an east/west local “theme” street, providing direct access to detached homes and private drives for the triplex town-homes. The appearance of the townhomes will be that of a large single-family estate home and provide enhanced elevations as viewed from off-site.

The townhome units include floor plans ranging from one thousand three hundred thirty-five square-feet to one thousand nine hundred twenty square-feet in size. The gross density of the specific plan is 5.1 du/ac, including the linear public park.

As previously mentioned, a 4.6-acre linear park is planned along the southern boundary of the site. The park land would help serve as a connecting link from Foothill and Grand to Barranca and the Monrovia Nursery properties. Included in the linear park will be a twelve-foot multipurpose trail and associated exercise stations. All park design and improvements would be installed by the developer and maintained by the Arboreta HOA. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.070 Community outreach.
Community outreach provides residents and interested parties an opportunity to review and comment on the project, work collaboratively with the developer and provide input on solutions/mitigations of perceived and identified impacts. This outreach is an important component of the Arboreta specific plan.

Community ascertainment, a series of third-party interviews with key community stakeholders, was conducted to gain a preliminary idea of the neighborhood issues and concerns. Interviews were conducted with adjoining residents, residents in leadership roles from La Fetra Elementary School and Sandburg Middle School, as well as the schools’ principals and school district officials, given the proximity of the schools to the project. Additional meetings were held during the public review process including the scoping session for the environmental impact report, as well as outreach meetings with various neighborhoods to provide information on the plan and solicit further input prior to the public hearing process. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.080 Specific plan document organization.
The Arboreta specific plan defines a vision and establishes guidelines for the development of the site. The basic approach for preparing this specific plan has been to recognize the interrelationship between land use, design, regulation and sound economic, market and financial considerations. It should be noted that all statistics (acreage, densities, etc.) have been rounded to the tenth.

The specific plan is arranged into seven articles as follows:

Article I Executive Summary. This chapter includes a discussion on the intent and purpose of the specific plan, the authority and scope, a description of the site location, the project objectives, and an overview of the project.

Article II Planning Context. This chapter provides a summary of the existing conditions affecting the specific plan area, including existing city land use designations, existing and surrounding land use discussion and a summary of the existing infrastructure within the project area.

Article III Specific Plan Elements .Forming the core of the specific plan document, this article presents the land use plan for the project, including proposed land use designations, and discusses the proposed circulation, grading and infrastructure of the land use plan.

Article IV Development Standards. This article specifies the permitted and conditionally permitted uses in the proposed land use designation, and specifies standards for development, such as lot coverage, building height, setbacks, etc.

Article V Design Guidelines. Article V details a creative, yet flexible set of guidelines and design criteria for site planning, architecture and landscaping. These provide direction for streetscape improvements, project identification, hardscape elements and architectural guidelines.

Article VI Implementation. This article contains provisions for the financing and maintenance of improvements, a process for implementation of this specific plan and procedures for amending the specific plan. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

Article II. Planning Context
21.12.090 Jurisdictional considerations.
A.      General Plan. The city of Glendora general plan designations for the site are partially Light Industrial (LI) and partially Industrial Park (IP). These designations are intended to encourage general industrial and industrial park uses, including light manufacturing, assembly, fabricating and warehousing. A general plan amendment to medium density residential will be processed concurrently with the specific plan. The project proposes a gross density of 5.1 du/gross ac, which would be included in the general plan designation of medium residential. The medium density category allows for multiple-family, attached housing, and a variety of housing types including townhomes, duplexes, patio homes and single-family detached homes. Upon approval, the Arboreta project site will be subject to the design guidelines and development standards contained in this document as adopted or amended.

B.      Parks Master Plan. In November 2000, the city of Glendora prepared a new parks master plan to assess the adequacy of existing park facilities and to project the need for new facilities, based on existing deficiencies and future growth. The Rain Bird Property was identified to potentially provide a five to seven acre park land dedication.

C.      Zoning Ordinance. The site is currently zoned Limited Industrial (M-1A), and Industrial Park (IP) under the city’s zoning code. These designations generally allow for a range of manufacturing uses. A zone change to specific plan (SP) will be processed concurrently with the application package. A rezoning from limited industrial and industrial park to specific plan will be required in order to implement the project. The specific plan designation will allow single-family and multi-family residential units at an overall density of 5.1 units per gross acre and 6.09 dwellings units per net acre and 6.1 dwelling units per net acre. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.100 Existing conditions.
Existing physical site conditions on and directly adjacent to the subject site are illustrated in site photographs. Refer to Exhibits 3A, 3B and 3C, Existing Conditions.

Exhibit 3A
EXISTING CONDITIONS



Exhibit 3B
EXISTING CONDITIONS



 

Exhibit 3C
EXISTING CONDITIONS



 

A.      Land Uses on Site. Current land uses on the site include office, research and development, parking and unoccupied property. Refer to Exhibit 4, Existing/Surrounding Land Use.

B.      Surrounding Land Uses and Relationship. The Arboreta specific plan area is surrounded by the following land uses, as depicted on Exhibit 4, Existing/Surrounding Land Uses:

1.       North: Two schools, single-family residential;

2.       East: Commercial center, single-family residential.

3.       South: MTA Railroad right-of-way, single-family residential, office and research and development uses.

4.       West: Monrovia Nursery operations, single-family residential.

 

Exhibit 4
EXISTING/SURROUNDING LAND USE



 

C.      Traffic and Circulation. The project boundary is Barranca Avenue to the west, single-family homes and Bennett Avenue to the north and Grand Avenue to the east. Primary access to the specific plan area will be provided from Grand Avenue and secondary access will be from Bennett Avenue. A traffic study will be completed as part of the EIR process.

D.      Aesthetics. The specific plan area contains significant unoccupied and underutilized properties including modular offices, a two-story office building and a product testing center. The specific plan addresses aesthetic and visual quality issues by providing a range of architectural style and significant landscaping for the site.

E.       Public Utilities and Facilities. Provisions for electrical, natural gas, telephone and cable television services will be made prior to development of the specific plan area. All services are available and can be extended by each representative company to meet the project’s needs. Utility providers are as follows:

Electrical: Southern California Edison Company;

Natural gas: Southern California Gas Company;

Telephone: Pacific Bell;

Cable television: Adelphia.

1.       Water. The site will be served by the city of Glendora water system, which has facilities directly adjacent to the site. The existing water distribution system includes a ten-inch water main in Grand Avenue and a six-inch water main in Bennett Avenue. Additionally, an eight-inch water main traverses the site, starting at Grand Avenue and continuing westerly to vacated Valencia Street, and then extending along the vacated street area, connecting to the existing eight inch water main in Bennett Avenue.

2.       Sewer. An eight-inch public sewer line exists in the specific plan area and is available to provide service to the project.

3.       Drainage. In the pre-development condition, the specific plan area is divided into two distinct drainage areas, which, for the purpose of the study, are referred to as the West Basin and the East Basin. Both basins are comprised of natural and improved areas as depicted on Exhibit 11, Conceptual Drainage Plan (Existing). The improved impervious areas consist of the Rain Bird Corporation’s headquarters, a manufacturing facility and associated paved parking areas, driveways and pathways. These improved areas encompass approximately seven acres of the 27.6-acre specific plan area, or twenty-five percent. This partially accounts for the minimal increase in runoff from the pre-developed to post-developed condition as summarized on Exhibit 11A, Post Development Hydrology.

A Los Angeles County flood control district facility, known as Hook Canyon Channel, crosses the central portion of the site from north to south within an easement along the alignment of vacated Valencia Street. The facility, as it crosses the property, is an underground ten feet by seven feet reinforced concrete box culvert. The hydrology study for Hook Canyon Channel indicates that all but a small portion of the west side of the specific plan area is planned to drain into the facility.

Generally, rainfall runoff from both the West and East Basin areas’ sheet flows southerly off of the property onto the north half of the A.T. & S.F. Railroad right-of-way. Runoff from the East Basin flows westerly within the railroad and is intercepted by Hook Canyon Channel near the center of the property. Runoff from the West Basin area flows westerly within the railroad and is intercepted by an existing storm drain facility in Barranca Avenue. Since the railroad right-of-way presently accepts and conveys runoff from the specific plan area, and since the railroad  right-of-way will continue to contribute runoff to both Hook Canyon Channel and the Barranca storm drain post-development, the acreage of the north half of the railroad right-of-way has been included in the study. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.110 Opportunities and constraints.
The land use plan presented in Article III Specific Plan Elements, was designed to incorporate existing physical site opportunities and constraints. These include:

A.      Opportunities.

1.       Surrounding residential character;

2.       Relatively flat terrain;

3.       Existing oak trees;

4.       Direct access to arterial roadways, 210 freeway;

5.       Walkability to two adjacent schools and commercial center.

B.      Constraint.

1.       Public utility easement;

2.       Existing general plan, zoning;

3.       Adjacent residential conditions/rear yards;

4.       Existing railroad right-of-way;

5.       Narrow frontage on Barranca;

6.       Irregular site configuration. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

Article III. Specific Plan Elements
21.12.120 Land use plan.
The proposed new community described in the Arboreta specific plan will represent a change from the site’s current office/research and development uses. The land use concept, shown in Exhibit 5, provides an overall vision and guide for the ultimate development of the site. The design approach includes a more compatible land use with the existing residential community than the industrial designation in the general plan and zoning. The architectural design and residential uses would upgrade the character of the surrounding residential area and help buffer existing noise impacts from the adjacent MTA Railroad right-of-way to existing residences and schools north of Bennett Avenue, and provide urgently needed housing. The plan proposes a gated community, creating a blend of residential product types in a pedestrian-friendly environment. A 1.4-acre oak tree preservation area is included in the center of the site, offering passive recreation opportunities. A private neighborhood pool area is located within the triplex area to serve the active recreational needs of the new Arboreta community. A tot lot, located on the perimeter of the oak preserve, will also serve the needs of the Arboreta community. A tot lot, located on the perimeter of the oak preserve, will also serve the needs of the Arboreta community. A 4.6-acre linear park is included along the southern boundary of the study area. This park land will be designed and improved by the applicant, and maintenance will be the responsibility of the community’s homeowner’s association. The specific plan allows a maximum of up to one hundred forty single-family detached and attached homes at an overall community density of 5.1 units per acre (6.1 units per acre net density without park), consisting of fifty-three single-family detached homes, and eighty-seven attached homes arranged in townhome clusters.

 

Exhibit 5
ILLUSTRATED SITE PLAN



 

Table 1, Proposed Land Use Summary, presents a statistical summary of the proposed development. It is the intent of the specific plan to give the vision, design intent and development standards unique and specific to this community. As such, the standards are different than those in conventional Glendora zones, but are based on establishing new communities in Southern California. The approval of this specific plan ensures both the city and developer that an exceptional cohesive community will be created.

Table 1
Proposed Land Use Summary

 

 

Land Use Description

Total Dwelling Units 53 86 140

Gross Acres 13.6 9.4 4.6 27.6 23.0

Single-family detached homes
Attached homes
Neighborhood park
Total
Net density without park
 
Gross Density 3.9 du/ac 9.4 du/ac 5.1 du/ac 6.1 du/ac



1Gross average includes roadways, passive park, slopes.

 

The single-family detached homes will offer four floor plans, with up to four bedrooms, and square-footages ranging from two thousand two hundred ninety-eight square-feet to two thousand five hundred forty-eight square-feet. Two of the four plans are single-story homes concentrated along the existing Bennett residences and sprinkled throughout the neighborhood. All plans will include a two-car, enclosed garage with roll-up garage doors. The townhomes will include floor plans ranging from one thousand three hundred thirty-five square-feet to one thousand nine hundred twenty square-feet. All plans will have a two-car garage with roll-up garage doors, three bedrooms and two and a half baths, except for the carriage unit, which includes two bedrooms and two baths. The typical townhome building measures approximately seventy-two feet by seventy-two feet. The homes will typically be clustered around common open space and back into alleys, which function as the access drive to the homes. Each attached home will feature private open space within a patio. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.130 Circulation.
A.      Project Circulation/Access. The circulation concept for the site consists of a system of private, internal streets to provide access to all residences. All streets are private except for the initial portion of the entry road, which will be public. The project is gated, with the primary entry on Grand Avenue and the secondary entry on Bennett Avenue, as shown in Exhibit 6, Circulation Plan. The primary entrance will feature accent trees and a special landscape treatment. The primary community entry road will consist of a short, gently curving street providing access to the neighborhood park to the south, and to the entry gate to the community to the west. The public road portion will end at a location indicated on the tentative map. The primary internal roadway will have a forty-foot wide pavement width (consisting of twelve-foot wide travel ways in each direction and eight-foot wide parking stalls on both sides of the street), and a ten-foot parkway (including a four-foot sidewalk at right-of-way and five-foot curb adjacent landscape parkway) on both sides of the street. The proposed on-site circulation system will include a series of private drives for the townhomes, taking direct access off the primary internal roadway.

Exhibit 7, Typical Street Sections, illustrates cross sections for the interior roadways, private drives and common drives for the project.

B.      Parking Considerations. A total of two hundred eighty resident parking spaces two per unit) and three hundred fifty nine guest parking spaces will be provided within the specific plan area. Resident spaces are all in enclosed garages. Guest spaces include a total of one hundred six driveway spaces in single-family lots and two hundred fifty-three on-street spaces. Overall, this total equates to approximately two and one-half guest parking spaces per dwelling unit.

 

Exhibit 6
CIRCULATION PLAN



 

Exhibit 7
TYPICAL STREET SECTIONS



 

(Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.140 Conceptual grading plan.
A.      A preliminary grading plan that accommodates the site plan requirements of the Arboreta community is illustrated on Exhibit 8, Conceptual Grading Plan.

 

Exhibit 8
CONCEPTUAL GRADING PLAN

 



 

In its existing state, the site is relatively flat, precluding the need for extensive grading. The grading concept was designed to ensure compatibility between the surrounding neighborhoods, particularly the eighteen homes on Bennett Avenue which back onto the northern property line and rear yards of the proposed single-family homes in the project. Specific goals and grading design considerations incorporated into Exhibit 8 and the tentative map for Arboreta include the following:

1.       Lowered pad elevations adjacent to Bennett Avenue, to minimize the visual impact of proposed home sites. Pad elevations range from five to fourteen feet below adjacent street or lot grades.

2.       Preservation of approximately sixteen existing California live oak trees within the passive park. All other healthy oak trees, as determined by the city arborist, shall be relocated on-site.

3.       Preservation of the existing utility easement extending north/south, generally in the center of the site.

4.       Raised pad elevations above the railroad right-of-way, between three to eighteen feet above the track elevation.

B.      The total preliminary earthwork quantities for the cut and fill grading operation will be in the range of sixty-six thousand one hundred cubic yards of cut and fifty-two thousand nine hundred cubic yards of fill. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.150 Public facilities and service.
A.      Water. The specific plan area will be served by Zone 1 of the city of Glendora water system. Zone 1 is served by three reservoirs designated as 1A, 1B and 1C, with a combined capacity of fourteen million gallons. In addition, the city is currently in the design stages of a project to add a three and one-half million gallon reservoir at the city yard site to serve Zone 1, with completion expected to take one to one and a half years for the new reservoir.

Water system demands for the project will include domestic demand and fire suppression demand. Typical average daily demand for domestic uses in the city of Glendora is one hundred gallons per person, per day. Typical maximum daily demand for domestic uses is one hundred eighty-five gallons per person, per day. Using the specific plan area’s proposed one hundred forty dwelling units at an estimated 3.01 persons per dwelling unit, the maximum daily demand for potable water for the proposed project is expected to be seventy-seven thousand nine hundred fifty-nine gpd. In preliminary discussions, the city has indicated that Zone 1 is presently capable of supplying the demand for the project. At this time, there is not a source of reclaimed water for landscape irrigation purposes in the city of Glendora.

Fire suppression flows are determined by the Los Angeles County fire department, which is the fire authority in the city of Glendora. The typical flow requirements for the proposed residential uses are one thousand two hundred fifty gallons per minute at a twenty psi residual.

The existing water distribution system in the vicinity of the specific plan area consists of a ten-inch water main in Grand Avenue, a six-inch water main in Bennett Avenue from Grand Avenue west to Valencia Street, an eight-inch water main in Bennett Avenue from Valencia Street west to a point easterly of Barranca Avenue, where it reduces to a six-inch water main and continues west connecting to an eight-inch water main in Barranca Avenue. In addition, an eight inch water main traverses the specific plan area starting at Grand Avenue and continuing through the property westerly to vacated Valencia Street and then north along the vacated street area connecting to the existing eight-inch water main in Bennett Avenue. This waterline currently provides service to the existing commercial and industrial uses on the property, but due to its location, would not be useful to the project and will be abandoned and removed as part of the development.

As a part of the specific plan area development, a new water distribution system designed to the standards and specifications of the city of Glendora will be constructed within the proposed streets. Glendora typically operates and maintains systems constructed to its required specifications. It is intended that the water system for the specific plan area be designed and constructed as such and ultimately turned over to the city of Glendora for maintenance. Easements will be granted to the city over the private streets and private lot areas as needed to allow for the existence of water mains and their operation and maintenance. The approximate location of the water system for the proposed development is shown on Exhibit 9.

 

Exhibit 9
CONCEPTUAL WATER PLAN

 



 

B.      Sewer. An eight-inch public sewer line exists within the specific plan area and is available to provide service to the proposed project. The existing line lies within an easement of the city of Glendora that was reserved at the time the portion of Valencia Street within the property was vacated by the city. The line runs south from Bennett Avenue through the subject property, under the MTA Railroad right-of-way and into existing Valencia Street south of the railroad. The line continues south in Valencia Street to Foothill Boulevard, where it connects to an existing trunk line.

The new sewer system within the project will be designed and constructed to conform to the requirements of the city of Glendora and the Los Angeles County department of public works and will be maintained by the consolidated sewer maintenance district of Los Angeles County. Easements for the existence and maintenance of the sewer system will be granted to the city of Glendora over the private streets and lots within the project as necessary.

Underground pipelines to a joint outfall system convey sewage flows from the city of Glendora. This system directs flows to the San Jose Creek water reclamation plant in the city of Industry. Los Angeles County sanitation district No. 22 operates this facility and the project will need to be annexed into this district. In the event of policy change, the city will take over maintenance of the sewer system. Refer to Exhibit 10, Sewer Plan.

 

Exhibit 10
CONCEPTUAL SEWER PLAN



C.      Drainage. A hydrology study has been prepared that analyzes the twenty-five-year storm runoff for both the pre-development and post-development conditions of the specific plan area. The Los Angeles County flood control district’s modified rational method hydrology for the twenty-five-year storm event was used in preparing the study. Exhibit 11, Existing Hydrology Plan, depicts the pre-development condition; Exhibit 11A, Post Development Hydrology, depicts the post-development condition, and Exhibit 11B summarizes and compares the findings of both previous plans in the proposed drainage plan.

Exhibit 11
EXISTING HYDROLOGY



 

Exhibit 11A

POST-DEVELOPMENT HYDROLOGY



 

Exhibit 11B
CONCEPTUAL DRAINAGE PLAN



1.       Pre-Development Condition. In the pre-development condition, the specific plan area is divided into two distinct drainage areas, which, for the purpose of the study, are referred to as the West Basin and the East Basin. Both basins are comprised of natural and improved areas as depicted on Exhibit 11, Existing Hydrology. The improved impervious areas consist of the Rain Bird Corporation’s headquarters, a manufacturing facility and associated paved parking areas, driveways and pathways. These improved areas encompass approximately seven acres of the 27.6-acre specific plan area, or twenty-five percent. This partially accounts for the minimal increase in runoff from the pre-developed to the post-developed condition summarized on Exhibit 11A, Post Development Hydrology.

A Los Angeles County Flood Control District facility known as Hook Canyon Channel crosses the central portion of the site from north to south within an easement along the alignment of vacated Valencia Street. The facility, as it crosses the property, is an underground ten foot by seven foot reinforced concrete box culvert. The hydrology study of Hook Canyon Channel indicates all but a small portion of the west side of the specific plan is planned to drain into the facility.

Generally, rainfall runoff from both the West and the East Basin areas sheet flows southerly off the property onto the north half of the MTA Railroad right-of-way. Runoff from the East Basin flows westerly within the railroad and is intercepted by the Hook Canyon Channel near the center of the property. Runoff from the West Basin area flows westerly within the railroad and is intercepted by an existing storm drain facility in Barranca Avenue. Since the railroad right-of-way presently accepts and conveys runoff from the specific plan area, and since the railroad right-of-way will continue to contribute runoff to both the Hook Canyon Channel and the Barranca storm drain post-development, the acreage of the north half of the railroad right-of-way has been included in the study.

2.       Post Development Condition. Onsite storm drain facilities will be designed to conform to an approved hydrology study and generally according to the proposed drainage plan shown on Exhibit 11B. The conceptual drainage plan for the proposed project includes interior streets fully improved with curbs, gutters and paving that will be used as mechanisms to convey runoff flows to a storm drain system consisting of catch basins and pipes placed at strategic locations within the streets. Runoff from the proposed lots will drain to the adjoined street via graded swales or to acceptable drainage device such as a yard drain or pipe. The proposed onsite storm drain systems will tie directly to the existing Hook Canyon Channel and Barranca Avenue storm drains.

Onsite storm drain facilities will either be maintained by the project homeowner’s association as private facilities or turned over to Los Angeles County flood control district for maintenance via the miscellaneous transfer drain (MTD) process. The facilities will be designed and constructed in conformance with the standards of both the flood control district and the city of Glendora. All required easements for access and maintenance would also be provided as a part of the MTD process. The design will also include the preparation and implementation of a Standard urban stormwater mitigation plan (SUSMP) for compliance with the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).

Post-development flows can be expected to exceed the pre-development flows due to possible increases in the percentage of impervious surfaces after development, slight variations in the tributary area to the particular facility and due to changes in the calculation methods and criteria between now and the time when the existing storm drain. facilities were constructed. The increase in the peak flows due to these factors will be mitigated by on-site detention in a manner satisfactory to both the city of Glendora and the county of Los Angeles public works departments.

D.      Utilities. Provisions for electrical, natural gas, telephone and cable television services will be made prior to the development of the specific plan area. All services are available and can be extended by each representative company to meet the project’s demands.  Utility providers are as follows:

1.       Electrical: Southern California Edison Company.

2.       Natural gas: Southern California Gas Company.

3.       Telephone: Pacific Bell.

4.       Cable television: Adelphia.

Any overhead utility lines that exist along the project’s frontage on Grand, Bennett, and Barranca Avenues and are not transmission lines may have to be placed underground as part of the development.  The existing overhead utility lines, which serve the existing homes along the northern boundary of the property on the south side of Bennett Avenue, will remain in place and be protected throughout the course of the project’s construction.

Solid waste disposal service is provided to the project site by the city of Glendora.

E.       Public Transportation. The Foothill Transit Authority and city mini-bus service the city of Glendora. The 187-East line travels east west from Pasadena to Montclair. The 276-South line travels from the Sunny Hills Mall in the city of Industry to Citrus College in the city of Glendora.

F.       Police, Fire, Hospital. The project site is serviced by the Glendora police department with the nearest station located at the Civic Center Complex, 150 S. Glendora Avenue.

The nearest Fire Station is Fire Station No. 151, located at 231 W. Mountain View.

Foothill Presbyterian Hospital is a full-service hospital and is located on Grand Avenue north of Route 66.

G.      Schools. The project site is within the Glendora Unified School District. La Fetra Elementary and Sandburg Middle School are directly adjacent to the project on Bennett Avenue.  The project will be served by local schools as determined in the EIR. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.160 Oak tree preservation.
A.      The 27.6-acre site for Arboreta includes a number of non-native and native trees, including California live oaks and several California walnut trees.  The trees are primarily located in the northern and central portion of the site. Some of the larger oak trees, approximately sixteen, have been incorporated into the conceptual plan of the project in a passive open space park, adjacent to single-family homes. The applicant will hire a certified arborist to prepare a tree study that ensures appropriate measures are taken with respects to the trees on the site.

B.      The EIR will include mitigation measures and guidelines to preserve the oak trees during construction and over the life of the project. These measures may include:

1.       Grading interface to the drip line and trunk;

2.       Horizontal setbacks to limbs, trunks from fences, walks and streets;

3.       Drainage around trees;

4.       Long-term maintenance;

5.       Irrigation requirements;

6.       Pruning to remove dead or broken limbs or approve the overall health of the tree.

C.      These mitigation measures will be defined in an oak tree conservation plan to be prepared by a certified arborist as part of the tree study and incorporated into the project EIR. Ultimate responsibility for the long-term maintenance of the oak trees will be the responsibility of the master homeowner association. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

Article IV. Development Standards
21.12.170 General regulations and conditions.
The Arboreta specific plan is intended to promote infill development of the project site into a new residential neighborhood, with an adjacent neighborhood park. The intent of the proposed regulations is to guide residential development within this community, thereby creating a high quality residential environment and bring new vitality into an unoccupied, underutilized area. These regulations set forth permitted uses and development standards for the specific plan area. The Arboreta specific plan housing types and lot sizes vary from the standard city zoning standards, and, in the interest of a varied and imaginative project design, a change of zone to “specific plan” is proposed.

The development regulations included herein shall apply to areas within the Arboreta specific plan boundaries only. The specific plan development regulations shall supersede the provisions, standards and requirements of the Glendora Zoning Ordinance, except in those instances where the specific plan development regulations remain silent or unclear. In instances where the specific plan development regulations do not address specific issues or other relevant considerations, the Glendora Zoning Ordinance shall apply. Where the specific plan’s provisions, standards and requirements differ from those of the Glendora Zoning Ordinance, the former shall take precedence.

A.      Gated Entry Operation. Approval of gates and mechanisms shall be approved by the city of Glendora public works department and police department and Los Angeles County fire department.

B.      Bennett Avenue Entry Gate. The Bennett Avenue entry gate shall be closed as an exit with the exception of emergency egress during La Fetra Elementary School and Sandburg Middle School morning drop off and afternoon pick up times (currently identified as seven thirty a.m. to eight thirty a.m. and one p.m. to two forty-five p.m.) Monday through Friday. The development shall adjust this closure time as needed as the school schedules change over time. Signs shall be posted to notify traffic of the hours of operation for the Bennett Avenue gates and shall direct traffic to use the Grand Avenue entrance during these restricted time periods. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.180 Permitted uses/residential.
A.      Permitted Uses.

1.       Single-family detached and attached residential dwellings.

2.       Contractor’s office and/or storage of construction materials and equipment within the specific plan boundaries will be allowed during the period of construction and not to exceed sixty days thereafter.

3.       Common open space lots and parks to be maintained by the homeowner’s association.

4.       For the purposes of this specific plan, accessory structures shall include those structures articulated in Section 21.12.190.

5.       Accessory buildings and structures are prohibited.

6.       Home occupation uses subject to Section 21.04.010(A)(3) of this code.

7.       Temporary model home and subdivision sales office (subject to development plan review).

8.       Temporary subdivision sales signage, in accordance with the Glendora sign ordinance.

B.      Uses Permitted Subject to a Conditional Use Permit.

1.       Child day care facility. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.190 Residential development standards.
Tables 2a and 2b, Residential Development Standards, follows and sets forth the building setbacks, maximum height and other requirements for residential development of the Arboreta specific plan. Additional residential development standards include the following:

A.      Patios. Open patios with trellis or lattice-work overhead structures that are attached to a single-family residence may project into the required rear yard setback, but no closer than ten feet to the rear property line.

B.      Deck Structures. Second story deck structures may project five feet into the rear setback except Lots 1-20. No decks allowed due to existing residences.

C.      Covered Porch Structures. Covered single-story porch structures that are attached to a single-family residence may project into the required front yard setback, but no closer than ten feet from the right-of-way of the private street (back of walk).

No additions or alterations that expand approved floor area for any unit in the Arboreta specific plan are permitted.

All first story additions require design review approval. Development plan review approval is required for second story additions.

D.      Balconies. Second floor covered or uncovered balconies may not project beyond the building setbacks and are restricted to one side of the building. Balconies may not exceed two hundred square-feet with the maximum dimensions of ten feet in depth and twenty-five feet in length.

 

 

TABLE 2a

Detached Residential Development Standards (SFD)

 

SFD

Minimum lot area (sq. ft.)

As approved by the TTM

Maximum bldg. height (ft./stories)

25'/2 stories1

Minimum bldg. setbacks

 

       Front2

Residence* 15'

 

Front porch* 10'

       Side (ft.)3

5'

       Rear (ft.)

Residence rear setbacks are denoted by the approved ttm site plan included as part of the specific plan*

Garage door4,5 (ft.)

20'*

Minimum distance between residences and garages on adjacent parcels (ft.)

10'

Minimum unit size

2,000 sq. ft.

Maximum perimeter walls height (ft.)

6'

Minimum garage space per unit

2/unit 20 x 20 interior-clear*

Minimum guest parking spaces

0.3/unit

Minimum back out distance, measured to street

25'

Floor area ratio (FAR)

Established by approved TTM site plan. No increase in interior living area or garage area permitted

 

Notes:

1.      Height as measured from any point on the roof to finish grade at the nearest exterior wall. Chimneys are exempt from the height limitation.

2.      Porches may encroach into the front setback, but no closer than ten feet to the property line.

3.      Side yard setback excludes exterior projections such as bay windows, media niches and chimneys which may protrude a maximum of two feet into side yard. Refer to Section 21.12.190(F) for explanation of shared use easements.

4.      Final perimeter wall heights shall comply with recommendations of the noise study.

5.      Garage doors shall be roll up doors.

6.      Garage space shall not be converted to living space.

*       No alteration permitted.

 

 

TABLE 2b

Attached Residential Development Standards (SFA)

 

SFA

Minimum lot area

As approved by the TTM

Maximum bldg. height (ft./stories)

28'/2 stories2

Minimum bldg. setbacks

Established by approved TTM site plan. No increase in interior living area or garage area permitted

       Front

10'*

       Side

10'*

       Rear garage door1

3'

       Rear projections

2'

Minimum bldg. separations

 

       Front to front

20'*

       Side to side

15'*

       Garage door to garage door

30'*

       Alley width (between rolled curbs)

24'*

       Clear to sky alley width

26'*

Minimum unit size (sq. ft.)

1,200

Maximum perimeter walls height

6'

Minimum garage parking space per unit

2/unit 20 x 20 interior clear interior space*

Minimum guest parking spaces

0.3/unit

Floor area ratio (FAR)

Established by approved TTM. No increase in interior living area or garage area permitted

 

Notes:

1.      Garage doors shall be roll up doors.

2.      Height as measured from any point on the roof to finish grade at the nearest exterior wall. Chimneys are exempt from the height limitation.

*       No alteration permitted.

 

Figure 1. Typical Shared Use Easement

 



 

E.       Accessory Structures. The planning director and the HOA shall consider the following structures permittable accessory structures with approval of a design review application: pools, spas, outdoor ﬁreplaces, ﬁre pits, and built-in barbeques.

F.       Shared Use Easements. A shared use easement to allow adjacent property owners to share use of their neighbors’ property is proposed within the single-family detached homes in Arboreta.

In particular, a five-foot wide use easement will occur in the side yard between Plans 2 and 3, as shown in Figure 1. The Plan 2 lot grants a use easement to the Plan 3 lot, to be utilized for a portion of the Plan 3 driveway and adjacent landscaping. No building setback standards, as described in Table 2a, are altered. The proposed lot line between Plans 2 and 3 is “jogged,” to accommodate a consistent five-foot side yard setback for both plans.

This concept is an improved adaptation of the “zero lot line” concept, which only allowed windows and lighting on three sides of the home on the property line; here windows are allowed on four sides. The deep recess garage in Plan 3 provides for a richer streetscene, with reduced appearance of garage doors on the street.

G.      Mechanical Equipment.

1.       Single-Family Detached Homes. Mechanical equipment shall be located only in side or rear setback areas and no closer than three feet to any property line. All air conditioning units shall be screened from view from the street.

2.       Single-Family Attached Homes. Mechanical equipment shall be screened from view from streets or paseo sidewalk areas.

H.      Recreational Facilities. Additional recreational facilities or modifications proposed after approval of the original specific plan such as a neighborhood pool and tot lot shall be reviewed and approved by the city with a design review application. (Ord. 1983 § 15, 2014; Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.200 Common open space lots and parks.
Common open space lots and parks are to be identified on a site development plan and will be maintained by the homeowner’s association. The following uses are permitted within open space lots:

1.       Neighborhood pool and spa;

2.       Park furniture and amenities;

3.       Landscape lots;

4.       Barbecue/picnic areas;

5.       Children’s play area(s)/ tot lot;

6.       Access and service roads;

7.       Sidewalks;

8.       Public utilities;*

9.       Utility easements or rights-of-way.*

*Public utilities within common open space lots and parks must be installed underground.

(Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.210 Supplemental standards.
A.      General. Temporary modular buildings such as portable buildings or mobile homes are prohibited, except as identified in Section 21.12.180(A), Permitted Uses.

B.      Landscaping.

1.       All required landscape areas shall be provided with permanent and adequate (commercial grade irrigation where appropriate) means of irrigation. All public or common landscaping shall be installed and maintained in such a manner as to not interfere with maintenance or repair of any utility to not restrict pedestrian or vehicular access, and to not constitute a traffic hazard by reducing visibility.

2.       All landscaping and irrigation improvements shall be installed by the developer, maintained by the project’s homeowner’s association, shall not be altered by any homeowner without prior consent or approval by such HOA landscape improvements by the developer shall include common areas for the attached homes, slopes, passive park and street parkways.

3.       The homeowner’s association shall maintain all landscape and irrigation in public and common areas in a lush and healthy condition or in the case of irrigation in perfect function at all times. Public and common area landscaping shall include but not be limited to all open space areas, passive park areas, hook drainage easement area, streets and street trees, all entryway/gateway landscape areas, and all perimeter open space areas within and surrounding the subdivision. All landscape and irrigation shall be maintained by the HOA in substantial conformance with the approved master landscape and irrigation plan.

4.       Street trees as identified on the approved master landscape and irrigation plan shall be maintained by the HOA. If a tree dies or is removed, it shall be replaced by the HOA with a similar species and size within sixty days.

5.       Oak trees as identified on the tree preservation plan prepared by an arborist approved by the city shall be maintained by the HOA in conformance with the approved the approved tree preservation plan. Unauthorized removal of trees or significant limbs shall result in inch per inch replacement by the HOA at the direction of the city and an approved arborist.

6.       All screening trees established by the approval of the specific plan shall be maintained by the HOA and/or property owner in lush and healthy condition. If any screening tree dies or is removed, it shall be replaced by the HOA and/or property owner with a similar species and size within sixty days.

7.       The HOA shall ensure that all single-family detached lot front yard areas are maintained in a lush, healthy and functional condition consistent with the intent of the Arboreta specific plan. The HOA shall review and approve all front yard landscaping improvements excluding public area and street tree improvements (which are approved through the master landscape and irrigation plan) to ensure consistency with overall aesthetic intent of the Arboreta specific plan.

C.      Walls and Fences.

1.       A six-foot masonry wall shall be provided around the perimeter of the specific plan area, in conformance with final fence/wall plan approved by city. Final wall heights shall conform to the recommendations of the EIR.

2.       A block wall will not be allowed between the linear public park and the new homes.

3.       Interior property line walls/fencing shall comply with the final wall/fence plan approved by the city. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.220 Parking standards.
Parking standards of the city of Glendora Zoning Ordinance shall apply to development within the Arboreta specific plan area, except as defined herein.

1.       Guest vehicles may remain on the streets during evening hours.

2.       Accessory vehicles, such as motorcycles, boats, all terrain vehicles, etc., shall be parked within an enclosed garage.

3.       Parking within common drives is prohibited at all times. No vehicle shall be parked continuously on private streets within the project for any period in excess of seventy-two hours. Vehicles parked in violation of these requirements are subject to towing and the requirement enforced by the HOA.

4.       Recreational vehicle parking is prohibited.

5.       Resident and guest parking shall conform with Tables 2a and 2b, Residential Development Standards. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.230 Satellite dish antennae.
Satellite dish antennae are permitted provided they blend with the architectural style of the dwelling, and are not visible from surrounding roadways and are approved by the HOA.

A.      Home Occupations/Business.

1.       Shall conform to Section 21.04.010(A)(3) of the Glendora Municipal Code. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.240 Nonresidential standards.
The open space parks and recreation uses within Arboreta shall comply with standards for height, setbacks, parking, etc. as part of the design review process with the city.

The nonresidential portion of the specific plan includes the 4.6-acre linear public park, 1.4-acre passive park, tot lot, and private neighborhood pool. Regulations for these uses are included in nonresidential development standards.

A.      Linear Public Park. The specific plan includes a 4.6-acre linear park. All permanent structures in the linear park (exercise stations, picnic tables and multi-purpose trail) shall maintain a minimum fifty-foot setback between any residential structure and/or the project entry street and the proposed structure. The developer shall install the park and the master HOA shall maintain the public park and the private recreation and park areas.

B.      Passive Park. The specific plan includes a 1.4-acre passive park for the use of the residents within the specific plan. All permanent structures shall be limited to seating and walkways. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.250 Rubbish and recycling.
Placement for collection and storage of all solid waste and recycling containers shall be consistent with Section 6.08 of the Glendora Municipal Code. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.260 Affordable housing.
As required by the city, an in-lieu fee will be paid on a per unit basis. This fee will be deposited into a special affordable housing fund established by the city for development of affordable housing in compliance with the city’s housing element, consistent with the development agreement as approved by the city council. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

Article V. Design Guidelines
21.12.270 Site planning concept.
The layout of lots and streets as shown on Exhibit 5, Illustrative Site Plan, is conceptual and shall remain slightly flexible in terms of layout, location and specific home orientation, so long as the development is in substantial conformance with approved subdivision for the Arboreta specific plan.

The overall community design concept for Arboreta is that of a gated, private, lifestyle that reflects the quiet residential nature of the surrounding community. Pedestrian linkages are provided to inter-connect all homesites with the passive park and neighborhood park. The focus of the site plan is an inward orientation, towards the central streetscene and outward, with sensitivity to visual impacts to the surrounding perimeter streets.

A.      Site Planning Measures. Specific site planning goals and techniques utilized in creation of the Illustrated Site Plan, Exhibit 5, include:

1.       New adjacent single-family detached residences, which abut homes that front on Bennett shall all be single story, and shall incorporate increased rear year setbacks as established on the tentative tract map from the rear property line, including room additions, living space, decks and single story structures.

2.       Passive open space adjacent to five single-family detached residences fronting on Bennett Avenue, as a rear yard buffer.

3.       Varied massing of rear elevations of single-family detached and side elevations of townhome units facing Bennett Avenue and the MTA Railroad right-of-way.

4.       Varied setbacks for single-family detached residences and town-home buildings facing Bennett Avenue and the MTA Railroad right-of-way.

5.       Lowered pad elevations for single-family detached residences and townhome buildings, below street grade along Bennett Avenue, to minimize the visual impact of building masses.

6.       Varied garage placement for single-family detached residences, setbacks and massing along the central community streetscene.

7.       Varied residential elevations along the central community streetscene (single-family frontage and side elevations of townhomes.) (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.280 Architectural character.
Arboreta is envisioned as a traditional neighborhood with two building types; single-family and attached. Neighborhood architecture includes eclectic Spanish, Craftsman, and Traditional styles, “classic” styles with appropriate massing. These styles include a blend of architectural elements compatible with existing architectural character in surrounding neighborhoods. Some single story elements have been maintained in the proposed single-family detached and attached home design, to blend and complement the range of styles.

A.      Building Mass. Building massing is varied by style. The Traditional style includes a  two-story mass, true to style, while Craftsman has more movement, wall breaks, and single story elements.  The Spanish style includes more wall mass and introduces a deck in the front elevation in contrast.

B.      Roof Forms and Window Treatment. Proposed roof forms and window treatments are simple and classic, true to style, and vary per style. The Craftsman style introduces more gable end roofs, with more movement. Chimney treatments vary per style. Window treatments will also vary per style. With Spanish, windows are recessed or stucco trimmed. Craftsman style windows include trim that allows for color blocking. The Traditional style shutters and trim coincide with the siding.

C.      Additional Building Components.

1.       Accessory structures such as mailbox structures are designed so that they are consistent with the architectural style of the adjacent primary structures and compatible with the residential character of the neighborhood.

2.       Community walls will be of durable material (e.g., stone, masonry or stucco-covered block) and of a design and color consistent with the residential character. These walls will be a maximum of six feet in height and be generously landscaped to prevent them from becoming a dominant visual element of the streetscape.

3.       Sound walls as required shall include decorative elements to blend with approved architecture and community walls. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.290 Landscape architecture.
A.      Landscape Concept. The community landscape concept (see Exhibit 13, Conceptual Landscape Plan) is intended to create a distinctive, diverse environment that will lend identity and character to the specific plan area. Consistent treatment of all landscaped areas is critical to the creation of a high-quality outdoor environment. The proposed landscape features, including a neighborhood pool and tot lot, are designed to enhance the project’s interface with the surrounding environment and the adjacent community. The landscape concept suggests methods of treatments that might be considered. Alternative landscape concepts and designs that accomplish the stated objectives and intentions are permitted.

 

Exhibit 12A: CONCEPTUAL SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED HOMES



 

Exhibit 12B:CONCEPTUAL SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED HOMES



 

Exhibit 13:CONCEPTUAL LANDSCAPE PLAN

 



1.       Landscape treatments should utilize and adapt to landscape elements from the urban patterns found in the traditional neighborhoods of Southern California, including regularly planted shade trees and clustered plant groupings.

2.       Landscape treatments should incorporate colorful plant material and evergreen trees in areas where such accents are appropriate.

3.       Landscape improvements should require minimal maintenance and irrigation. The use of native and/or drought-tolerant plant material should be emphasized to the extent possible.

4.       All public areas and rights-of-way shall have automatic irrigation systems (commercial grade, where applicable). Low volume spray heads and drip irrigation systems should be used and be compatible with any reclaimed water systems utilized.

5.       Landscape plans shall consider service lines, traffic safety sight line requirements, and structures on adjacent properties to avoid conflicts as the trees and shrubs mature. Street trees and trees planted in privately owned landscaped areas near public walkways or street curbs should be selected and installed to prevent unreasonable damage to sidewalks, curbs, gutters and other public improvements.

6.       Tree species with invasive root systems shall be oriented away from water lines, sewer lines or public rights-of-way (see subsection D, Plant Palette).

7.       Landscape maintenance practices for public areas shall be provided by the HOA at regular intervals sufficient to promote plant health and appearance. Maintenance may include discing, mowing, pruning, clearing of debris, weed removal, replacement of dead plant material, and repair and replacement of non-functioning irrigation equipment.

8.       Street trees shall be located so as to not prevent effective solar access.

9.       All landscaping shall be maintained to prevent interference with emergency vehicle access.

10.     Fire protection measures within the Oak Tree Preservation Area (Passive Park) shall be consistent with applicable measures of the city of Glendora and Fire Marshal.

11.     Maintenance of Hook Channel easement landscape shall be managed by HOA consistent with other public area standards.

Exhibits 13(A)—(C) provide illustrated cross sections of key edge conditions surrounding the specific plan area, and proposed landscape treatments to help insure project compatibility with surrounding the neighborhood.

 

Exhibit 13A: PROPOSED SITE SECTIONS



Exhibit 13B: PROPOSED SITE SECTIONS





 

Exhibit 13C: PROPOSED SITE SECTIONS



 

B.      Streetscapes. The streetscape within the Arboreta will receive a distinct landscape design. The goal is to establish the neighborhood character with a street tree palette appropriate for the scale and architecture. Courtyard planting shall generally consist of vertical screen elements and flowering accent trees.

Street trees shall be consistent with the approved street tree or master landscape and irrigation plan.

1.       Landscape treatments should generally utilize formally planted street trees, unless otherwise specified.

2.       Street tree planting may generally utilize one or two (at the most) primary species for each street, consistent with approved master landscape and irrigation plan with a limited number of additional species used as accent.

3.       Landscape vines shall be planted along perimeter walls to provide a softened streetscape.

4.       In order to conserve water, landscaping of the ground plane may emphasize the use of shrubs, native grasses and mulches as well as turf.

5.       Landscaping in public areas shall minimize the use of groundcover. Turf will be specially designed into public, open space and entries.

6.       Masses of shrubs shall be limited to a few, extensively used species for each street. Variations to the basic species should selectively be used for accent and contrast.

7.       A landscaped parkway will be provided along the south edge property line, as indicated on the tentative map.

C.      Project Entries. Inspired by the architecture of the Green Brothers, the newest neighborhood in Glendora will welcome visitors with a Craftsman style entry to the project, using specimen coast live oaks with masses of ornamental grasses to create a rural feeling at the project entry. Beyond the entry, this theme is reinforced with a street lined forest of London Plane trees reminiscent of neighborhoods of the past. Special design emphasis is given to the main entry into the specific plan. The primary project entry will be enhanced with clusters of vertical screening elements and flowering accent trees on either side. The treatment of the primary and secondary entries will reinforce the overall community character while distinguishing the Arboreta project as a unique place.

The primary community entry is located off of Grand Avenue and is the most prominent point of arrival to the project (refer to Exhibit 14, Primary Community Entry). The landscape treatment will include:

1.       Monumentation;

2.       Interesting accent shrubs and trees;

3.       Accent paving in pedestrian or vehicular areas.

The secondary community entry is located off of Bennett Avenue. This entry will utilize similar landscape treatment elements such as pilasters, walls and themed plan materials and paving or other details established by the primary community entry.

 

Exhibit 14
PRIMARY COMMUNITY ENTRY FROM GRAND AVENUE



Exhibit 15

SECONDARY COMMUNITY ENTRY FROM BENNETT AVENUE

 



 

D.      Plant Palette. The following plant palette has been created to help reinforce the character of the specific plan. Species should be chosen for their ability to reinforce not only the community character, but also the areas where their presence has an influence. Plant selections shall be in substantial conformance with the approved master landscape and irrigation plan and may include, but not limited to, the following:

 

 

TREES

Botanical Name

Common Name

Platanus A. “Bloodgood”

London Plane Tree

Cinnamomum Camphora

Camphor Tree

Rhus Lancea

African Sumac

Magnolia “Little Gem”

Magnolia

Lagerstroemia L. “Muskogee”

Crape Myrtle

Pistachia Chinensis

Chinese Pistache

Prunus Caroliniana

Carolina Laurel Cherry

Quercus Agrifollia

Coast Live Oak

Brachychiton populneus

Bottle Tree

Cassia leptophylla

Gold Medallion Tree

Citrus species

Citrus

Eriobotrya deflexa

Bronze Loquat

Erythrina caffra

Kaffirboom Coral Tree

Erythrina coralloides

Naked Coral Tree

Eucalyptus species

Eucalyptus

Liquidambar styraciflua

American Sweet Gum

Melaleuca linariifolia

Flaxleaf Paperbark

Melaleuca nesophila

Pink Melaleuca

Olea europaea

Olive

Pinus canariensis

Canary Island Pine

Prunus halepensis

Allepo Pine

Tristania conferta

Brisbane Box

SHRUBS/GROUNDCOVER:

Botanical Name

Common Name

Agave Vilmoriniana

Octopus Agave

Callistemon “Little John”

Dwarf Bottlebrush

Rosmarinus O. “Prostratus

Dwarf Rosemary

Cistus Purpureus

Orchid Rockrose

Pittosporum Species

Mock Orange

Dietes Bicolor

Fortnight Lily

Lavandula Specikes

Lavender

Ligustrum Japonicum

Privet

Sesleria Atumnalis

Moor Grass

Artemisia californica*

California Sagebrush

Azalea species

Alaska Azalea

Baccharis pilularis “Twin Peaks”

Coyote Bush Prostrate

Bougainvillea species

Bougainvillea

Buxus japonica

Japanese Boxwood

Camellia japonica

Japanese Camellia

Carissa macrocarpa “Green Carpet”

Green Carpet Natal Plum

Coprosma x kirkii

Creeping Mirror Plant

Escallonia “fradesii”

Pink Princess Escallonia

Gardenia jasminoides

Cape-jasmine

Grevillea “Noellii”

Grevillea

Hemerocallis species

Day Lily

Hemerocallis hybrid “Mountain Violet”

Daylily

Hibiscus rosa-sinensis

Chinese Hibiscus(rose of China)

Juniperus chinensis species

Blue Vase Juniper

Kniphofia uvaria*

Red Hot Poker

Lantana species

Lantana

Mahonia repens

Creeping Mahonia

Myrtus communis

True Myrtle

Nandina domestica*

Heavenly Bamboo

Phormium tenax species

New Zealand Flax

Rhaphiolepis indica species

India Hawthorn

Rosa species

Hybrid Tea Rose/Carpet Rose

Salvia species

Sage

Santolina chamaecyparissus

Lavender Cotton

Solanum rantonnetti

Paraguay Nightshade

Trachelospermum jasminoides

Star Jasmine

Verbena peruviana

Verbena

VINES:

Botanical Name

Common Name

Rosa “Alba Plena”

Lady Banks Rose

Hardenbergia Violacea

Lilac Vine

Distictus Buccinatoria

Blood Red Trumpet Vine

 

E.       Walls and Fences. To create a distinctive community identity and cohesive streetscene, community walls of consistent material and design will be used along the majority of the perimeter of the specific plan area. Depending on their location within the community, walls provide privacy, enclose public and private spaces, establish character, enhance security and safety, and minimize impacts to surrounding areas. Exhibit 13, Conceptual Landscape Plan, illustrates the proposed wall and fence locations for the planned community.

 

Exhibit 16
TYPICAL WALL AND FENCE DETAILS

 



 

All walls and fences shall be in substantial conformance with the approved wall and fence plan.

General guidelines:

1.       Decorative walls and fences shall be limited to a maximum height of six feet and be constructed in concert with plant material described in the landscape plan. The height may be increased as necessary to address noise mitigation measures as may be required by the EIR.

2.       Retaining walls three feet or greater shall be designed by a qualified engineer and approved by the city.

3.       Walls and fences visible from public streets shall be constructed of durable, high-quality materials and shall display a high level of quality in finish and detail.

4.       Interior walls between single-family residential lots and separating rear yards between the project and Bennett Avenue residences shall be slump stone.

5.       Permitted materials include stone, stone veneer, stucco, split face block, slump stone blocks, masonry, brick, wrought iron and tubular steel.

6.       Prohibited materials include barbed wire, chain link, chicken wire, metal (aside from wrought iron or galvanized tubular steel used in view fencing), corrugated metal, or aluminum fencing, wood/plywood or other non-relief flat surfaces. Community walls will be of durable material (e.g., stone or masonry) and of a design and color consistent with the residential character. These walls will be generously landscaped to provide a softer streetscape. Refer to Exhibit 16, Wall and Fence Details. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.300 Architectural green building program.
The goal of this green building program is to create healthy interior environments, use natural resources wisely and preserve our natural resources. All homes shall be included in this green building program. As a part of this program, the builder should educate homebuyers about the green building components included in their new home and in the overall community by way of sales office displays and as part of sales brochure documents. The builder will be required to provide all components of the green program as it is written. The green building program as written is a self-governing program. Monitoring implementation and measuring results will be the responsibility of the builder.

A.      Site / Landscape Design.

1.       Plant materials with low water requirements;

2.       Localize turf areas to public corridor, open space, and entries;

3.       Use a majority of native plant materials.

B.      Water Conservation: Design Elements.

1.       Automatic zone irrigation systems;

2.       Rain gauges, rain sensors and moisture sensors;

3.       Drip irrigation (optional);

4.       Low flow water fixtures;

5.       High efficiency water heaters;

6.       Hot water re-circulating pumps;

7.       Tankless water heaters (optional).

C.      Energy Conservation: Homebuilder Will Provide:

1.       Insulation.

a.       Wall insulation minimum R13,

b.       Exterior envelope ceilings/roofs minimum R30;

2.       Blown fiberglass insulation (buyer option).

a.       All insulation installed shall be reduced formaldehyde content product;

3.       Air systems.

a.       Air filtration package (buyer option),

b.       Natural cross ventilation in all primary rooms,

c.       Title 24 compliant caulking at all crevices and holes to address draft stop conditions,

d.       Garages interiors shall be fully enclosed with drywall,

e.       Insulated and weather sealed garage doors;

4.       Heating and cooling systems.

a.       High performance HVAC,

b.       Energy star thermostats,

c.       Thermostatic expansion valves;

5.       Windows.

a.       Vinyl frame low e glazing windows at all elevations,

b.       Insulated glass—dual pane seal systems:

i.        Solar tube skylights (buyer option),

ii.       Retractable screen at windows and doors optional;

6.       Doors.

a.       Insulated exterior doors;

7.       Appliances.

a.       Energy star dishwashers;

8.       Lighting.

a.       Fluorescent lighting in all units except for dimmable incandescent room fixtures,

b.       Bathroom lighting on separate switch,

c.       Low voltage outdoor lighting (where applicable).

D.      Materials and Resources: Homebuilder Will Provide:

1.       Waste recycling.

a.       Recycle at minimum fifty percent of all construction, demolition and land clearing materials.

Establish at all construction sites easy access to well organized recycling bins for wood, cardboard, metals, glass and other recyclable potential materials.

b.       Provide recycling bin cabinet at each dwelling unit kitchen (buyer option);

2.       Environmentally preferable materials for exterior elevations.

a.       Concrete roofing,

b.       Stucco, concrete or fiber cement siding,

c.       Real and faux stone;

3.       Framing materials, reduced lumber consumption methods.

a.       Truss joists with recycled content,

b.       OSB (oriented strand board),

c.       Trex decking,

d.       Laminated strand board,

e.       Parallam strand lumber,

f.        Medium density fiber board;

4.       Indoor Air Quality: Builder to Provide :

a.       Recycled content carpets,

b.       Low formaldehyde insulations or alternative cotton/cellulose,

c.       Water based wood finished optional,

d.       Natural lighting by maximizing window locations. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.310 Auxiliary structures/equipment and utilities.
Additional Building Components shall be treated as follows:

A.      Mechanical equipment:

1.       All air conditioning/heating equipment, soft water tanks, gas and electric meters, pool, spa and fountain equipment associated with single-family residential units must be screened from public view with landscaping or fencing as approved by city planning department.

2.       Window or rooftop mounted air conditioning units are prohibited.

3.       All exterior mechanical equipment shall be screened from all sides.

4.       Rooftop solar water tanks are prohibited.

5.       Screening materials shall blend with the building materials and design, as well as with landscaping within the vicinity.

6.       Screening shall be in a manner consistent with the building façade.

B.      Utilities.

1.       All new utilities within the Arboreta specific plan area shall be placed underground, unless noted otherwise.

2.       The location of above-ground appurtenant utility boxes and similar equipment, if required, shall be consolidated whenever possible.

3.       Utility connections to a building must be located to be as unobtrusive as practicable, with the preference being at the side or rear. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

Article VI. Implementation
21.12.320 Financing and maintenance of improvements.
The financing and maintenance plan for the Arboreta specific plan will ensure the timely completion of public facilities, streets, utilities, and other necessary capital improvements as well as the proper maintenance of these facilities.

Table 3, Financing and Maintenance Plan, which follows, indicates the parties responsible for construction, financing and maintaining the public improvements proposed by the specific plan.

 

 

Table 3

Financing and Maintenance Plan

Service or Facility

Party(ies) Executing
Construction

Party(ies) Financing Construction

Party(ies) Responsible for Operation and Maintenance

On-site residential streets

(private)1

Developer

Developer

HOA

On-site water, sewer and storm drainage facilities

Developer

Developer

Utility operator

Off-site ROW improvements (public)

Developer

Developer

City of Glendora

Parkway landscaped along Barranca, Bennett and Grand Avenue adjacent to project

Developer

Developer

HOA

Residential streetscape

Developer

Developer

HOA

Community open space
improvements

Developer

Developer

HOA

Linear park improvements2

Developer

Developer

HOA

 

1       All streets are private except for the initial portion of the primary community entry road, as indicated on the tentative map. This portion will be dedicated to and maintained by the city.

2       Neighborhood park design plans shall be reviewed by the master homeowner association.

 

(Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.330 Subsequent applications.
Applications for modifications to existing structures must be reviewed and approved by city of Glendora department of planning and redevelopment through either a design review or development plan review process.

Applications for both design review and development plan review shall be submitted to the city of Glendora department of planning and redevelopment with the processing fee as established by city council resolution and all required plan and information.

A.      Design Review. The design review process is a discretionary process conducted by the director of planning and redevelopment. Applications for all lattice covered patio structures, pools, spas, outdoor fireplaces, fire pits and built in barbecues and front porch improvements to individual residential units conforming to specific plan development standards and design guidelines shall be submitted to the director for review and approval. The director shall approve the application based upon evidence of substantial conformance with specific plan development standards and design guidelines.

B.      Appeals. All decisions of the director of planning and redevelopment concerning the applications shall be final unless appealed to the planning commission. All appeals shall be filed in writing with the director within ten days of the action of the director of planning and redevelopment. The director shall schedule the matter for consideration at a regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission held within thirty days of receiving the written appeal.

C.      Building Permits. No building permits shall be issued until the planning director, director of planning and redevelopment or the planning commission on appeal has approved the application. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.340 Enforcement of the specific plan.
The enforcement of the provisions of this specific plan shall be the following:

A.      The director of planning shall be responsible for interpreting and enforcing the site development standards and design guidelines set forth herein. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.350 Amendments to the specific plan.
A.      Requirements and Procedures. This specific plan may be amended at any time in the same manner and by the same process by which the plan was originally adopted.  The city’s standard environmental review procedures shall be followed.

B.      Administrative Actions. The planning director, subject to appeal to the planning commission, may make minor modifications to provisions in the specific plan administratively. Such amendments do not require additional environmental review. These changes include but are not limited to:

1.       The addition of new information to the specific plan maps or text that does not change the effect of any concepts or regulations.

2.       Changes to the community infrastructure such as drainage, streets, water, and sewer systems which do not increase the development capacity in the specific plan area, decrease the development by more than twenty percent, or alter the major design concepts of the specific plan.

3.       Boundary adjustments, easement locations and minor design feature changes.

4.       Phasing adjustments.

5.       Other items determined to be appropriate by the planning director.

C.      Formal Amendments. All specific plan modifications which do not meet the criteria of an administrative action, shall be deemed to require a formal amendment to the approved specific plan. All formal amendments shall be reviewed for approval by the planning commission and city council.

Whether classified as administrative or formal amendments, all such changes to the specific plan shall reflect the same comprehensive analysis which was undertaken in the adoption of the specific plan and may require additional environmental review. The amendment application shall satisfy the following criteria:

1.       Demonstrate that the proposed amendment meets the goals and objectives of the specific plan and general plan.

2.       Ensure that any impacts from the amendment can be satisfactorily mitigated.

3.       Provide a strikeout/underline copy of the specific plan text when changes are proposed and update any specific plan exhibits affected by the proposed amendment.

4.       Update any specific plan technical studies and/or provide additional environmental studies deemed necessary by the planning director and/or other city officials. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

 

21.12.360 Phasing.
The Arboreta project is anticipated to be completed in one major development phase. Grading and infrastructure improvements are anticipated to be completed in one phase. In the event more than one phase of development is necessary, a phasing plan shall be submitted for review and approval by the director of planning. (Ord. 1835 § 2 Exh. A, 2006)

Chapter 21.13 MONROVIA NURSERY SPECIFIC PLAN
Article I. Background and Setting
21.13.010 Context.
A.      The city of Glendora has undertaken the lead role in preparing this specific plan for the eventual development of property commonly referred to as the “Monrovia Nursery.” This property is located in west central Glendora on approximately 95 acres. This specific plan governs only the 95-acre property formerly occupied by the Monrovia Nursery operations. However in the course of implementation it is certain that some infrastructure improvements (circulation, drainage) will occur outside of the specific plan. The specific plan appears as two large undeveloped parcels, one on the north adjacent to Sierra Madre Avenue and one on the south adjacent to the Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad right-of-way. These are being referenced as specific plan - north and specific plan - south.

B.      The plan calls for the development of 124 minimum 20,000 square foot detached single-family residential lots; all lots will be served by public water, and sewer. All parcels will be accessed by public streets with the exception of five lots and an existing home at 1326 West Sierra Madre Avenue, which will be served by a private drive. (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.020 The specific plan.
A specific plan was chosen for this project to provide a document that applies development requirements for the property that are not possible through the application of the city of Glendora Zoning Code alone. In general a specific plan provides the regulations for the construction of new homes, grading and access, open space, and a comprehensive infrastructure plan and utilizing development standards and guidelines attuned to the setting to assure that new development fits the community character. The development standards and guidelines contained herein govern placement, size, style, level of detail, landscaping and drainage. This specific plan also implements the city’s general plan land use objectives. Development within the specific plan area will be subject to standards that are more specific than the requirements of the underlying E-7 20,000 zoning district (the specific plan area will be rezoned “specific plan”). (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.030 The neighborhood.
A.      Many neighborhoods in Glendora were developed with large subdivision tracts that included complete road networks, unified single-purpose land uses and functional comprehensive infrastructure. In contrast, the specific plan’s foothill neighborhood evolved incrementally over several decades, by means of an assortment of tracts and individual home building actions. Many homes have evolved over time per a series of modifications. As a result the neighborhood exhibits vastly different looks across the landscape. In some cases, such as along Baldy Vista Avenue, the streetscape includes large homes with similar roof pitches and a limited range of exterior treatments, all set back identically. On the other hand, homes elsewhere in the neighborhood are often one-of-a-kind, with varying setbacks, styles, sizes, and details.

B.      The streetscapes are also markedly different. For instance, Baldy Vista Avenue has a generous pavement width and concrete curbs. On the other hand, Milton Drive in the same neighborhood narrows to nearly a single curb-less lane, with the homes displaying a range of sizes, styles and setbacks. Similarly the neighborhood along Yucca Ridge Road has a rural character and shares nearly no characteristics with Foxglove Court’s residences of uniform vintage and similar design.

C.      Throughout all of this, the neighborhood has remained incomplete, always divided and interrupted by nearly 95 acres of nonresidential land use in the form of the Monrovia Nursery (the specific plan). Now that the nursery has ceased operations on this acreage it is vacant and the neighborhood has an opportunity to be completed.

D.      In response to the eclectic character of the neighborhood, this specific plan was tasked with providing standards and directives that assure compatibility within a diverse design setting while ensuring that city requirements for development and infrastructure are met. The attraction of this neighborhood lies in the range and variety of homes that display individual expression and largely recede into generously shaded home sites. This specific plan seeks to respect this character and fit within it. The following factors drove this specific plan:

1.       Infill in Character. The neighborhood is protective of the appeal of their community. The infill that is to occur in the specific plan will not be a jarring departure from the general character.

2.       Compatible Design. The city of Glendora and the neighborhood wanted to see development in the specific plan that is compatible and performs a transition between the current neighborhood, and new development.

3.       Non-Standardized Architecture. The neighborhood does not have a single consistent identifiable “architecture,” therefore stock design standards that rely on specific architecture (e.g., “Mediterranean,” “Craftsman,” “American Farmhouse”) were not applicable. (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.040 Traffic concerns.
The neighborhood has been active in framing this process and helping this specific plan address their concerns. As in most public input undertakings, this process sorted through an array of concerns, ideas, suggestions, constraints and opportunities. As the process advanced, a balance was attained between individual desires, broader public policy and community building approaches. Consequently, though many ideas were incorporated, several demands were not included. For instance, many in the neighborhood initially opposed extending streets linking the northern specific plan area with the southern specific plan area due to concerns about traffic. For the most part concerns about traffic rested primarily on the possibility of passthrough traffic. And in response to this, previous concepts included no street connections between the north and south. It is worthy to note that current city of Glendora general plan policy no longer allows the extension of streets or completion of street links between the city of Glendora and other jurisdictions. Therefore, though previous concepts proposed a street link to Citrus Avenue within the city of Azusa, such a link is now prohibited. As a result, concerns about “cut-through” or non-neighborhood traffic are no longer valid. Instead, the specific plan proposes the extension of Baldy Vista Avenue, thus providing a route through the neighborhood between Sierra Madre Avenue and Barranca Avenue near the Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad crossing. An access point is proposed into the city of Azusa for pedestrians, bicycles and emergency vehicles, but not public vehicular traffic. (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.050 The plan in brief.
A.      This specific plan proposes 124 detached single-family residential homes on lots of at least 20,000 square feet. Although this specific plan contains its own development standards, it closely follows the city of Glendora’s E-7 20,000 zoning district (Glendora Municipal Code Section 21.04.010). This specific plan contains a set of grading, drainage, circulation and design guidelines created to result in new homes compatible with the existing neighborhood.

B.      This specific plan includes text and diagrams that specify the following in detail:

1.       The distribution, location, and extent of the land uses within the specific plan.

2.       The distribution, location of public and private circulation, sewage, water, drainage, and other essential facilities proposed to be located within the specific plan needed to support the land uses.

3.       Standards and criteria by which development will proceed.

4.       A program of implementation measures including regulations, programs, public works projects, and financing measures necessary to carry out the provisions of subsections (B)(1), (2) and (3) of this section.

5.       A statement of the relationship of the specific plan to the general plan.

Figure 1: Regional Location



 

Article II. Vision
21.13.060 Planning approaches.
It is unusual for an established neighborhood to experience what has occurred in this community. The departure of the Monrovia Nursery operations from the neighborhood has opened up nearly 95 acres (the specific plan) of vacant land to redevelopment, presenting the opportunity to convert the property from nursery use to neighborhood homes.

A.      Planning Approach 1—Compatible Design. Create design regulations that result in new homes that are compatible with, but do not duplicate, the late 20th Century homes in the neighborhood.

B.      Planning Approach 2—Contemporary Standards. Produce design regulations that meet today’s planning, energy, sustainability, engineering, and community-building standards. (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.070 Goals.
The specific plan was charged with a set of goals that drove the plan and were the focus and purpose of the undertaking.

A.      Goal 1—Exhibit Respect for Existing Home Market Values. The specific plan had to account for the property values and property rights of the existing adjacent neighborhood.

B.      Goal 2—Create a Unified Community. The specific plan had to result in new development that will be physically and functionally harmonious with the existing neighborhood.

C.      Goal 3—Address Neighborhood Infrastructure. The specific plan had to address shortcomings within the broader neighborhood infrastructure:

1.       The lack of full vehicular circulation which impacts emergency (EMT, police, fire) response time and restricts emergency evacuation options.

2.       The existing poor drainage system that has resulted in problems during storm events.

3.       Water pressure and water availability improvements.

4.       Meeting “fuel modification” requirements to reduce fire hazards.

D.      Goal 4—Serve as a Basis for Future City Development Entitlements. The specific plan had to provide a development template for future developer-submitted entitlements including tentative maps, grading plans, infrastructure improvement plans, and private lot development plans.

E.       Goal 5—Create Market-Driven New Development. The specific plan had to contain regulations that result in homes that meet the demands of the marketplace and that make economic sense for the developers of the specific plan property. (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.080 Plan elements.
A.      Plan Element 1—Zoning. Although the actual zoning for the specific plan area will be “SP” (specific plan), development will adhere to the provisions of the specific plan and also use the city of Glendora’s E-7 20,000 zoning district standards as a guide.

B.      Plan Element 2—Circulation. Baldy Vista will be extended south and result in a connection between the north and south specific plan areas. No direct public street access from the specific plan into the city of Azusa is proposed.

C.      Plan Element 3—Drainage. Specific plan will account for existing drainage issues by proposing infrastructure improvements that will meet contemporary drainage standards.

D.      Plan Element 4—Grade Transitions. The grading approach within the specific plan area utilizes a series of intermediate stair-stepped terraces with associated slopes. The height differential/vertical separation between the existing adjacent residences and the proposed homesites has been designed to enhance privacy between new and existing residences.

E.       Plan Element 5—Building Height. Building height in the specific plan per the E-7 20,000 zoning district.

F.       Plan Element 6—Neighborhood Continuity and Integration. Specific plan development to be compatible with neighborhood character through the implementation of design guidelines.

G.      Plan Element 7—Annexation. Portions of the specific plan area that are unincorporated Los Angeles County parcels are to be annexed into city of Glendora prior to development.

H.      Plan Element 8—City of Azusa Agreements. The specific plan will remain subject to existing and future agreements between Glendora and Azusa regarding drainage and street maintenance.

I.        Plan Element 9—Fairmount Cemetery. The specific plan provides access to, and provides a buffer for, the Fairmount Cemetery.

J.       Plan Element 10—Covina Canal. The specific plan resolves a number of function, flow, and maintenance matters related to the facilities related to the Covina Canal, which will have a new easement to account for any relocation.

K.      Plan Element 11—Access to Existing Property. The specific plan will respect the right of access for existing properties. In many instances refining and further formalizing access within the context of contemporary engineering and street design standards.

L.       Plan Element 12—Linear Park. The specific plan will include a new linear park adjacent to the Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad (and proposed future Gold Line) tracks. The park will include elements similar to those that exist in the Arboreta development east of Barranca Avenue, including a drainage swale, and a bike/pedestrian trail. (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.090 Guiding principle.
Guiding Principle—Neighborhood Continuity and Integration. The specific plan will include development guidelines derived from an understanding of the existing neighborhood that address bulk, mass, setbacks, height, and number of floors. It will complete a vehicle and pedestrian circulation system that unifies the neighborhood from north to south. It will develop infrastructure systems that account for water, sewer and drainage demands. The plan will propose a new public linear park. (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.100 Public benefits.
This specific plan provides the following public benefits:

A.      Public Benefit 1—Land Use Certainty. The specific plan includes a final land use plan for the 95 acres that used to house a nursery operation. It establishes that the specific plan will be developed as 124 detached single-family residences on lots of at least 20,000 square feet, putting to rest many concerns about the future use of the land.

B.      Public Benefit 2—Settles the Issue of Road Extensions. The specific plan proposes the extension of Baldy Vista Avenue, it also confirms that Calera Avenue will not be extended and that West Danton Drive and Oakbank Drive will only have emergency access beyond their current limits. The specific plan proposes no roadway extension west to Monrovia Lane/Citrus Avenue in the city of Azusa. However, it will provide a restricted link for emergency and pedestrian access only.

C.      Public Benefit 3—No Cut-Through Street Connections. By not connecting the specific plan street system west into the city of Azusa to Monrovia Lane/Citrus Avenue, the specific plan will not result in a cut-through connection between Citrus Avenue in the city of Azusa and Barranca Avenue in the city of Glendora.

D.      Public Benefit 4—Minimize Traffic. The build out of 124 detached single-family residences on lots of a minimum 20,000 square feet will generate less traffic than other types of land use options, such as multiple-family, or certain nonresidential uses. This minimizes the traffic impact of the development on the local neighborhood.

E.       Public Benefit 5—Safer Sierra Madre Avenue. Sierra Madre Avenue will be widened with more defined shoulders and edges, plus the introduction of a safe sidewalk and an improved intersection at Barranca Avenue.

F.       Public Benefit 6—Minimal New Rights-of-Way. The specific plan requires that new street sections meet current city of Glendora engineering design standards, but it does not require the widening of local streets outside of the specific plan, with the exception of improvements to Sierra Madre Avenue, a portion of Milton Drive, Yucca Ridge, as well as small portions of Barranca Avenue at Sierra Madre Avenue where proposed connections are to be made.

G.      Public Benefit 7—Drainage Solutions. The specific plan provides for a comprehensive approach to drainage problems through proposed on-site and off-site improvements. New storm drains are planned at Calera Avenue, Donington Street, Baldy Vista Avenue, and Leadora Avenue to minimize storm flows within the local streets and in Baldy Vista Creek.

H.      Public Benefit 8—Assured Privacy. Where new homes are planned adjacent to existing residences, lot orientation and pad height/separation will help minimize concerns for privacy. Where necessary, some lots in the specific plan area will be restricted to one story only.

I.        Public Benefit 9—Improved Sewer Connections. Underperforming sewer segments are located below Foxglove Court, between Danton and Oakbank Drive, and most of the segment at Newhill/Foothill between Oakbank & Citrus. The general function of the sewer network will be improved as part of the implementation of the specific plan.

J.       Public Benefit 10—A New Linear Park. A linear park containing many attributes similar to the existing linear park within the Arboreta specific plan east of Barranca Avenue is proposed.

K.      Public Benefit 11—Dependable Water Supply and Water Pressure. An adequate water infrastructure system will be provided. A hydraulic study will be conducted as part of the implementation of this specific plan which will determine water line size.

Figure 2: Master Plan



(Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

Article III. Master Plan
21.13.110 Land use plan.
The following are the specific proposed plans for the 95 acres within the specific plan:

A.      Land Use Within Specific Plan – North.

1.       The northern specific plan east of Yucca Ridge Road includes 38 single-family residential lots of a minimum 20,000 square feet, served by an internal “loop” street with access to Yucca Ridge Road and Barranca Avenue.

2.       The northern specific plan west of Yucca Ridge Road includes 12 single-family residential lots of a minimum 20,000 square feet, served by a cul-de-sac street with access to Yucca Ridge Road.

B.      Land Use Within Specific Plan – South.

1.       The southern specific plan includes 74 single-family residential lots of a minimum 20,000 square feet, served by an extension of Baldy Vista Avenue that proceeds south then east to Barranca Avenue.

2.       The design accounts for access provisions concerning a private agreement that the Monrovia Nursery property owners made regarding the Fairmount Cemetery.

3.       A private drive will serve a residence north of Fairmount Cemetery and five new residential lots of at least 20,000 square feet.

4.       A linear park along the Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad right-of-way has been included. The park includes a trail; an extension of the trail in place east of Barranca Avenue within the Arboreta planned community.

5.       A stormwater detention facility in the southwest corner of the Specific Plan is proposed, replacing the existing Citrus basin.

 

Figure 3: Existing Zoning and General Plan Designations



(Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.120 Zoning and general plan.
The specific plan area is currently zoned for, and designated as detached single-family residential and will remain as such.

A.      Zoning. Although the actual zoning for the specific plan area will be “SP” (specific plan), development will adhere to the provisions of the specific plan and also use the city of Glendora’s E-7 20,000 zoning district standards as a guide. The specific plan requires minimum 20,000 square foot lots.

B.      General Plan. The specific plan is in conformance with and consistent with the general plan maintaining the properties’ current low-density residential designation (1-3 du/ac).

Figure 4: Proposed Circulation



(Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.130 Circulation.
A.      Project Access—Circulation—Street Improvements. As shown in Figure 4, several new streets and street extensions are proposed in the specific plan. Street designs for all proposed new streets and street extensions are shown in Figures 6 through 9.

1.       Within the Specific Plan – North.

a.       Loop Street. An internal “loop” street serves the northern specific plan area east of Yucca Ridge Road with access to Yucca Ridge Road and Barranca Avenue.

b.       Cul-de-Sac. A cul-de-sac street serves the northern specific plan west of Yucca Ridge Road with access to Yucca Ridge Road.

c.       No Direct Connection to Sierra Madre. No new road has a direct connection to Sierra Madre Avenue.

d.       Calera Drive Unextended. Calera Avenue remains unextended, with the exception that lockable decorative bollards will allow emergency access to the northern specific plan through the existing terminus of Calera Avenue.

2.       Within the Specific Plan – South.

a.       Baldy Avenue Extension. The southern specific plan area will be served by an extension of Baldy Vista Avenue that will extend south then east to Barranca Avenue.

b.       Street Network. A street connecting to Barranca Avenue is proposed that reaches the border with Azusa, but does not cross the boundary. Four streets link to this street, creating a network that serves specific plan - south.

c.       Private Drive. A private drive serves five lots and an existing home and provides access to Fairmount Cemetery.

Figure 5: Sierra Madre Avenue Improvement



d.       Traffic Signal. The purpose of the signal is to allow a u-turn movement at the intersection enabling residents to have access to the site from the south-bound leg of Barranca. No left turn into the site is allowed from northbound Barranca because the proximity of the railroad track to the project entry makes the left turn unsafe in the event of vehicle queuing to make the left. But it also does provide the means of access to the linear park but this is a secondary purpose.

B.      Emergency Access Points. Four emergency access points are located in Figure 4, Proposed Circulation, and detailed designs of each are shown in Figures 10 through 13.

C.      Sierra Madre Avenue Widening. Sierra Madre Avenue is an important and popular route that forms the northern edge of the specific plan. It serves as a critical circulation element for automobiles and should serve as a safe and convenient pedestrian route, as well. However, in its current state Sierra Madre Avenue has, effectively, no pedestrian or bicycle facilities. The right-of-way consists of a narrow two-lane road with nearly no shoulders and a severe drop-off without any sidewalks, curbs, barriers or landscaping.

The specific plan calls for retaining the northern edge of pavement but regrading and widening the roadbed, adding an 8-foot on-street parking lane on the north and potentially, curb and gutter. Further to the south is a 12-foot westbound travel lane, a 12-foot center turn lane, and a 12-foot eastbound travel lane, and a 14-foot-wide landscape area with a sidewalk/trail and up to a 6-foot high masonry theme wall consistent with the delineation of existing subdivisions east of the specific plan area.

D.      The Closure of Milton Drive. The specific plan shall provide for a closure of Milton Drive substantially in compliance with Exhibit A (see Appendix 6), and subject to the approval of the County of Los Angeles. The City Engineer shall have the authority to determine substantial compliance. If the County of Los Angeles does not approve closure of Milton Drive, traffic calming measures shall be constructed on Milton Drive, substantially in compliance with Exhibit B and C (see Appendix 6). The City Engineer shall have the authority to determine substantial compliance.

Figure 6: Street Design—Sierra Madre Avenue



 

Figure 7: Street Design—Streets “C,” “D” (North) and Streets “A” (South) and Baldy Vista Avenue



 

Figure 8: Street Design—Streets “A, B, E, F, G” (North) and “B, C, D, E, F, G”(South) and West Danton Drive



Figure 9: Street Design—Private Drive



Figure 10: Emergency Access—Calera Avenue



 

Figure 11: Emergency Access—Citrus Avenue/Monrovia Lane



 

Figure 12: Emergency Access—West Danton Drive



 

Figure 13: Emergency Access—Oakbank Drive



 

Figure 14: Linear Park Concept



 

Figure 15: Linear Park Cross Sections “A-A,” “B-B”



 

Figure 16: Linear Park Cross Section “C-C”



 

E.       Linear Park/Linear Sidewalk. A linear park is proposed to be located at the southern extreme of the specific plan adjacent to the Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad right-of-way. The park serves as a continuation of the existing park and trail created with the Arboreta planned community (see the Arboreta specific plan) east of Barranca Avenue. A portion of the park functions as a water quality facility by incorporating drainage swales. The park includes a decorative fence separating the park from the railroad right-of-way. (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.140 Grading plan.
A.      Grading Plan and Grading Cross Sections. Grading is to conform to the final geotechnical report as part of the approval process of any subdivision or parcel map and applicable local grading regulations. The Monrovia Nursery property has been used as a commercial nursery for several decades and has been graded for that purpose. This specific plan transforms this land into two residential lot subdivisions with minimum 20,000 square-foot parcels; this will require new grading which will conform to this specific plan.

1.       The northern specific plan generally slopes to the south at an approximate grade of 10% with an approximate 65-foot elevation change across the site which is only 600 feet wide. The site is bound to the north by Sierra Madre Avenue, Barranca Avenue to the east, and existing residential lots to the south and west. To accommodate this grade difference within the project site, the grading plan has been sensitive to grade transitions to avoid the feel of new structures “towering” over the existing residences. The site is kept at an elevation below Sierra Madre to help diminish the vertical difference across the site and will also allow the residences on the north side of Sierra Madre to continue to enjoy their views to the south. The slopes in this area are kept at an approximate maximum height of 25 feet to help reduce the vertical difference to the existing residences to the south and between proposed residences in this new subdivision.

 

Figure 17: Grading Plan



2.       The southern specific plan slopes generally to the southwest. The low point of the site is at the corner of Citrus Avenue and the existing Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad (the southwest corner of the specific plan). As such, the project’s detention basin is located here. The grading of this southern site is dominated by the existing edge conditions, as the site is adjacent to existing residences to the north, east, and west, and the existing BNSF Railroad to the south. The proposed grading of this area reduces the size of the slopes between the new and existing residences to better blend the site into the neighborhood while also balancing the site.

3.       The Fairmount Cemetery is surrounded by the specific plan. In response, the plan maintains access to, and includes a landscape buffer around, the historic cemetery.

4.       A private street is included to the highest point of the southern project site, north of the Fairmount Cemetery to access five (minimum 20,000 square foot) lots and to provide access to the existing residence on top of the hill at 1326 Sierra Madre Avenue. This private street will not exceed a maximum grade of 15%.

5.       To insure that all existing facilities, utilities and easements are taken into account, and that the grading is within appropriate guidelines for all agencies affected by the project, the developer’s engineer shall submit the grading plans to all affected agencies for review and approval prior to the issuance of a grading permit from the city of Glendora.

B.      Grading Plan Development Standards.

1.       All grading must be in substantial conformance with the overall conceptual grading plan, the Uniform Building Code, Chapter 70, and city of Glendora standards and ordinances.

2.       Prior to any development within any area of the specific plan, an overall conceptual grading plan for the portion in process shall be submitted for planning department approval as required. The grading plan for each area shall be used as a guideline for subsequent detailed grading plans for individual stages of development within that area, and shall include preliminary pad and roadway elevations.

3.       Unless otherwise approved by the city of Glendora, all cut and fill slopes shall be constructed at inclinations of no steeper than 2 horizontal feet to 1 vertical foot.

4.       A grading permit shall be obtained from city of Glendora, prior to grading.

5.       Grading activity shall comply with South Coast Air Quality Management District, Rule 403.

6.       Erosion control practices shall be implemented during grading activities.

7.       The grading contractor shall be required to obtain an encroachment permit from any agency or city prior to entering any public rights-of-way.

8.       All construction activities, including clearing, grading, or excavation that results in the disturbance of at least one acre total land area, or activity which is part of a larger common plan of development of one acre or greater shall obtain the appropriate National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) construction permit and pay the appropriate fees. All development within the specific plan boundaries shall be subject to future requirements adopted by the city of Glendora to implement the NPDES program.

 

Figure 18: North Cross Sections “A-A,” “B-B”



Figure 19: South Cross Sections “C-C,” “D-D,” “E-E”



(Ord. 1965 § 2, 2012; Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.150 Drainage and flood control.
The specific plan has addressed several key issues related to drainage and water quality design requirements. The proposed drainage plan will help alleviate existing flooding concerns, adequately convey proposed stormwater runoff within proposed storm drain systems, and will include the use of existing and proposed detention facilities on-site and off-site to reduce peak runoff rates to levels equal to or less than pre-project levels and below the design capacity of the downstream storm drain system. The proposed water quality plan for stormwater runoff will help reduce the transport of urban pollutants that may occur on-site towards downstream receiving waters. Following are descriptions of the project area hydrology, detention, hydraulics, and water quality.

A.      Hydrology. A preliminary drain, detention and SUSMP Analysis for Monrovia Nursery Project - Glendora Portion August 11, 2010 (Preliminary Drainage Report) for the specific plan has been prepared to analyze the hydrologic impacts of development for the north and south portions of the city of Glendora Monrovia Nursery project area. The Monrovia Nursery property was previously comprised of nearly 600 acres that extended across the city of Azusa and city of Glendora. A portion of the property was sold in recent years for the development of the city of Azusa portion, leaving the city of Glendora portion as a separate development project. This is an important consideration as both portions share the same overall watershed that is tributary through the project area and share an outfall location at the southwest corner of the specific plan, referred to as the 1264 Drain, located at the intersection of the existing railroad and Citrus Avenue which is maintained by Los Angeles County.

The preliminary hydrology for the specific plan includes a comprehensive analysis of the overall watershed, including both the city of Azusa and city of Glendora project areas that are tributary to the 1264 Drain. For the specific plan, the existing condition is considered the proposed condition from the city of Azusa project, with the north and south portions of the Glendora project undeveloped. The proposed condition for the Glendora project models the north and south portions as developed, and uses a proposed storm drain alignment that conveys flows from the north to the south within Baldy Vista Avenue to the southwest corner of the project into a proposed detention facility, referred to as Facility G1.

B.      Detention/Detention Basins. The following list identifies the names and locations of existing and proposed detention basins that are relevant to the specific plan. (See Figure 20, Stormwater Plan, for locations.)

 

Figure 20: Stormwater Plan



 

1.       Facility 2B (Existing). Located just west of West Leadora Avenue, on the city of Azusa side of the city boundary line. It was constructed as part of the Azusa project and was designed to discharge less than 40 cubic feet per second (cfs).

There are no physical modifications proposed for Detention Basin 2B. The northwest portion of the project will continue to drain through Detention Basin 2B. Due to the development, the amount of runoff entering and exiting the basin will increase compared to existing conditions, however, the design for 2B accounted for the future developed condition of this area. Therefore, the maximum water surface elevation (WSEL) will remain within the basin and the maximum outflow will remain within the 40 cfs design criteria originally intended for the facility as a part of the adjacent city of Azusa.

2.       Facility 4D (Existing). Located further south along the city boundary line, and southwest of Fairmount Cemetery, this detention basin straddles the municipal boundary, existing within both the city of Azusa, and the city of Glendora.

Figure 21: Watershed



The specific plan proposes that the Glendora portion of Detention Facility 4D be filled, fulfilling an agreement between the city of Azusa and the city of Glendora. Then Glendora runoff is to be redirected to proposed Detention Facility G1. Detention Basin 4D would, therefore, experience a significant decrease in tributary area, a slight increase in the maximum WSEL for a 50-year design storm, and a significant decrease in maximum outflow into the existing storm drain system in Citrus Avenue. The increase in the maximum WSEL is acceptable since the maximum WSEL remains well below the top of basin elevation.

3.       Facility G1 (Proposed). Proposed to be located at the southwest corner of the specific plan and intended to replace the Glendora portion of Facility 4D. It would be installed near the northeast corner of the Citrus Avenue and existing Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad intersection.

Detention Basin G1 will be constructed as part of the specific plan and would receive runoff from a majority of the north and south portions of the specific plan, the tributary watershed north of Sierra Madre Avenue that will be conveyed through the specific plan, and from the existing neighborhood located between the north and south specific plan.

The resulting discharge rate at Outfall 2C (approximately 620 cfs), into Los Angeles County department of public works 1264 Drain (78-inch reinforced concrete pipe), will be less than the approved post-project flow rates in the approved August 2005 report prepared for the adjacent city of Azusa project, and significantly less than the approved design discharge flow rate of 920 cfs for the 1264 Drain (also identified in the August 2005 report).

Figure 22: Facility G-1



 

C.      Hydraulics—Storm Drain. There are existing drainage problems, as addressed in the Preliminary Drainage Report dated August 11, 2010 (i.e., flooding concerns) identified within the specific plan. Proposed drainage improvements should help alleviate these issues and adequately convey runoff through the specific plan to the downstream storm drain facility (at the southwest corner of the project site). The proposed improvements will be sized to convey off-site flows received from the north (entering the site from Sierra Madre Avenue at two separate locations), from the west (entering the site from one existing detention basin, while the other existing detention basin is routed down Citrus Avenue within the city of Azusa project limits), and on-site flows from throughout the specific plan and surrounding neighborhood (both existing and proposed residential streets and lots).

The exact alignment of the main storm drain segments is subject to minor adjustment in final engineering; however, the storm drain systems will run towards the southwest corner and ultimately discharge to the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works facility (1264 Drain – 78-inch reinforced concrete pipe). A preliminary layout for the proposed storm drain system and existing storm drain systems to remain in place are shown in Figure 20, Stormwater Plan.

D.      Water Quality—Permanent Stormwater BMPs.

1.       In the city of Glendora, water quality treatment solutions are to use infiltration, extended detention, or retention based solutions. For large single-family lots, requirements include installing an infiltration trench or bioretention area on each single-family lot, sized to infiltrate 0.75 inches from the lot. Each lot will utilize one of these methods (or combination thereof) to satisfy the water quality treatment requirements; however, the newly created streets also require treatment. Among the solutions for stormwater will include one of the following (or an approved equivalent):

a.       Vegetated swales with infiltration (where feasible);

b.       Bioretention areas adjacent to inlet locations;

c.       Proprietary systems such as Filterra or Modular Wetland at each inlet location.

The bottom portion of Detention Basin G-1 will be used for infiltration or extended detention (water quality benefits), limited to streets in close proximity to the basin.

2.       Pursuant to Low Impact Development (LID) requirements, each lot in the specific plan will be required to utilize site design Best Management Practices (BMP) directing impervious areas to pervious areas (i.e., roof drains to landscaping), and street runoff will be directed to vegetated areas as well, where feasible. Therefore, water quality treatment, LID, and EPI requirements will be met with a variety of permanent stormwater BMP solutions. For portions of the streets where it is not feasible to direct runoff to natural vegetated areas, then proprietary bioretention systems may be utilized that will provide contact time with soil and vegetation for water quality storm events.

3.       The following summarizes the preliminary solutions proposed for water quality and LID/EPI requirements:

a.       Lots. Infiltration trench and/or bioretention raingarden.

b.       Streets.

i.        Vegetated swales with bioretention or infiltration trench;

ii.       Bioretention system(s) at curb inlet locations;

iii.     Soft bottom detention basin with bioretention/infiltration.

4.       Each of the above systems will be numerically sized to detain, retain, or infiltrate the first 0.75 inches of stormwater runoff where feasible, with remaining areas numerically sized to treat 0.75 inches or a comparable treatment flow rate (cfs), such as bioretention systems at inlet locations. Preliminary locations of these facilities are shown in Figure 23, Water Quality Plan.

 

Figure 23: Water Quality Plan



 

5.       These permanent stormwater BMPs located on lots will be maintained by the private landowner or an established homeowner’s association; the permanent BMPs installed for treatment of public street runoff will be maintained by the city of Glendora. In the case of the soft bottom detention basin, the Los Angeles County department of public works/Los Angeles County flood control district will assume operation and maintenance responsibilities, upon its acceptance into the Los Angeles County flood control district. (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.160 Open space.
The specific plan consists of detached single-family residences on parcels of at least 20,000 square feet, affording every homeowner with a significant private open space within their own lot. Therefore public open space was not a driving emphasis of the plan. However, open space is still important to engender a sense of shared experience and community, especially open space that contains amenities to encourage pedestrian and bicycle circulation. This specific plan proposes several open space facilities that demonstrate an appreciation for the history of the area, and foster neighborhood interaction.

A.      Linear Park. The specific plan includes a linear park adjacent to the Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad that include facilities similar to those already in place in the linear park east of Barranca Avenue, including a trail/sidewalk, a noise attenuation wall, stormwater facilities, and landscaping.

B.      Linear Sidewalk. Throughout the specific plan non-contiguous sidewalks are to be installed concurrent with new development. These sidewalks will be separated from the street with a landscaped parkway. Of particular significance are the new sidewalks proposed within the Linear Park and the meandering sidewalk on the south side of the improved Sierra Madre Avenue.

C.      Fairmount Cemetery. Fairmount Cemetery is an important and revered local historic landmark. The specific plan recognizes this and provides a landscape buffer as well as some design details that help parking for special events.

D.      Homeowner’s Association Lots. Slopes adjacent to some residences, emergency access points and gateways will be landscaped and maintained by the homeowner’s association. The precise specifics of such will be made a part of subsequent covenants, conditions and restrictions. (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.170 Easements.
Baldy Vista Creek is an open drainage channel which outlets onto the specific plan area and the Covina Canal is in an existing water pipe line that will need to be removed and relocated. The flow in Baldy Vista Creek will be placed in a pipe as it enters the specific plan area. Easements are proposed to address these elements as well as nonutility matters such as the Fairmount Cemetery and a new private drive easement to an existing homesite at 1326 West Sierra Madre Avenue.

A.      1326 West Sierra Madre Avenue. The specific plan anticipates a provision for an access easement for a private drive to reach the property at 1326 West Sierra Madre Avenue because the current access route to this property would be eliminated as part of the implementation of the specific plan.

B.      Fairmount Cemetery. The specific plan includes a buffer for Fairmount Cemetery and provides on-street and off-street parking opportunities for services at the cemetery and maintenance purposes.

C.      Covina Canal. The Covina Canal within the specific plan is a below grade facility in a 42-inch ductile iron pipe, though it is partially exposed at the southern end of Baldy Vista Creek. The specific plan proposes removing and relocating the pipe. New easements associated with this action will follow. Prior to recordation of the final map, the subdivider will be required to obtain the necessary quitclaim deed from the Covina Irrigating Company (CICO) vacating the easement.

D.      Los Angeles County Department of Public Works. The Los Angeles County department of public works is responsible for operations and maintenance of sewers within the specific plan, a series of easements related to sewer lines within the specific plan have been incorporated into the utility plans.

 

Figure 24: Covina Canal Realignment



 

Figure 25: Baldy Vista Creek 2009 Photos



(Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.180 Water and sewer.
A.      The specific plan’s water supply is provided by the city of Glendora. The Los Angeles County sanitation district provides the sanitary sewer service. The water and sewer system plan is based on the existing capacity of water and sewer facilities surrounding the project. The city of Glendora draws 222 acre-feet per year from the Covina irrigating canal.

1.       The following water facilities exist in the vicinity of the project:

• Existing 8″ Ductile Iron Pipe in Sierra Madre Avenue

• Existing 20″ Ductile Iron Pipe in Sierra Madre Avenue

• Existing 30″ Ductile Iron Pipe in Sierra Madre Avenue

• Existing 8″ in Yucca Ridge Road

• Existing 30″ in Yucca Ridge Road (High pressure Transmission Main)

• Existing 6″ in Foxglove Court

• Existing 6″ in Leadora Avenue

• Existing 30″ in Leadora Avenue (High pressure Transmission Main)

• Existing 6″ in Donington Street

• Existing 6″ in Calera Avenue

• Existing 6″ in Baldy Vista Avenue

• Existing 6″ in Milton Drive

• Existing 6″ in Oakbank Drive

• Existing 6″ in Danton Drive

• Existing 8″ in Barranca Avenue

2.       The following sewer facilities exist in the vicinity of the project:

• Existing 8″ Sewer in Yucca Ridge Road

• Existing 8″ Sewer in Sierra Madre Avenue

• Existing 8″ Sewer in Leadora Avenue

• Existing 8″ Sewer in Calera Avenue

• Existing 8″ Sewer in Donington Street

• Existing 8″ Sewer in Baldy Vista Avenue

• Existing 8″ Sewer in Milton Drive

• Existing 8″ Sewer in Danton Drive

• Existing 8″ Sewer Southerly along the Existing Covina Canal Alignment, from West Danton Drive to Oakbank Drive

• Existing 8″ Sewer in Oakbank Drive

• Existing 8″ Sewer in Barranca Avenue from Leadora Avenue to Milton Drive

B.      Water System.

1.       The city of Glendora provides water to customers from three sources:

a.       Groundwater from the San Gabriel Valley Water District (SGVWD).

b.       Surface water from the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California (MWD) through the Three Valleys Municipal Water District.

c.       Surface water from the Covina Irrigating Company (CIC) by way of the Covina Canal (42-inch ductile iron pipe). The water is disinfected with chlorine or chloramines before it is delivered to the customer.

2.       City water lines exist throughout the specific plan. The specific plan - north is proposed to obtain service from the existing 8-inch water lines on Yucca Ridge Road and Barranca Avenue. The specific plan - south is proposed to obtain service from the 6-inch existing water lines on Baldy Vista Avenue, Milton Drive, West Danton Drive, Oakbank Drive and the existing 8-inch water lines on Barranca Avenue. The domestic water system will be designed and constructed per city of Glendora standards.

3.       The domestic potable water system for the entire specific plan will also be used for fire protection of the site. The domestic potable water system will include the fire hydrant system and any necessary fire protection services to insure adequate fire safety for the specific plan. A hydraulic analysis may be required to determine adequacy of the existing 6-inch and 8-inch water lines to serve the project, in which case upsizing of these existing water lines may be required to ensure adequate water pressure to the proposed residential homes.

 

Figure 26: Water Plan



 

C.      Sewer System.

1.       The specific plan is comprised of a total of 95 acres, 35 acres are part of the specific plan - north and 60 acres are part of the specific plan - south. The sanitation district of Los Angeles County provides wastewater management of the city of Glendora. The city of Glendora is located in sanitation district No. 22, which operates the San Jose Creek reclamation plant in the city of Industry.

2.       The specific plan - north wastewater is conveyed to a low point on Street “B” at which point it drains southerly through a sewer easement and connects to the existing local 8-inch sewer line on Calera Avenue. From this point the 8-inch line flows in Baldy Vista Avenue southerly to Danton Drive where it connects to the existing sewer outfall.

3.       In the specific plan - south, sewer on West Danton Drive will be extended to proposed Street “E,” and the flows will be conveyed southerly to proposed Street “A.” The proposed sewer alignment will continue westerly along Street “A” through a proposed sewer easement along the proposed detention basin (Lot M). The proposed sewer will continue southerly under the Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad and connect to an existing 8-inch sewer on Citrus Avenue and Foothill Boulevard. A jack and bore process will be needed to extend the sewer under the Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad. In anticipation of the development of the property the Monrovia Nursery company obtained an agreement for a sewer easement through an adjoining property located at 1155 West Foothills Boulevard. The sewer line would require coordination, review and approval from the Southern California Regional Rail Authority.

4.       For the proposed residential lots draining to the existing sewer on Oakbank Drive the sewer will be extended westerly from the existing sewer stub on Milton Drive and Oakbank Drive to the proposed Street “N” cul-de-sac. Wastewater then flows through an existing 8-inch sewer pipeline that crosses under the existing Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad along the Oakbank Drive alignment.

5.       To determine the peak flow generated from the project site, the following design criteria were used. Generation factors in the 2006 Sewer Master Plan are based on acreage.

a.       The factor shown on Table 1 was used to determine flows. The factor is based on five dwelling units per acre and medium low-density residential flow factor from the 2006 sewer master plan.

b.       Table 2 provides the calculated project sewer flows. A peaking factor of 1.66 was used to be consistent with the highest diurnal peaking factor of the 2006 sewer master plan.

 

TABLE 1

 

LAND USE

FACTOR (gpd)

UNITS

Residential

250

Per dwelling unit

 

TABLE 2

 

LAND USE

UNITS

FACTOR (gpd)

UNIT

AVG. FLOW (gpd)

PEAK FLOW (gpd)1

PEAK FLOW (gpd)2

PEAK FLOW (cfs)

Residential

129*

250

du

32.637

37

56

0.1241

 

*       Currently 124 residential units are proposed. Sewer flow calculation based on September 18, 2007 report prepared by RBF.

1 Based on residential peak factor =1.66 per 2006 sewer master plan.

2 Based on inflow and infiltration factor of 50% average daily flow per 2006 sewer master plan.

 

6.       The specific plan’s wastewater is ultimately conveyed to the existing JOH unit 8-L relief line located on Baseline Avenue south of the project and this leads to the San Jose Creek reclamation plant. The size of the relief trunk line is 24 inches to 30 inches and has a capacity of 20 to 30 cfs. In the beginning of 2009 the relief trunk line was measured at 4 to 6 cfs peak flow, and therefore currently has the capacity to serve the specific plan.

D.      Water and Sewer Development Standards.

1.       All water facilities will be designed and constructed in accordance with the city of Glendora Standards and the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, 2009 edition (Green Book).

2.       All sewer facilities will be designed and constructed in accordance with the sanitation district of Los Angeles County and the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, 2009 edition (Green Book).

3.       Final engineering for domestic water and sewer facilities shall be subject to the appropriate studies to confirm the alignment and capacity of new or existing lines to serve new development from the project. The city engineer shall set the criteria used in preparing the studies and shall also review and approve the studies.

 

Figure 27: Sewer Plan



(Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.190 Other utilities.
A.      Utility Plan. The specific plan - north and south is surrounded on the north, west, and east by existing development served by Southern California Edison for electricity and the gas company for natural gas. While portions of the specific plan have electrical service, the gas service does not currently exist. Nonetheless, both utilities exist in the roadways and property surrounding the nursery.

B.      Electrical. The existing locations of the electrical facilities are illustrated on the following page. All of the existing facilities are located above ground. In the specific plan - north, electrical facilities are located on the east side of Yucca Ridge Road north of Sierra Madre Avenue, west side of Barranca Avenue and along the southern property boundary. In the specific plan - south, overhead electrical facilities enter the nursery property south of the Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad tracks between Calvary Lutheran Church and the Autumn Oaks condominiums. The facilities extend north through the southern portion of the site into residential areas northeast of the Fairmount Cemetery. Overhead lines are also located throughout much of the northern perimeter of the specific plan - south between the property and existing residences. In general, overhead service is provided to the rear of the adjacent residential properties. It is anticipated that implementation of the specific plan will require coordination with Southern California Edison to extend electrical service into the proposed specific plan. All new electrical service within the specific plan must be underground. The developer will need to coordinate with the city and Southern California Edison to identify existing poles and wires that may need to be relocated to implement the specific plan.

C.      Natural Gas. The existing locations of the natural gas facilities are illustrated in Figure 28, Gas and Electric Utility Plan. No natural gas facilities are located in the specific plan, however, natural gas facilities exist in almost all the surrounding streets including: Sierra Madre Avenue, Barranca Avenue, Yucca Ridge Road, Donington Street, Calera Avenue, Leadora Avenue, Oakbank Drive, Baldy Vista Avenue, West and East Danton Drive. It is anticipated that implementation of the specific plan will require coordination with the gas company to extend natural gas service into the proposed specific plan.

 

Figure 28: Gas and Electric Utility Plan



 

(Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

Article IV. Maintenance and Financing
21.13.200 Background.
The specific plan contains a number of public amenities such as landscaping and lighting on streets, emergency access gateways, and a linear park, that require initial funding and a vehicle to assure ongoing maintenance. The following are a range of approaches and options that could provide the funding necessary. (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.210 Associations.
A.      Common Interest Development (CID) (Commonly an HOA). A homeowner’s association (HOA) is a form of CID, a certain type of real estate and form of home ownership. CIDs allow individual owners the use of common property and facilities and provide for a system of self-governance through an association of the homeowners within the CID. The most common type of association of homeowners is the nonprofit mutual benefit corporation. This is a corporation in which the members of the corporation vote for a board of directors that runs the affairs of the corporation.

B.      Some of the statutory basis for the operation of CIDs can be found in:

1.       Civil Code 1350, et seq. (The Davis-Stirling Act);

2.       Corporations Code 7110-7160 (Nonprofit Mutual Benefit Corporations Formations and Powers);

3.       Corporations Code 7210-7215 (Corporate Duties and Responsibilities);

4.       Corporations Code 7220-7225 (Selection, Removal and Resignation of Directors). (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.220 Assessments and fees.
A.      Assessment Districts.

1.       Background. In 1978 Californians enacted Proposition 13, which limited the ability of local public agencies to increase property taxes based on a property’s assessed value. Since that time, assessment districts, which have been in existence since the early 1900s, have been used on a widespread basis as an alternative method for financing public improvements. Currently, about one in three properties in California is part of an assessment district.

2.       Authorizing Legislation for Assessment Districts. There are two primary acts which authorize the establishment of assessment districts:

a.       The Improvement Act of 1911 (Streets & Highways Code § 5000 et seq.), which can be used by cities, counties and other municipal governments to fund a wide range of public infrastructure projects. The 1911 Act can also fund maintenance of improvements.

b.       The Municipal Improvement Act of 1913 (Streets & Highways Code § 10000 et seq.), which can be used by cities, counties, joint powers authorities and other special districts to fund water, electrical, gas and lighting infrastructure, public transit facilities, as well as other basic infrastructure needs.

c.       The Improvement Bond Act of 1915 (Streets & Highways Code § 8500 et seq.) is normally used in combination with one of these acts to issue bonds to finance the improvements. The vast majority of assessment district projects are paid for with 1915 Act Improvement Bonds.

3.       Assessment District Purpose. An assessment district is created to finance improvements when no other source of money is available. Assessment districts are often formed in undeveloped areas and are used to build roads and install water and sewer systems so that new homes or commercial space can be built. Assessment districts may also be used in older areas to finance new public improvements or other additions to the community.

4.       Assessment District Formation. An assessment district is created by a sponsoring local government agency, such as a city or county. The procedure for forming a district begins with a petition signed by owners of the property who want the public improvement. The proposed district will include all properties that will directly benefit from the improvements to be constructed. A public hearing is held, at which time property owners have the opportunity to protest the assessment district.

5.       Once approved, property owners have the opportunity to prepay the assessment prior to bond issuance. After this cash payment period is over, a special assessment lien is recorded against each property with an unpaid assessment. Then, these parcels will pay their total assessment through annual installments on the county property tax bill. The property owners will have the right to prepay the remaining balance of the assessment at any time, including applicable prepayment fees.

B.      Mello-Roos.

1.       Mello-Roos Bonds. The Mello-Roos (named for its legislative sponsors) Community Facilities District Act of 1982 established another method whereby almost every municipal subdivision of the state may form a special, separate district to finance a long list of public facilities by the sale of bonds and finance certain public services on a pay-as-you-go basis. These community facilities districts are formed and bond issues authorized by a two-thirds vote of the property owners in the district. Typically the only voters in a district are one or more real estate developers who own or have an option on all of the land in the district. These land-based financings were nicknamed “dirt bonds” by the bond advisor years ago. Bonds are sold to finance facilities that can include schools, parks, libraries, public utilities and other forms of infrastructure. The districts may provide public services that include police and fire protection, recreation programs, area maintenance, library services, and flood and storm drainage. Bonded debt service and/or the public services are paid for by special taxes levied on the real property within the district. As the developer subdivides and sells off the land the new property owner assumes the tax burden. Tax delinquencies can lead to fines and penalties and ultimately foreclosure and sale. The ultimate security for Mello-Roos bonds is the value of the real property being taxed, consequently a provision in the law requires the appraised value of the land be three times the bonded debt. Recent foreclosure sales have cast doubts on the skills of the appraisers, and underscore the risk of some of this debt when a severe real estate slump hits developers.

2.       Background. In 1978 Californians enacted Proposition 13, which limited the ability of local public agencies to increase property taxes based on a property’s assessed value. In 1982, the Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982 (Government Code § 53311-53368.3) was created to provide an alternate method of financing needed improvements and services.

3.       The Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982. The Act allows any county, city, special district, school district or joint powers authority to establish a Mello-Roos Community Facilities District (a “CFD”) which allows for financing of public improvements and services. The services and improvements that Mello-Roos CFDs can finance include streets, sewer systems and other basic infrastructure, police protection, fire protection, ambulance services, schools, parks, libraries, museums and other cultural facilities. By law, the CFD is also entitled to recover expenses needed to form the CFD and administer the annual special taxes and bonded debt.

4.       Mello-Roos CFD Purpose. A CFD is created to finance public improvements and services when no other source of money is available. CFDs are normally formed in undeveloped areas and are used to build roads and install water and sewer systems so that new homes or commercial space can be built. CFDs are also used in older areas to finance new schools or other additions to the community.

5.       Mello-Roos CFD Formation. A CFD is created by a sponsoring local government agency. The proposed district will include all properties that will benefit from the improvements to be constructed or the services to be provided. A CFD cannot be formed without a two-thirds majority vote of residents living within the proposed boundaries. Or, if there are fewer than 12 residents, the vote is instead conducted of current landowners. In many cases, that may be a single owner or developer. Once approved, a special tax lien is placed against each property in the CFD. Property owners then pay a special tax each year. If the project cost is high, municipal bonds will be sold by the CFD to provide the large amount of money initially needed to build the improvements or fund the services.

C.      Landscaping and Lighting Act District.

1.       Background. A 1972 Landscaping and Lighting Act allows for the creation of a district used by local government agencies to pay for landscaping, lighting and other improvements and services in public areas. As a form of benefit assessment, it is based on the concept of assessing only those properties that benefit from improvements financed, either directly, or indirectly through increased property values. Because it is considered a benefit assessment, a 1972 Act assessment is not subject to Proposition 13 limitations.

2.       The Landscaping and Lighting Act of 1972. This legislation (Streets & Highways § 22500) allows local governmental agencies to form Landscape & Lighting Maintenance Districts for the purpose of financing the costs and expenses of landscaping and lighting public areas. This act can be used by any local agency including cities, counties, and special districts such as school districts or water districts. The many approved uses include installation and maintenance of landscaping, statues, fountains, general lighting, traffic lights, recreational and playground courts and equipment, and public restrooms. Additionally, the Act allows acquisition of land for parks and open spaces, plus the construction of community centers, municipal auditoriums or halls to be financed. Notes or bonds can be issued to finance larger improvements under the Act.

3.       Landscape Lighting District Formation. The sponsoring agency conducts a specific plan, prepares an engineer’s report and proposes the formation of a district and the levy of assessments. Affected property owners are then notified and a public hearing is held. In order to approve the district, a majority vote of affected property owners through an assessment balloting procedure is required. Once approved, assessments will be placed on property tax bills each year to pay for the improvements and services.

4.       Annual Charge. By law (Prop. 13), benefit assessments cannot be based on the value of property. Instead, each district establishes a benefit formula and each parcel in the service area is assessed according to the benefit it receives from the services and improvements. (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.230 Exactions and fees.
Government Code Section 65583(a) requires “An analysis of potential and actual governmental constraints upon the maintenance, improvement, or development of housing for all income levels…including…fees and other exactions required of developers, and local processing and permit procedures…”

A.      Types of Fees and Exactions.

1.       Housing development is typically subject to two types of fees or exactions: permit processing fees for planning and zoning; and impact fees or exactions, imposed to defray all or a portion of the public costs related to the development project.

2.       These fees and exactions can impact the cost, and feasibility of housing development and its affordability, and involve issues of private property rights. High planning and site development fees can impact property owners’ ability to make improvements or repairs, especially for lower-income households. Development projects are subject to fees and exactions from a growing number of public entities, ranging from special districts to regional agencies. It is important to estimate the cumulative amount of fees housing development will be subject to for development of viable proposals; information about the city or county’s fees and exactions is among the most critical. For both processing fees and impact fees, State law specifies procedural and nexus requirements:

a.       Government Code Section 66020 requires that planning and permit processing fees do not exceed the reasonable cost of providing the service, unless approved by the voters; agencies collecting fees must provide project applicants with a statement of amounts and purposes of all fees at the time of fee imposition or project approval.

b.       Government Code Section 66000 et. seq. (Mitigation Fee Act) sets forth procedural requirements for adopting, and collecting capital facilities fees and exactions, and requires they be supported by a report establishing the relationship between the amount of any capital facilities fee and the use for which it is collected.

B.      Requisite Analysis.

1.       Identify and analyze permit processing and planning fees, and development and impact fees and exactions and how they have been established relative to the above statutory requirements, including any in-lieu fees.

2.       Identify exactions such as land dedication requirements (e.g., streets, public utility and other right-of-ways, easements, parks, open space, etc.) and other exactions imposed on development.

3.       Include information on how fees are collected, i.e., at the beginning of the approval process, at the time of building permit issuance, or deferred until the project receives certificate of occupancy.

4.       Identify any policies or efforts to moderate high fee impacts for housing for lower-income households, such as fee waivers, fee deferrals, streamlined fee processing, and consolidated fee schedules.

C.      Nexus Requirements.

1.       State law requires establishment of a nexus between the projected development impacts and the public facilities for which impact fees are imposed. Government Code Section 66001(a) of the Mitigation Fee (Act) (Section 66000-66025) requires that any city or county which establishes, imposes, or increases a fee as a condition of development approval do all of the following: (a) identify the purpose of the fee; (b) identify the use to which the fee is to be put; (c) determine how there is a reasonable relationship between the fee’s use and the type of development project on which the fee is imposed; and (d) determine how there is a reasonable relationship between the need for the public facility and the type of development project upon which the fee is imposed.

2.       Government Code Section 66001(b) further requires the locality to determine whether there is a reasonable relationship between the specific amount the fee imposed and the costs of building, expanding, or upgrading public facilities. Such determinations, also known as nexus studies, are made in written form and must be updated whenever new fees are imposed or existing fees are increased.

3.       The Act also requires jurisdictions to segregate fee revenues from other municipal funds and to refund them if they are not spent within 5 years. Any person may request an audit to determine whether any fee or charge levied by the city or county exceeds the amount reasonably necessary to cover the cost of the service provided (Government Code Section 66006(d)). Under Government Code Section 66014, fees charged for zoning changes, use permits, building permits, and similar processing fees are subject to the same nexus requirements as development fees. Lastly, under Government Code Section 66020, agencies collecting fees must provide project applicants with a statement of the amounts and purposes of all fees at the time of fee imposition or project approval. (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.240 Borrowing.
A.      General Obligation Bonds.

1.       Definition. “General obligation bonds” are a form of long-term borrowing in which the state issues municipal securities and pledges its full faith and credit to their repayment. Bonds are repaid over many years through semiannual debt service payments. The California Constitution requires that GO bonds be approved by a majority vote of the public and sets repayment of GO debt before all other obligations of the state except those for K-14 education.

2.       Key Statutory Authorities.

a.       Article XVI, Section 1, of the California Constitution prohibits the Legislature from creating debt or liability which exceeds $300,000 without a majority vote by the people, except in case of war.

b.       Government Code, Title 2, Division 4, Part 3 (Section 16650 et seq.) sets out the statutory framework for GO bonds. Statutory authorization for individual GO bond measures is placed programmatically in the codes (e.g., prison authorizations are located in the Penal Code).

B.      Certificates of Participation (COPs). A form of lease revenue bond that permits the investor to participate in a stream of lease payments, installment payments or loan payments relating to the acquisition or construction of specific equipment, land or facilities. In theory the certificate holder could foreclose on the equipment or facility financed in the event of default, but so far no investor has ended up owning a piece of a school house or a storm drainage system. A very popular financing device in California since Proposition 13 because COP issuance does not require voter approval. COPs are not viewed legally as “debt” because payment is tied to an annual appropriation by the government body. As a result, COPs are seen by investors as providing weaker security and often carry ratings that are a notch or two below an agency’s general obligation rating. (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

Article V. Development Standards
21.13.250 Permitted uses.
Detached single-family residences, accessory dwelling units, accessory buildings, appropriate home occupation businesses, open space and flood control uses as depicted by the development plan. (Ord. 2015 § 2, 2017; Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.260 Private area standards.
A.      Lot Dimensions.

1.       Lot Size. Minimum 20,000 square feet.

2.       Lot Width. 100 feet.*

*       Minimum width may be reduced to 80 feet as part of a final map review by the city of Glendora as long as the parcel is a minimum of 20,000 square feet in size.

 

B.      Setbacks.

1.       Front Yard. Minimum 25 feet.**

**    Where needed to provide greater compatibility with the front setback of adjacent existing residences the Director may increase the required setback.

 

2.       Side Yard. Minimum 7 feet on each side.

3.       Side Street. Minimum 15 feet.

4.       Rear Yard. Minimum 35 feet.

Account for the Setbacks of Existing Homes. Take into account the setbacks established by existing homes. The 25-foot front yard setback is the minimum that shall be maintained, but it can be exceeded (within reason) out of respect for the established block face setback.

C.      Floor Area Ratio. 35%, not including up to 400 square feet for an attached garage.

D.      Maximum Second Floor Area. 75% of the first floor, excluding up to 400 square feet of attached garage space.

E.       Main Residence Height.

1.       Maximum 25 feet (1 or 2 stories);

2.       Maximum 2 stories.***

***  Certain lots are restricted to one story (see Figure 29, One-Story Exhibit).

 

Height is measured from any point on the roof to the finished grade at the nearest exterior wall. Chimneys are excluded. The maximum roof pitch shall be 6:12.

 

Figure 29: One-Story Exhibit



F.       Landscaping/Irrigation.

1.       The design of the landscaping will be executed per an approved set of documents that adhere to the guidelines of Article VI.

2.       A minimum of 50% of the front yard setback shall be planted in turf. A maximum of 25% of the front yard setback is allowed to be hardscape, including driveways.

3.       Homeowners are encouraged to use simple large mass plantings of a singular species of low ground covers. Natural grasses are also encouraged.

4.       All irrigation systems shall conform to all other applicable city and regional standards for irrigation installation and maintenance. Irrigation systems shall be designed so that separate areas of maintenance responsibility are metered and controlled with the city of Glendora to assure conformance to standard equipment and installation techniques. All permanent irrigation systems will be below ground, automatically controlled and in full compliance with building code requirements. Water conserving systems, such as drip irrigation, moisture sensors, low water use heads, and matched precipitation rate heads will be used. All backflow control devices will be located or screened from public view.

5.       Slope Revegetation. All graded slopes will be promptly revegetated in compliance with city requirements and in conformance with the overall landscape concept.

G.      Roofs and Roof Penetrations.

1.       Maximum Roof Pitch. 6:12 maximum.

2.       Roof Terraces. Roof terraces are not permitted above a second floor. They are allowed above a single floor.

3.       Chimneys. A maximum of 5 chimneys are permitted per house. Maximum height to the top of the chimney is 4 feet above the nearest ridge line or 4 feet above the nearest roof slope as measured from a distance of 10 feet away from the face of the chimney. Chimneys protruding from one story roofs must be located away from an adjacent 2-story roof to limit excessively high chimneys. Chimney caps must be designed to complement the major architectural elements of the house, must screen the spark arrester and shall not be constructed of painted sheet metal. Exposed metal flues and spark arresters are not permitted. Wherever possible, chimneys from 1-story spaces should be integrated into second story wall massing to diminish the impact of tall chimneys over 1-story roofs. The location of chimneys on the low side of 1-story shed roofs is discouraged.

4.       Antennas, Dishes, and Similar. All antennas and satellite dishes and similar roof-mounted apparatus shall either be restricted to the attic or interior of the residences or, if mounted on the exterior, shall be reasonably obscured from view by other lot owners.

H.      Windows and Doors. Glass block and horizontal bathroom “gunslit” windows are discouraged. Mirrored glass is not permitted.

I.        Fences, Gates and Driveways.

1.       Design. Design of the walls and fences will be executed per an approved set of drawings that adhere to the guidelines of Article VI.

2.       Gates. Decorative gates across the opening of the driveway are allowed behind the front yard setback.

 

Figure 30: Decorative Gate



 

3.       Circular Driveways. Circular driveways are not permitted.

J.       Water Quality. The design of the water quality facilities will be executed per an approved set of drawings that adhere to the standards within this specific plan.

K.      Garages.

1.       Garage Doors. Back-up from garages must be 25 feet minimum clear and the turning radius into a side entry garage must be 26 feet minimum.

2.       Number of Parking Spaces—On-Site Parking. A minimum of 2 enclosed parking spaces are required for each individual lot.

L.       Accessory Structures. Refer to the city of Glendora Municipal Code for regulations regarding size restrictions, setbacks and height for accessory structures.

1.       Floor Area Ratio Calculation. The square footage of a stand alone accessory structure shall be included in the FAR calculation for the parcel.

2.       Consistent with Main Residence. Stand alone accessory structures are to be consistent in architectural design, color, and materials with the main residence. The structure must exhibit the same roof material, wall treatment, color, window and door design and detailing of the main residence. This does not apply to greenhouses.

M.     Accessory Dwelling Units. Refer to the city of Glendora Municipal Code for regulations regarding accessory dwelling units. (Ord. 2015 § 2, 2017; Ord. 1965 § 2, 2012; Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.270 Public area.
The design of the public areas, including streetscape, open spaces, and emergency access will be executed per an approved set of drawings that adhere to the guidelines of Article VI.

A.      Landscaping. The design of the landscaping will be executed per an approved set of drawings that adhere to the guidelines of Article VI.

B.      Water Quality. The design of the water quality facilities will be executed per an approved set of drawings that adhere to the standards within this specific plan.

C.      Project Perimeter Theme Walls and Fences.

1.       Design. Design of the walls and fences will be executed per an approved set of drawings that adhere to the guidelines of Article VI.

2.       Prohibited Fence Material. Chain link, barbed wire, wood fences with only one “good” side, and grapestake fencing are not permitted.

3.       Open Space Borders. Fences bordering or fronting open space, or other common areas shall be wrought iron or tubular steel.

4.       Perimeter Solid Wall Material. Acceptable wall materials include planted hedges, stone, masonry with plaster finish, adobe block, and slump block with stucco finish. Combination walls may consist of a 12-inch high masonry or stone wall below a tubular steel or wrought iron fence (total height not to exceed 6 feet).

5.       Prohibited Perimeter Solid Wall Material. Prohibited wall materials include exposed concrete block, metal panels, railroad tie, glass, cribwall, and similar materials. Vendura walls are allowed as long as they are planted so as to be fully covered with vegetation.

6.       Height—Front Yard. Fences and walls not exceeding 4 feet in height shall be permitted within the front yard setback if no more than 3 feet or 50% is solid and the remainder is at least 50% open.

7.       Other Yards. Fences and walls not exceeding 6 feet in height shall be permitted behind the front yard setback.

 

Figure 31: Fence Type and Location



(Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

Article VI. Design Guidelines
21.13.280 Architectural styles.
A.      Types and Characteristics. The character of the existing neighborhood reflects its natural setting and legacy of being built over many years. The variety in housing styles and design makes it unreasonable to assign a single motif to this neighborhood. Consequently, architectural standard guidelines are inappropriate. Given that the homes in the neighborhood differ in terms of home size, landscape theme, and design treatment, applicants should give close attention to how their project achieves compatibility with their immediate neighbor. Projects will be judged on an individual basis which includes appropriateness to the natural topography, degree of visibility, intrinsic merit of design, and compatibility with the neighborhood.

B.      Architectural Style Guidelines.

1.       Simplicity. Architectural design philosophy should emphasize simplicity, restraint, limited but rich ornamentation, and quality materials.

2.       Shade Trees. An allotment of trees in the landscape plan should, upon maturity, exceed the height of the home and help the house retreat into the background.

3.       Quality Materials. Exterior materials should include a limited variety of compatible materials such as stucco, wood, glass, natural stone, masonry, and climbing vines.

4.       Colors. Exterior colors should adhere to a restrained palette of natural colors and avoid vivid, bright and flashy displays.

 

Figure 32.1 Architectural Style Guidelines



 

Figure 32.2 Architectural Style Guidelines



 

Figure 33.1 Existing Neighborhood Character



 

Figure 33.2 Existing Neighborhood Character



(Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.290 Building placement.
Structures are to appear to recede into the site. The specific plan includes largely level lots of at least 20,000 square feet which allows greater flexibility in building placement. Designers should create new dwellings that are compatible with existing homes and consistent with the texture and color of the natural setting including landscaping and hillsides.

A.      Placement of the Main Residence—Guidelines.

1.       Emphasize Natural Setting. New homes in the specific plan are to respect the approach taken by most existing homes in the neighborhood, that take a second position to their natural setting. The residence should not be the sole focus of the lot. Landscaping might play a larger role in accomplishing this rather than the building placement on some lots.

2.       Account for Wildfire. Site buildings and manage vegetation through fuel modification requirements to account for wildfire hazards in any very high fire hazard areas of the specific plan (currently specific plan - north).

3.       Allow for Extra Vehicle Storage. In the event on-site vehicle storage is needed to store boats, trailers, and recreational vehicles, parking shall be outside of the front yard and screened from neighboring properties as required by the city’s RV parking requirements.

4.       Create Defensible Space. For fire prevention purposes, a fuel modification plan consistent with Los Angeles County fire department fuel modification plan requirements shall be submitted to the city of Glendora department of planning and redevelopment and department of public works for review and approval prior to issuance of building permits.

5.       Account for the Setbacks of Existing Homes. New construction should use setbacks in keeping with the established building line along a street. The specific plan has a maximum setback of 35 feet to ensure that a home that assumes a deep front setback would not adversely affect the development of an adjacent lot.

B.      Views.

1.       There are no view protection regulations implied within this specific plan as views from the existing adjacent neighborhoods are not anticipated of being impaired by the project as proposed. Internal to the specific plan area however, consideration should be given in the house designs to not impair possible offsite views with the placement of prominent elements such as towers, chimneys, and second story dormers.

 

Figure 34: Building Placement—Views



 

2.       View Guidelines—Minimize View Blockage. Respect views through the use of building setbacks consistent with neighboring structures, low landscape features (e.g., plants, walls, and fences), and roof plate heights, stepped back second stories, non-reflective paint and roofing materials, and roof forms that minimize mass.

Figure 35 provides a good example of off-setting the taller (second level) elements to one side in deference to the views a neighbor might enjoy. This is also a good example of segmenting the roof planes and having robust and significant roof dormers, and a well-placed chimney to reduce the mass and potential dominance of the roof.

 

Figure 35: Example of Off-Setting Taller Elements



 

C.      Solar Access and Solar Energy Systems.

1.       Access to sunlight is important for energy efficiency and landscaping as well as for homes that use solar energy. It is also important to ensure adequate access to sunlight on the south side of properties so that passive solar heating opportunities are available and solar energy systems can be installed.

2.       Solar Access Guidelines.

a.       Allow Solar Access for Neighbors. Wherever possible, orient building volumes and second stories to allow solar access to neighboring properties. Limit the height of structures near “northerly” property lines such that the structure does not unduly encroach into a neighbor’s solar access plane.

b.       Design for Solar Installation.

i.        Exposures. Design for southern roof exposure. Shade the west side. Create a wind break on the north side. Place and orient homes to take advantage of natural heating and cooling, sun and wind exposure, and solar energy opportunities. Panels should ideally face south, with southeast and southwest as secondary options. If the placement can’t face south, west is better than east to capture late afternoon sun.

ii.       Tilt Angle. The ideal tilt angle for Southern California is approximately 17 degrees, roughly a 4:12 pitch.

iii.     Roof Space for Solar Collectors. Technologies as of Spring 2010 require between 300 and 600 square feet of south-facing, shade-free roof space for most solar collection installations, for average homes (2,500—3,000 square feet). This is only a guideline, as it is likely that with the advance in technology the efficiency will improve and less space will likely be required.

iv.      Building Integrated Photovoltaics (BIPV). As much as possible solar collectors placed on front-facing roofs and visible from the street should be unobtrusive, matching (within reason) the color and texture of the roof. Technology is emerging that will likely make this more possible.

 

Figure 36: Solar Access Design



(Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.300 Building envelope.
Building envelope refers to the planes and surfaces of a home. Building setback and height limitations in the specific plan place some scale restraints on new construction. However, a house built to maximum height and within setbacks may still result in a dwelling that is not compatible with the neighborhood. A dwelling may appear massive or bulky if the shape and/or façade is too simple and lacking in articulation and detail. Dwellings of different size can be in scale with one another if they share architectural characteristics, including building shape, complexity of form, or style and detail.

A.      Overall Building Envelope Guidelines.

1.       Use Offsets. If appropriate for the architectural style, use offsets extending to grade on the long dimension of the dwelling. Articulate all sides of the dwelling facing a public right of way consistently, as well as on any attached accessory structure.

2.       Use Decks, Balconies, Recesses. Use projecting or recessing architectural details, such as decks, bay windows or balconies, and appropriate complementary changes in building materials or colors to visually break up long unarticulated walls.

3.       Design to Mitigate Bulk and Mass. Minimize size, bulk, and scale through the use of appropriate roof style and shallow pitch, form and materials, varied setbacks, asymmetric design, window treatment and location, and door size and type. Break up mass to create interplay between various building elements.

4.       Account for the Size of Neighboring Homes. Structures that are significantly larger in size, bulk, scale, height, or architectural style from adjacent dwellings may be allowed if the new dwelling is consistent with the design guidelines regarding placement, privacy, shade, and overall neighborhood character.

 

Figure 37: Offset Examples



 

Figure 38: Balcony Examples



 

Figure 39: Design to Mitigate Bulk and Mass



B.      Height. Maximum building height is 25 feet measured from the top of roofing material to finished grade. A modest extension above the 25-foot limit is allowed for chimneys, but no more than is required to meet Building Regulations.

C.      Porches and Courtyards—Guidelines.

1.       Porch Depth. Porches should be a minimum 6 foot in depth and be usable.

2.       Posts and Columns. Posts may be wood, stucco, stone, cast concrete, or metal typically simplified in form. Columns should be robust (10 to 15 inches wide) and feature a wood, stone, or masonry base and cap. Columns, bases and caps can be accented with decorative carvings and tile.

3.       Decking to Be Fireproof. Use heavy timber or noncombustible construction materials for decks. Enclose the underside of balconies and above ground decks with fire resistant materials to prevent embers from blowing underneath.

4.       Courtyards. Front yard courtyards are allowed and encouraged.

 

Figure 40: Porch Examples



 

Figure 41: Front Yard Courtyard Examples



 

D.      Second Story Guidelines.

1.       Privacy. Window placement, and landscape screening to minimize (as much as practical) second floor windows overlooking the rear yard of existing homes.

2.       Second Floor Size Limit. The second story shall be no more than 75% of the footprint of the first floor (minus 400 s.f. of the garage).

3.       Account for the Height of the Home Next Door. New homes should include single-story elements adjacent to existing one-story residences.

Figure 42: Second-Story Examples



E.       Roofs. In a low-profile setting the color, texture, pitch and style of a roof can have a profound impact in the overall character of a home.

Roof Guidelines.

1.       Simplicity. Roofs should be simple and straightforward. Complex roofs are discouraged. The use of valleys should be minimized.

2.       Roof Materials. Desirable roof materials include manufactured barrel, light weight cement, modified barrel, light weight, two piece clay tiles, two piece Roman pan clay tiles or flat clay tiles, slate, and cement tiles and others approved by the city of Glendora.

3.       Roof Elements. Flashing, sheet metal, vent stacks and pipes should be painted to match adjacent building surfaces or the roof, or otherwise treated to recede into the background.

4.       Skylights. Skylights should be designed as an integral part of the roof and exhibit quality in materials and design, for instance, they should be flat bronze-colored glass in bronze-anodized frames. Bubble and white plastic skylights are not allowed.

5.       Exposed Rafter Tails. Exposed heavy timber rafter tails may be used where appropriate.

6.       Gutters and Eaves. If used, exposed gutters should be nonextruded, half-round gutters with round downspouts unless otherwise approved by the city of Glendora. Gutters and downspouts should be designed as a continuous architectural feature. Gutters and downspouts may be made of copper or shall be painted dark to imitate aged metal or painted to match the roof, the trim, or the wall. Downspouts and rain leaders should be placed in building corners and at inconspicuous locations. Decorative gutter boxes may be used sparingly where required. Roof eaves should be boxed in with fire resistant materials to protect the underside of eaves and soffits.

7.       Dormers. Dormers should be robust and significant and provide relief from the mass of the roof.

Figure 43: Dormer Examples



8.       Privacy. Windows should be placed mindful of potential intrusions in privacy for adjacent residents.

9.       Overhangs. In some styles of architecture generous overhangs are typical and expected and in such instances a minimum overhang of 12 inches is desirable. Some styles do not have generous overhangs. Some overhangs are extended to create trellises and porches, if that is consistent with the architectural style.

10.     Overall Integration of Elements. Integrate solar energy collector panels, tiles or shingles, skylights, and other roof-mounted equipment into the roof forms. Minimize their visual prominence when viewed from the street and nearby dwellings. Roof-top heating and air conditioning systems are not permitted.

 

Figure 44: Roof Examples



 

Figure 45: Chimney Examples



(Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.310 Garages and accessory structures.
A.      Garages and Parking. Garages can be split and offset to reduce their visual impact. Garages shall be stepped back to reduce their visual impact and to enforce the primacy for the front door entrance.

B.      Garage and Parking Guidelines.

1.       Compatible with Main Structure. Garages and carports should be architecturally consistent with the main dwelling. Garages should not be the dominant design feature of the front façade. Garage placement, exterior treatment, and position should be varied.

2.       Position of Garages. Attached garages and carports should be subordinate to the main dwelling and architecturally consistent in detail. Garages should be set back a minimum of 5 feet from the main façade. For garage openings wider than 35 feet, it is recommended that such garages be fronted with a porte cochere. (See Figure 46.)

Figure 46: Porte Cochere Example



 

3.       Garage Doors. Garage doors should be designed for architectural and visual interest. Street facing garage door openings should not dominate the street elevation and must be recessed from the plane of the main residence. A variety of garage entry conditions are encouraged. Rear lot, multi-car, multi-car with tandem spaces, and split designs are allowed.

 

Figure 47: Garage Door Example



 

Figure 48: Garage Placement



 

Figure 49: Garage Doors



 

4.       Parking Location and Screening. Areas intended to serve as parking courts should be located behind courtyard walls, or screened with landscape and walls as much as practical from off-site views. A driveway, leading to a garage which has been designed to be included as an integral part of a residence, does not need to be screened.

5.       Carports. Carports should be landscaped and screened from view from adjoining parcels.

C.      Stand-Alone Accessory Structures and Accessory Dwelling Units. The following guidelines apply to accessory structures that are not attached to the main residence. This includes detached garages, studios, pool houses, greenhouses, and accessory dwelling units. Accessory dwelling units are permitted and function as independent living quarters from the main residence while maintaining the appearance of being an integral part of the site development. Refer to the City of Glendora Municipal Code for regulations regarding accessory dwelling units.

 

Figure 50: Accessory Dwelling Unit



 

D.      Stand-Alone Accessory Structure Guidelines.

1.       Unobtrusive. Stand-alone accessory buildings should be unobtrusive and blend with the site and the main residence.

2.       Not the Dominant View. Avoid placing accessory structures where they are a dominant component of the view from the street frontage or other public viewpoints or an adjoining residence. (Ord. 2015 § 2, 2017; Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.320 Building details.
A.      Windows and Doors. Doors and windows are visually distinctive and prominent features on a dwelling. They are a link between private and public space and can provide a sense of security for both. They also establish an architectural rhythm and affect the apparent mass of the dwelling.

 

1.       Window Guidelines.

a.       Space Between Openings. Windows and doors should have ample dimension between all openings and building corners to reflect the opening to mass ratios of each style.

b.       Surrounds and Sills. With the exception of accent windows and doors, window and door trim and surrounds should have a consistent treatment on all major building elevations. Window surrounds shall be deeply recessed stucco or rustic stone. Window sills should be relatively flat with a slight incline.

c.       Lites and Divides. Windows should have true non-removable divided lites. Individual window panes should be relatively small, rectangular and vertically proportioned. Ranch homes are allowed more horizontally proportioned windows because that is the traditional approach.

d.       Recessed Windows. Recess windows into the wall plane enough to add shadow effects and provide visual relief. The exterior plaster return should be perpendicular and tight to the window frame.

Figure 51: Recessed Windows with Awnings



e.       Construction. Wood, clad wood or steel hinged casement or fixed casement windows are preferred. Second floor windows should be vertically proportioned casements or French doors with decorative iron or wooden railings.

f.        Frame Color. Window frames are encouraged to be a color other than white.

g.       Awnings. Fabric and metal slat awnings can add accent color and address heat gain from sunlight. Metal awnings can only be metal slats with openings between. Solid aluminum or steel awnings are prohibited.

 

Figure 52: Window Details



 

h.       Picture Windows. A picture window or bay window is often located on the primary façade. Additional picture windows are typically located to frame notable views.

2.       Door Guidelines.

a.       Entry Doors. The primary entry portal or entry door should receive special delineation and greater differentiation from all other exterior doors. Designs should emphasize the main entrance with porches, archways, alcoves, and a prominent location on the front façade. Design the entry in proportion to the scale of the dwelling. Avoid the use of columns, towers, and other entry features that are out of scale or style with the dwelling and/or neighborhood.

Figure 53: Window Shutters



 

Figure 54: Metal Awnings



b.       Door Construction. Door may be single or paired. Doors should typically be wood, either paneled or plain. Main entry doors should be (but are not required to be) ceremonial, substantial and robust with real wood, glass windows, glass side lites, luxury hardware and above average height.

c.       Upper Story Recessed Exterior Doors. Performing a deep recess, and adding railings, awnings, doors and decorative accents to the typical programmed window opening can result in an upper story recessed exterior door which results in shadow effects and interest.

 

Figure 55: Entry Door Details



 

Figure 56: Front Entry Treatment



B.      Exterior Wall Treatment Guidelines.

1.       Number of Materials. Use a limited number of exterior materials to minimize conflicting design features.

2.       Color. Use warm, earth-toned materials and colors to integrate with the surrounding terrain and reduce glare and the apparent mass of the dwelling. Exterior materials and colors should complement the style of the dwelling and neighborhood, and permit it to blend with surrounding natural features when viewed from a distance. Wall cladding should vary in tone, color, material and arrangement to diminish the bulk and to fit in the neighborhood vernacular. A structure should not be overwhelmed with exterior finishes to the degree that it adds to the appearance of bulk and mass to the structure.

 

Figure 57: Balanced Mix of Exterior Wall Treatments



 

Figure 58: Exterior Wall Treatment



 

3.       Application of Materials. “Wrap” accent materials (stone, wood cladding, etc.) needed to maintain the integrity of the architectural style on all elevations. Stone, for instance, should be carried “around the corner” to a logical terminus (wall projection, chimney, etc.). The expectation is that façades with more exposure to public views will have more detailing.

4.       Stucco Finishes. For the most part, stucco finish should be a quality finish, not “heavy.” Mottled, “burned” and faux finishes which reflect an authentic aged plaster are acceptable. Use fire resistant materials such as stucco, masonry or other fire-rated materials on exterior walls and throughout the structure. Use of durable and recycled construction materials such as cement fiber siding and tile roofing is encouraged.

5.       Use of Stone. Stone should be an accent, (such as the cladding of one bay) not the dominant material of the entire home, and it should exhibit a range of earth tone colors common to the area stone and soils. Formal, rectangular, equal-sized dressed stone quoins used to reinforce an exterior corner of a building and laid on squared beds are allowed. Use of real stone and high grade quality synthetic stone, faux stone and/or stucco stone is allowed.

6.       Wood. When wood is used it should be treated with a weather-resistant treatment. For a natural look, stain is preferred over paint.

 

Figure 59: Comprehensive Approach to Exterior Treatment



(Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.330 Landscaping—Private residential dwelling.
Landscaping is addressed in three sections. The first section addresses private residential dwellings, followed by a section on landscaping in the public rights-of-way, and finally, a section with guidelines for landscaping maintained by a homeowner’s association.

 

Figure 60: Landscaping



 

A.      Plant Material. All landscaping should be developed with drought tolerant, arid and ornamental landscape to complement the overall project character. The specific plan areas will mesh the surrounding existing landscape to create a soft transition condition. All landscaping within the project shall conform to standard horticultural installation and maintenance.

1.       Overall Plant Material Guidelines.

a.       Water Wise Plant Choices. Plant palettes are to adhere to all applicable water conservation regulations and ordinances.

b.       Native Plants. Mix in native California plants in high fire hazard severity zones, including well-adapted firewise non-native plant material.

c.       High Fire Hazard Severity Zone. In the high fire hazard severity zone select plants for their ability to reduce wildfire hazards. Avoid landscaping which promotes ladder fuels (vegetation that allows fire to move from lower growing plants to taller ones). Place plants with adequate spacing and use permeable hardscape features to break up continuous dense cover of shrubs and trees.

d.       Architectural Enhancement. Landscaping such as vines, espeliers, shrubs, trees or trellises should be used to enhance the architecture, creating attractive public and private open spaces.

e.       Front Yards. Front yards should be designed using plant material and other landscape elements that compliment the building form, horizontal and vertical lines, hardscape and softscapes that display texture and color compatible with the colors and building materials of the building.

f.        Shadows and Shade. Landscape plans should locate trees, shrubs, and new structures to avoid casting shade onto a neighbor’s solar energy system after that system is installed.

g.       Root Structures. All plant material is to be chosen mindful of the potential, among some species and varieties, of root incursion into subsurface pipes and conduit, and root mass that damages paving and foundations.

h.       Anticipate and Maintain Natural Form. With the exception of turf areas, all plants should be chosen and located so that they may be allowed to grow and mature in a natural form. Plants within public view should not be pruned into artificial shapes such as boxes, balls, triangles or topiary. Hedges should be planted in anticipation of full mature size to reduce the need for pruning to resolve conflicts with sidewalks and trails.

i.        Chemical Avoidance or Elimination. Plant material should be chosen that is naturally compatible to the soils, climate, insect colonies and blight conditions of the specific plan setting so as to avoid or eliminate the need for the use of herbicides, insecticides, or other poisons and chemicals within both private and public property within the specific plan area.

Figure 61: Plant Material Examples



Figure 62: Plant Material Arrangement Examples



 

2.       Tree Guidelines—Shade Trees. Plant new shade trees on new development parcels sufficient to respect the generally shaded nature of the neighborhood.

3.       Shrub Guidelines—Anticipate Shrub Size at Maturity. Shrubs should be chosen mindful of their mature size in the location in order to minimize pruning. Ideally shrubs are allowed to remain natural. Shrubs should assume a second position to adjacent shade trees and not assume a size that will eventually interfere with adjacent trees.

4.       Ground Cover Guidelines. Ground covers should require low maintenance. Turf should be limited as a ground cover. Ground covers should be primarily low water using varieties with species of higher water requirements closer to the home. Homeowners are encouraged to limit turf areas to defined areas extending from the home or patio. Turf areas are not prohibited, but they should be minimized.

5.       Drainage and Wildfire Irrigation Guidelines.

a.       Drainage. Where appropriate and as required by the project SUSMP, infiltrate runoff through on-site storage and drainage systems, such as into landscaped areas, bioswale and detention basins.

b.       Wildfire Irrigation. For fire prevention purposes, a fuel modification plan consistent with Los Angeles County Fire Department fuel modification plan requirements shall be submitted to the Department of Planning and Redevelopment and city of Glendora’s Department of Public Works for review and approval prior to issuance of building permits.

B.      Hardscape.

1.       Prohibited Hardscape Materials. Materials not permitted to be used for sidewalks, driveways, patios and courtyards:

a.       Patterned concrete (stamped brick, stamped stone);

b.       Asphalt.

 

Figure 63: Hardscape Examples



 

2.       Driveway Paving Materials. The following are allowed driveway paving options:

a.       Concrete;

b.       Paving brick;

c.       Natural stone unit pavers;

d.       Pre-cast concrete pavers (natural stone colors);

e.       Wire cut brick;

f.        Fired clay pavers;

g.       Terrazzo;

h.       Auto courtyards can feature gravel paving beyond the front yard setback.

 

Figure 64: Mix of Pavers and Concrete



 

3.       Hardscape Guidelines.

a.       Hardscape Paving Materials. The following are recommended materials:

i.        Concrete;

ii.       Textured concrete;

iii.     Paving brick;

iv.      Natural stone unit pavers;

v.       Pre-cast concrete pavers (natural stone colors);

vi.      Wire cut brick;

vii.    Fired clay pavers;

viii.   Terrazzo;

ix.      Interlocking concrete pavers (natural stone colors) tumbled and weathered.

 

Figure 65: Driveway Paving Examples



 

Figure 66: Courtyard and Patio Paving Examples



b.       The following should be limited, used selectively, and not dominate the hardscape:

i.        Three-eighths (3/8) inch earth tone pea gravel;

ii.       Earth tone, or lighter gravel, stone, pebbles, decomposed granite and similar materials (earth tone or lighter).

4.       Permeable Pavers. Use of permeable paving materials to reduce runoff is encouraged.

5.       Slope of Walkways. Slope walkways toward landscaped areas to encourage water infiltration and reduce irrigation needs.

C.      Walls and Fences. Fences and walls between lots (perimeter) should blend with both the architecture and the landscape, while still providing privacy and security consistent with the needs of individual lot owners. Fences and walls placed on lots should be an extension of the colors and materials of the adjacent residential architecture, visually compatible and be of materials related to the land (such as stone). They may occur as an extension of house living spaces, to frame courtyards or to direct views. Wrought iron fencing styles are encouraged to maintain openness. The following requirements apply to all fences and walls within the specific plan.

1.       Perimeter Fence Guidelines—Perimeter Fence Material. Acceptable fence materials include tubular steel and wrought iron. Solid fences may be wood as long as the wood fence has two “good” sides.

2.       Perimeter Solid Wall Guidelines.

a.       Perimeter Solid Wall Material. Acceptable wall materials include planted hedges, stone, masonry with plaster finish, adobe block, and slump block with stucco finish. Combination walls may consist of a 12-inch high masonry or stone wall below a tubular steel or wrought iron fence (total height not to exceed 6 feet).

b.       When to Use Solid Walls. Solid walls should generally be attached to buildings or architectural elements, and be designed to be visually compatible with, or an extension of, the architecture of the building and may be “attached” to the building by a gate.

Figure 67: Perimeter Wall



c.       Hedges. Hedge “walls” are allowed and encouraged and must comply with height restrictions for solid walls.

d.       Color. Perimeter walls should be colored in conformance with the color palette of the main residence, or in earth tones and subtle shades. Planting climbing vines on walls is allowed and encouraged.

e.       Caps. All walls should have a brick, or stone or concrete cap with a minimum of a 1 inch reveal on each side. Precast concrete caps are allowed.

f.        Pilasters. All walls should have pilasters at the ends. Walls must be centered on the pilaster.

Figure 68: Landscape Wall Examples



3.       Gate Guidelines. Gates should be tubular steel, wrought iron or wood. Wood gates are required to screen equipment areas. Gates may not be installed along rear property lines except at fuel modification easements. Finish colors for gates attached to fences shall be identical to the wood fence. Finish colors for gates attached to walls shall be derived from the color palette of the main residence or the wall.

4.       Retaining Wall Guidelines.

a.       Treatment. Retaining walls should perform their function gracefully, and not be a dominant landscape element, and, if possible, be masked and mitigated with plantings.

b.       Retaining Wall Materials. Acceptable wall materials include stone, masonry with plaster finish, adobe block and slump block with stucco finish. Where appropriate, a retaining wall should be made of natural boulders or cut stone. Precast caps are allowed.

c.       Berms. Gentle berms should be used where appropriate to reduce the impact of retaining walls.

d.       Vines. Retaining walls should have vines planted on them to reduce their impact. Where retaining walls are allowed they should be stepped or terraced, and should blend into their surroundings, with height and length kept to a minimum.

 

Figure 69: Retaining Wall Examples



5.       Screening Guidelines.

a.       It is expected that the following utilitarian elements should be placed out of public view, or view of the neighbors (from the first floor) or otherwise screened:

i.        Dog runs (allowed in side or rear yard only);

ii.       Mechanical equipment, such as heating or air conditioning equipment;

iii.     Utility meters;

iv.      Outdoor storage areas;

v.       Pool and fountain equipment, including sound attenuation devices and structures;

vi.      Satellite dish and antennas;

vii.    Spas;

viii.   Trash enclosures.

b.       Screening may be accomplished by any one of the following means, or in a combination of means:

i.        Enclosed in a building that is part of, or architecturally consistent with the style of the residential building;

ii.       A masonry wall of sufficient height. The treatment of the wall should match the architectural treatment of the main residence, or the walls and/or fences that are an integral part of the garden design;

iii.     Permanent landscape planting of evergreen hedges, shrubs, trees or vines of sufficient mature height, density and breadth to completely conceal from view those things that require screening;

iv.      Overhead trellis.

 

Figure 70: Screening and Privacy Fence Examples



6.       Outdoor Lighting Guidelines.

a.       Minimal Lighting. Lighting is to provide levels of lighting sufficient to meet safety and orientation needs, but low enough to promote the community’s character.

b.       Color of the Light Emitted. Lighting must be warm-colored and unobtrusive. Light sources must be warm-colored. Incandescent, tungsten and metal halide sources are preferred; mercury vapor, sodium, neon and cool fluorescent are not permitted unless the light they emit can be made warm by filters and lenses.

c.       Fixtures. Light sources should be concealed when possible, and lighting indirect. Exposed bulbs, spot lights, reflectors, and lenses are prohibited. Light fixtures on top of pilasters are not permitted.

d.       Wall Mounted Lights. Wall mounted fixtures should have seeded glass and be fitted with bulbs with accumulated output not exceeding 40 watts.

e.       Reflected Light. Light is allowed to be reflected off natural elements such as rocks or trees. Generally, light should be reflected from natural surfaces, such as bark, natural stone, leaves or wood. Lighting of large surface areas of stucco or other man-made materials will not be permitted.

f.        Light Overflow. Light sources may not be directed into areas adjacent to the parcel. All light should be directed so that adjacent homes, open space and other areas are protected from substantial light overflow and glare. This applies to all exterior lighting.

 

Figure 71: Lighting Examples



 

7.       Landscape Boulder Guidelines. The use of additional boulders as part of the site and landscape design requires special attention to the scale, proportions and arrangements of the boulders.

a.       Scale. The addition of boulder elements into the landscape and site needs to consider the scale of the existing elements.

b.       Natural Arrangement. If additional boulders are proposed or existing boulders moved, they must be placed in a natural arrangement with the boulders being placed horizontal, not vertical, with a minimum of one-third of the boulder buried into the ground. Boulders should be naturally clustered, not “lined up” or evenly scattered. Boulders may not be placed “on top” of walls.

8.       Irrigation Guidelines.

a.       The irrigation system should accommodate the water requirements of the plant material and provide just enough water for optimum plant growth. Efficient irrigation and drought tolerant plant materials will conserve a great amount of water. The use of moisture sensing devices is encouraged.

b.       Irrigation plans are to indicate all components of the irrigation system, including point of connection, controllers, backflow preventers, irrigation heads and underground pipe locations.

c.       All above-ground controllers should be completely screened from adjacent roadways.

d.       Drip, bubbler or micro-spray should be used for trees and shrubs. Irrigation design should be mindful of overspray.

e.       All natural grasses shall be irrigated for establishment purposes. Thereafter, natural grasses shall be allowed to change colors with the seasons.

f.        Lots within the specific plan are encouraged to examine the feasibility of irrigation with reclaimed water. (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.340 Landscaping—Public right-of-way.
The public right-of-way consists of the public property outside of the property lines of the residential lots and exclusive of the linear park. Landscaping governed in this section applies only to land between the curb and sidewalk more specifically defined as the “parkway.”

A.      Trees. Trees in the public right-of-way shall be limited in variety to simplify maintenance, create a strong unifying sense of character appropriate to the setting large shade trees are to be planted to bring unity and consistency to the streetscape. Trees should be selected from the specific plan plant palette.

B.      Shrubs/Ground Cover. Shrubs and ground cover are permittted in the parkway.

C.      Sidewalks/Parkway. All new public streets in the specific plan will have 5-foot wide sidewalks separated from the street by a minimum 4 1/2-foot landscaped parkway to back of curb. (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.350 Landscaping—Homeowner’s association.
It is anticipated that a homeowner’s association will be formed to bear the responsibility to care for the following open spaces and parcels within the specific plan. They are described as follows:

A.      The Linear Park. The precise landscape design of the linear park is not specified in this specific plan. But, as a guide, it is intended to be similar to the plants (see subsection G of this section, Plant Pallette) and similar to, with respect to pavement type, pavement widths, landscape palette, walls and trails, and general approach to the design treatment found in the Arboreta planned community immediately to the east of the specific plan.

B.      Visible Man-Made Slopes. These are disturbed areas or manufactured slopes that lie between native vegetation and ornamental areas. They will be vegetated in such a manner so as to provide visual and horticultural compatibility with adjacent native materials while transitioning to the ornamental landscaping. On large slopes over 20 feet high, native grasses and wildflower seed mixes are allowed in combination with shrubs between tree and shrub groups for up to 30% of the area. Grasses are encouraged next to existing grasslands. Flower seed shall not comprise more than 5% of the total seed mix. Mowing or weed whipping is necessary only for fuel modification or brush management. On smaller slopes, shrubs from the plant palette are required.

C.      Emergency Access Points. The emergency access points have decorative bollards, hardscape and landscaping. The HOA would assume maintenance over these connections.

D.      “Letter lots” that are neither part of the public right-of-way nor part of a private residence.

E.       The Private Drive Adjacent to the Fairmount Cemetery. Plant selections should be in substantial conformance with an approved master landscape and irrigation plan and may include, but is not limited to, the plant palette.

Figure 72.1: Gateways



Figure 72.2: Gateways



 

F.       HOA Landscape Guidelines.

1.       Large trees, large shrubs or small trees located in large informal masses, planted as single species and in large groups to resemble native shrub arrangements.

2.       Minimize mature tree and other vegetation removal to the extent necessary for the construction of the structure(s) and fire safety.

3.       Integrate new structures and landscaping with the existing neighborhood vegetative cover.

4.       Minimize turf areas.

5.       Mix in native California plants and well-adapted firewise non-native plants.

6.       Retaining walls should be stepped or terraced, and should blend into their surroundings, with height and length kept to a minimum and, where appropriate, a retaining wall should be made of natural boulders or cut stone. Use earth tone colors and native or natural materials such as sandstone for walls. Natural stone walls instead of concrete, brick or slag block should be considered the first choice where a masonry wall is desired. Walls or fences are to have setbacks adequate to allow ample room for bicycle and pedestrian passage. Walls and fences should be incorporated into a landscaping scheme that appears natural and follows the terrain.

7.       Chain-link fencing is prohibited.

G.      Plant Palette—Parkway and Homeowner’s Association. The following plant palette applies to the landscaping within the public right-of-way or parkway and to landscaping on property maintained by a homeowner’s association. Additional plant material can be used subject to the approval of the city.

 

 

BOTANICAL NAME

COMMON NAME

COMMENTS

TREES

 

 

ALNUS RHOMBIFOLIA

ALDER

STANDARD/LOW BRANCH

CELTIS X “FOREST PANSY”

EASTERN REDBUD

STANDARD

CINNAMOMUM CAMPHORA

CAMPHOR TREE

STANDARD/MULTI

HETEROMELES ARBUTIFOLIA

TOYON

LOW BRANCH

LAGERSTROEMIA “MUSKOGEE”

CRAPE MYRTLE

STANDARD/MULTI

LAGERSTROEMIA “GLENDORA WHITE”

CRAPE MYRTLE

STANDARD/MULTI-BRANCHED

MAYTENUS BOARIA

MAYTEN TREE

LOW BRANCH

PLATANUS ACERFOLIA

LONDON PLANE TREE

STANDARD “BLOODGOOD” MULTI

PRUNUS CAROLINIANA-COLUMN

LAUREL CHERRY

COLUMN

QUERCUS AGRIFOLIA

COAST LIVE OAK

LOW BRANCH/ STANDARD

VINES

 

 

FICUS PUMILA

CREEPING FIG

 

ROSA “ALTISSIMO”

CLIMBING RED ROSE ESPALIER

 

GROUND COVERS

 

 

BACCHARIS PILULARIS “TWIN PEAKS”

DWARF COYOTE BRUSH

 

FESTUCA OVINA GLAUCA

BLUE FESCUE

 

HYPERICUM CALYCINUM

ST. JOHN’S WORT

 

SENECIO SEPEN

LUE CHALKSTICK

 

PENNISETUM ALOPECUROIDES “LITTLE BUNNY”

DWARF FOUNTAIN GRASS

 

TURF

 

 

SEA DWARF SEASHORE PASPALUM

SEA DWARF TURF

 

ALOHA SEASHORE PASPALUM

ALOHA SEASHORE TURF

 

SHRUBS

 

 

AGAVE AMERICANA

CENTURY PLANT

 

ANIGOZANTHOSX BUSH RANGER

DWARF KANGAROO PAW

 

ARCTOSTAPHYLOS “PACIFIC MIST”

MANZANITA

 

ARMERIA MARTIMA

SEA PINK

 

CARISSA “TUTTLEI”

NATAL PLUM

 

CAREX BUCHANII

LEATHER LEAF SEDGE

 

CEANOTHUS “YANKEE POINT”

CEANOTHUS

 

CORDYLINEX “ELECTRIC PINK”

ELECTRIC PINK COUDYLINE

 

EUONYMUS GRANDIFOLIA

EUONYMUS

 

HEBE “VERONICA LAKE”

HEBE

 

HELICTOTRICHON SEMPERVIRENS

BLUE OAT GRASS

 

JUNIPERUS SABINA “BROADMOOR”

BROADMOOR JUNIPER

 

LAVATERA ASSURGENTIFLORA

TREE MALLOW

 

LIGUSTRUM TEXANUM

WAX-LEAF PRIVET

 

LOROPETALUM CHINENSE “RAZZLEBERRY”

LOROPETALUM

 

MAHONIA REPENS

CREEPING MAHONIA

 

MUHLENBERGIA RIGENS

DEER GRASS

 

MYRICA CALIFORNICA

PACIFIC WAX MYRTLE

 

PENSTEMON “APPLE BLOSSOM”

PINK BORDER PENSTEMON

 

PITTOSPORUM TENUIFOLIUM

BLACK STEM PITT.

 

PYRACANTHA “SANTA CRUZ”

PYRACANTHA

 

RHAPHIOLEPIS “PINK LADY”

INDIAN HAWTHORN

 

ROSA “MOON DANCE”

MOON DANCE WHITE ROSE

 

SALVIA GREGGII “ALBA”

WHITE SALVIA

 

WESTRINGIA FRUTICOSA “SMOKEY”

COAST ROSEMARY

 

YUCCA WHIPPLEI

OUR LORD’S CANDLE

 

(Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

Article VII. Implementation
21.13.360 Authority and scope.
A.      California Government Code Section 65450 authorizes preparation of specific plans to implement a jurisdiction’s general plan. State law provides limited guidance regarding the content and scope of a specific plan, indicating that a specific plan must address the distribution, location, and extent of land use; the infrastructure—both public and private—necessary to support the land use plan; and an implementation plan that includes identification of financing measures. Also, the specific plan must include a statement of the relationship of the specific plan to the general plan. The specific plan may also address any other subjects which decision makers find necessary to desirable to achieve city goals, as stated in the general plan.

B.      The regulations contained in this specific plan apply to all properties within the specific plan area. The regulations contained herein take precedence over the zoning regulations contained in Title 21 of the City of Glendora Municipal Code. Following adoption of the specific plan by the city council, all subsequent development within the project area must be consistent with specific plan regulations and standards. This includes all local public works projects, tentative maps, and parcel maps (Government Code Section 65455). Where a particular standard is not addressed in this specific plan, the regulations of Title 21 shall apply. Applications are to comply precisely with the provisions of this specific plan, or be deemed in conformance by means of the substantial conformance provisions of this specific plan. (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.370 California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
Pursuant to local and state CEQA guidelines, the city of Glendora has prepared a mitigated negative declaration. Mitigations required by the MND have been incorporated into this specific plan, or are part of the subdivision approval. (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.380 Enforcement.
The provisions of the specific plan shall generally be enforced through subsequent zoning actions the city must take to approve development in the specific plan. The city will monitor compliance with the specific plan:

•         During the approval of any CEQA document.

•         During the review and approval of subsequent development permits and use permits.

•         During the review of working drawings, and prior to the issuance of grading or building permits.

•         Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for any building within the specific plan area.

•         Prior to the recording of any parcel map or final map within the specific plan boundaries. (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.390 Amendments.
In accordance with the California Government Code Section 65450 (et. seq.), specific plans shall be prepared, adopted, and amended in the same manner as general plans, except that specific plans may be adopted by resolution or by ordinance. The specific plan may be amended, as necessary, in the same manner that it was adopted, pursuant to Section 21.06.060(E) of the Glendora Municipal Code. Said amendment shall not require a concurrent general plan amendment unless it is determined by the city that the proposed amendment would substantively affect the city of Glendora general plan goals, objectives, policies, or programs for the specific plan area. Any specific plan amendment application shall be subject to review as required by the California Environmental Quality Act. (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.400 Citrus Avenue.
A.      General Plan. Citrus Avenue in the city’s 2025 general plan is classified as an arterial roadway that terminates at Foothill Boulevard (Exhibit CIR-1).

B.      Specific Plan. Citrus Avenue will terminate at Monrovia Place (approximately at the Azusa/Glendora municipal boundary line) and will not continue north to Sierra Madre Avenue. In accordance with city of Glendora general plan policy, no new street connections will be maintained to an adjoining jurisdiction. (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.410 Determination of substantial conformance.
A.      “Substantial conformance” means that any proposed activity, construction and development complies with the Monrovia Nursery specific plan, adopted mitigation measures, and project conditions of approval, where no additional units (except accessory dwelling units), property, or parcels beyond that provided by the specific plan or approved map are involved, approved minimum lot sizes are maintained, proposed construction is consistent with the architectural guidelines provided in the specific plan, no grading beyond substantial conformance limits is proposed, and no significant environmental impact is created. The directors of public works and department of planning and redevelopment or their designees shall make a determination of substantial conformance prior to the issuance of any permits or approval of plans. No written determination is required provided that plans submitted to the city for approval exhibit substantial conformance with the Monrovia Nursery specific plan. Plans found not to be in substantial conformance shall not be approved and shall be revised.

B.      Issuance of Permits and Development Approval through Substantial Conformance. The purpose of substantial conformance is to provide an administrative mechanism which allows for the implementation of the specific plan and development of the site in accordance with the provisions of the Monrovia Nursery specific plan, adopted project mitigation measures, and conditions of approval that may apply (such as through an approved tentative tract map). Substantial conformance allows the city to approve plans and issue necessary permits for proposed infrastructure and site improvement plans that implement the specific plan as well as approve non-substantial modifications to the specific plan which do not modify the effect of the specific plan’s adoption on surrounding property. Public works improvement plans, development plans, and other city applications which may be approved under a ministerial building permit or other administrative permit approval as required by the city under these substantial conformance provisions include, but are not limited to, the following when consistent with the approved specific plan and project CEQA document:

1.       Accessory buildings and uses such as cabanas, carports, garages, and patios.

2.       Changes in exterior building materials.

3.       Grading and drainage plans resulting in not more than a one-foot increase over building pad elevations depicted in the specific plan grading exhibit for the following lots in the specific plan – north: All lots. In addition, deviation from the specific plan grading exhibit also shall be allowed when necessary to accommodate the minimum slope necessary to provide adequate lot drainage. However the building pad elevation upon which the footprint of the main residence is situated shall be in conformance with the specific plan grading exhibit.

4.       Grading and drainage plans resulting in not more than a one-foot increase over building pad elevations depicted in the specific plan grading exhibit for the following lots in the specific plan – south: Lots 1 through 6, 9 through 23, 33, 45, 46, and 60. Grading and drainage plans for all other lots will be deemed to be in substantial conformance if building pad elevations are within 5 feet of the specific plan grading exhibit. In addition, deviation from the specific plan grading exhibit also shall be allowed when necessary to accommodate the minimum slope necessary to provide adequate lot drainage. However the building pad elevation upon which the footprint of the main residence is situated shall be in conformance with the specific plan grading exhibit.

5.       One-story single-family residences.

6.       Lot line adjustments or lot mergers which result in the sale or transfer of “lettered lots” not part of the project landscape plan as evidenced by an approved landscape plan, or necessary to comply with water quality requirements as evidenced by an approved stormwater quality plan (either temporary or permanent).

7.       Project infrastructure such as for street improvements, water, sewer, storm drain, and water quality, which satisfy the intent of the specific plan with respect to providing the capacity needed, or ensuring the functionality of infrastructure necessary to serve the specific plan area, provided no new environmental impacts are created beyond those evaluated for the project.

8.       Public and private landscaping plans.

9.       Roof-mounted solar panel installations.

10.     Accessory dwelling unit construction.

11.     Swimming pools and spas.

12.     Walls and fences.

C.      Development Approvals for Activity Found Not to Be Under Substantial Conformance. Substantial conformance approval shall not apply to any of the activities listed below but instead shall be subject to the specified review processes. Upon approval by the appropriate reviewing body, the requested permits or approvals may be issued by the city:

1.       The following activities are subject to an amendment of the specific plan following the procedures established by Section 21.06.060 of the municipal code.

a.       Amendments to the specific plan, and any modifications that propose to alter components of the approved master plan, including but not limited to the following:

i.        Modifications in the basic design and layout of the project;

ii.       Increase or decrease in the number of lots;

iii.     Changes in the specific plan grading design which exceed the limits described above;

iv.      Changes which result in an increase in the magnitude of environmental impacts not analyzed in project environmental documents.

2.       The following activities are subject to planning commission and city council approval following the procedures established by Title 20 and Title 21 of the Glendora Municipal Code: Tentative and final approval of parcel maps or tract maps.

3.       The following activities are subject to planning commission approval following the procedures established by Section 21.02.040 of the Glendora Municipal Code.

a.       Approval of a master builder phasing plan for the development of two-story single-family residences;

b.       Approval of two-story custom homes;

c.       Second-story additions.

4.       The following activities are subject to planning director approval following the procedures established by Section 21.02.035 of the Glendora Municipal Code: Approval of minor modifications as defined by Section 21.02.035 of the Zoning Code.

5.       The following activities are subject to approval of the planning director and the city engineer at their discretion, which is limited to making a determination as to the compliance with mitigation measures of the project CEQA document, requirements of the specific plan, project conditions of approval, applicable requirements of the Glendora Municipal Code, or other requirements of state or federal law which the city is obligated to enforce.

a.       Infrastructure Phasing Plan. Approval of an infrastructure phasing plan.

b.       Development Phasing Plan. Approval of a development phasing plan depicting the areas of the site which will be under construction by a single developer, or jointly by several developers.

D.      Approval of Plans and Permits Found to Be Under Substantial Conformance. For building permits and improvements plans found to be in substantial conformance with the Monrovia Nursery specific plan and any other subsequent discretionary zoning approvals granted by the city, including the project’s environmental review, the city shall issue the requested permits or other necessary documentation required to exhibit the city’s approval. The city may withhold the approval of any permit where an applicant has not obtained the approval of other agencies required by law or other authority to review and approve proposed development plans.

E.       Approval of Entitlement and Permits Not Specified. Approval of entitlements or permits not specified shall follow the processes and procedures identified by the Glendora Municipal Code. (Ord. 2015 § 2, 2017; Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.420 Project infrastructure/development phasing.
A.      The phasing of improvements in the specific plan area has been determined by the need to protect the health, safety, and welfare of future residents of the project as well as the people and property surrounding the project site. The lack of storm drain and flood control protection in the area subjects the specific plan area and surrounding properties to a potentially hazardous condition due to the substantial amounts of stormwater runoff which can be generated in the watershed above the project. The condition could be severely exacerbated if the foothills above the watershed experience a heavy rain event after a wildfire. Heavy flooding after a wildfire in unprotected watersheds is a well-documented occurrence and was most recently exhibited in the La Canada Flintridge area in the aftermath of the 2009 Station Fire.

B.      While the project is not responsible for protecting existing homes exposed to the flooding hazard in the watershed new homes must be protected from the existing hazard. The project must also address any increases in runoff resulting from new development or alterations to drainage patterns caused as a result of the project.

C.      Given the size of the project and the potential for areas of the site to be developed independently or by different developers, although developing the entire specific plan as one phase remains as a viable option, the phasing plan described below ensures that certain infrastructure needs of the site are not accomplished in a piecemeal fashion, but in a manner suitable to ensure the welfare of new and existing residents of the area.

D.      Storm Drain/Flood Control Improvement Phasing—North Area. Due to the potential flood hazard immediately north of the project, no grading or construction for roads or dwelling units will be permitted in the north area until the completion of a final hydrology study. Final hydrology is subject to the review and approval of the city of Glendora and Los Angeles County. If the final hydrology determines that no additional flood control facilities are required beyond those provided for in preliminary hydrology, development of the north area may proceed with the installation of all of the improvements as described below:

1.       The developer is required to construct facility G-1 and modify the Citrus Basin to its final configuration.

2.       The storm drain system needed to serve the north area, to divert new and existing surface flows into and from the north area to facility G-1, shall be installed.

In the event the final hydrology study identifies that any part of the site is subject to flooding or debris flows, the developer shall install temporary or permanent facilities required to mitigate the threat as deemed necessary by the final hydrology, provided on-site debris facilities do not alter the master development plan.

E.       Substantial Conformance Review Required. To implement storm drain/flood control infrastructure phasing for the north area, the developer shall submit a phasing plan for substantial conformance review and determination by the city. Onsite facilities required by the final hydrology study not identified by the specific plan will require evaluation for conformance with the specific plan through substantial conformance. Improvements shall be designed and built in accordance with the appropriate Los Angeles County design manuals.

F.       Storm Drain/Flood Control Infrastructure Phasing—South Area. Infrastructure phasing for the south area has also been largely determined by the need to address the potential flood hazard north of the project. Development in the south area has the added requirement of accounting for increases in stormwater runoff resulting from development of the site overall and its effects on adjoining development in Azusa.

G.      No grading or construction for roads or dwelling units will be permitted in the south area until the completion of a final hydrology study. Final hydrology is subject to the review and approval of the city of Glendora and Los Angeles County. If the final hydrology determines that no additional flood control facilities are required beyond those provided for in preliminary hydrology, development of the south area may proceed with the installation of all of the improvements as described below:

1.       The developer shall construct a temporary detention basin in the north area that has the effect of reducing existing peak flow storm water runoff to 25% of existing conditions if adequate storm drain facilities have not been completed which convey existing runoff to facility G-1. In the alternative, permanent storm drain improvements may be constructed which convey existing and future runoff to facility G-1.

2.       The Citrus Basin shall be modified to its final configuration and facility G-1 shall be constructed.

3.       Permanent storm drain facilities shall be installed as necessary to intercept stormwater runoff entering the south area.

H.      Substantial Conformance Review Required. To implement storm drain/flood control infrastructure phasing for the south area, the developer shall submit a phasing plan for substantial conformance review and determination by the city. On-site drainage facilities required by the final hydrology study not identified by the specific plan will require evaluation for conformance with the specific plan through substantial conformance. Improvements shall be designed and built in accordance with the appropriate Los Angeles County design manuals.

I.        Street and Development Construction Phasing. Street and development construction phasing in the specific plan has been selected to be sensitive to the comfort of residents adjoining the specific plan area where possible and provide the circulation backbone needed to serve the development of the site. A specified street construction phasing provides for an orderly approach to the development of the site, minimize noise and traffic from construction activity, and obtain a finished project appearance for the community and neighborhood as quickly as possible.

1.       Street construction phasing for the north area may occur independently of the south area and as follows in any order or concurrently:

a.       West of Yucca Ridge: Street G1;

b.       East of Yucca Ridge: Streets A1, B1, C1, D1, E1, and F1.

2.       Street construction phasing for the south area shall occur as follows: Streets B and C, the Baldy Vista extension and Street A to Barranca Avenue, and the private street serving Lots 61-65 and 1325 East Sierra Madre Avenue.

J.       Substantial Conformance Review Required. To implement this section, the developer shall submit a phasing plan for substantial conformance review and determination by the city. The plan shall identify the order in which lots or areas of the specific plan will be developed. As part of the substantial conformance review, the city shall identify the street construction necessary to serve development where not stated above. (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

Article VIII. Appendices
21.13.A1 Appendix 1—General plan compliance.
Existing Zoning and General Plan Designations



GENERAL PLAN COMPLIANCE

This specific plan is in compliance with the city of Glendora general plan, and in fact carries forth several key goals and objectives of the general plan.

 

LAND USE ELEMENT

 

CITY OF GLENDORA GENERAL PLAN LAND USE ELEMENT GOALS:

Planning Consideration: Future land use planning should acknowledge the need to improve the distribution of land uses citywide, and that balanced and equal access to opportunities for all residents are considered. The existing distribution of land uses provide a challenge to establishing an equitable distribution of land uses citywide. Currently, the 210 Freeway creates a physical and functional barrier between the northern and southern portions of the city.

 

GOAL 1: Balanced open space, residential and commercial development citywide.

•         LU-1.1: Establish an equitable distribution of commercial and employment opportunities between the northern and the southern portions of the city.

•         LU-1.2: Evaluate the potential for the future development South Hills as a mixture of open space, residential and commercial uses.

•         LU-1.3: Consider opportunities for open space acquisition.

•         LU-1.4: Establish open space conservation areas and identify compatible uses such as natural resource conservation, hiking and passive recreation.

•         LU-1.5: Consolidate hillside residential land uses into one land use designation and implementing zone.

 

GOAL 2: Equitable geographic distribution of land uses.

•         LU-2.1: Ensure the coordination of economic development, redevelopment and land use planning.

 

LAND USE BALANCE - MIX OF LAND USES

Planning Consideration: The city of Glendora is a predominantly residential community. Future land use planning should consider the development of a more balanced land use pattern, including a complimentary mix of retail, commercial, residential and entertainment uses.

 

GOAL 3: Integrated mixed use development.

•         LU-3.1: Establish development standards and design guidelines for mixed use development in the city’s primary activity nodes.

•         LU-3.2: Encourage the development of mixed use through flexible land use regulations.

•         LU-3.3: Encourage the development of infill residential development within mixed use projects.

 

GOAL 4: Integrated commercial and residential development.

•         LU-4.1: Provide for increased densities and mixed use development standards to encourage the expansion of residential development opportunities within the Village.

•         LU-4.2: Provide for expanded infill residential opportunities in appropriately designated areas in the city.

 

GOAL 5: Expanded residential development opportunities.

•         LU-5.1: Provide for increased densities and mixed use development standards to encourage the expansion of residential development opportunities within the Village.

•         LU-5.2: Provide for expanded infill residential opportunities in appropriately designated areas in the city.

 

LAND USE BALANCE - HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES

Planning Consideration: Limited ownership and rental housing opportunities for a variety of income levels exist within the city. A diverse inventory of housing opportunities should afford first-time home buyers, elderly, and low- to moderate-income residents an opportunity to live in Glendora. The establishment of a broader range of housing densities that support the expansion of housing opportunities throughout the city should be a consideration in future land use decisions.

 

GOAL 6: Expanded opportunities for affordable housing.

•         LU-6.1: Establish regulatory mechanisms and incentives for the development of quality affordable housing opportunities.

•         LU-6.2: Encourage land use planning that provides for affordable housing development through the implementation of the city of Glendora Housing Element of the general plan.

 

GOAL 7: A diverse range of housing choices.

•         LU-7.1: Provide opportunities for the development of housing at variety of affordability levels and densities that respond to the various needs of future residents.

 

LAND USE BALANCE - EMPLOYMENT NODES

Planning Consideration: The city envisions a healthy mix of centralized employment generating land use mix, arranged in several modes throughout the community that support a diverse and stable employment base. The city’s current land use patterns within existing commercial corridors do not maximize opportunities in creating strong nodes of employment.

 

GOAL 8: Expansion of employment-generating land uses.

•         LU-8.1: Expand employment generating land use land uses along the Route 66 corridor.

•         LU-8.2: Evaluate the potential for development of portions of the South Hills area for commercial development.

•         LU-8.3: Consider land use policy modifications along the Arrow Highway corridor to enhance retail, commercial and other employment uses.

•         LU-8.4: Encourage the development of the Grand Avenue corridor for employment generating land uses, including a mixture of retail, office and professional uses.

 

GOAL 9: Attraction of high tech businesses and industry.

•         LU-9.1: Provide for flexible land use development regulations and standards that provide for the specialized facilities needs of high technology business and industry.

•         LU-9.2 Establish an economic development marketing plan for the attraction of high tech industry.

•         LU-9.3 Ensure the city of Glendora periodically evaluates the specific development requirements of high tech businesses.

 

VACANT AND UNDERUTILIZED LAND

Planning Consideration: The city of Glendora’s relatively built-out nature requires a comprehensive strategy for the utilization of limited vacant and underutilized parcels. Redevelopment and reuse of these sites should consider such factors as the compatibility with adjacent uses, design quality, density/intensity and rehabilitation.

 

GOAL 10: Quality infill development.

•         LU-10.1: Ensure the design and development of infill projects compliments existing development in terms of scale, character, and pedestrian quality.

•         LU-10.2: Encourage the development of viable infill development within the Route 66 Corridor through the assembly of parcels.

•         LU-10.3: Evaluate the potential for developing a specific plan for the Arrow Highway Corridor to maximize infill development opportunities.

•         LU-10.4: Provide for a thorough evaluation of vacant and underutilized sites within the city of Glendora, including South Hills, Monrovia Nursery, San Jose Park, and the Rainbird property.

 

GOAL 11: Rehabilitation and enhancement of existing land uses.

•         LU-11.1: Identify regulatory mechanisms that encourage redevelopment and improvement of existing properties, including:

1.       Development incentives/bonuses

2.       Redevelopment agency participation

3.       Façade rehabilitation programs

4.       Code enforcement

•         LU-11.2: Provide for a comprehensive review of all city-owned property to determine redevelopment potential.

•         LU-11.3: Evaluate development standards for South Grand Avenue and Foothill Boulevard and revise standards, encourage revitalization, intensification and density.

•         LU-11.4: Ensure that the evaluation of redevelopment and enhancement of existing land uses considers the preservation of open space and natural resources, including hillside areas.

 

PRESERVATION OF NEIGHBORHOOD CHARACTER

Planning Consideration: The city of Glendora considers the preservation of neighborhood character a primary means in preserving the character of the community as a whole. The city’s existing neighborhoods are well-established and provide a character and quality that reflect the stability of the community’s residents. Land use planning should consider the preservation of neighborhood character in terms of design, scale and extent of development and infrastructure.

 

GOAL 12: Preservation of existing historic neighborhoods.

•         LU-12.1: Provide for regulatory policies, design guidelines and other methods that promote the preservation of historic neighborhoods and established singe-family residential areas.

•         LU-12.2: Encourage the restoration and rehabilitation of historic resources.

•         LU-12.3: Increase the level of public education regarding Glendora’s historic resources.

•         LU-12.4: Introduce provisions within the city’s Municipal Code that would enhance and protect historically significant neighborhoods.

•         LU-12.5: Encourage the creation of neighborhood groups and associations for the purpose of neighborhood preservation and enhancement.

•         LU-12.6: Ensure that rehabilitation efforts preserve the historical integrity of the original structure.

•         LU-12.7: Develop design guidelines to preserve neighborhood character and control mansionization.

 

GOAL 13: Clearly defined strategies for neighborhood preservation and enhancement.

•         LU-13.1: Provide specific policies that maintain uniform setbacks, yard areas and building separations to preserve the integrity of neighborhoods.

•         LU-13.2: Establish criteria to identify and/or create neighborhood districts.

•         LU-13.3: Encourage the participation of residents in the creation of neighborhood preservation and enhancement strategies.

•         LU-13.4: Strengthen code enforcement activities within neighborhoods to ensure existing regulations are properly enforced.

•         LU-13.5: Evaluate the potential for reducing width of residential streets, providing wider parkways, increasing landscaping and street trees and integrating open space and trails in existing neighborhoods.

•         LU-13.6: Evaluate the appropriateness of physical improvement that would increase the level of pedestrian amenities in neighborhoods.

 

COMMUNITY DESIGN AND CHARACTER - SCALE AND CHARACTER

Planning Consideration: Land use planning should consider the scale and character of development and redevelopment to provide a positive contribution in the future to the physical quality of the city. The scale and character of development and redevelopment should be considered within the context of each neighborhood so that existing land use character is not diminished.

 

GOAL 18: Compatibility of adjacent land uses.

•         LU-18.1: Ensure the preservation of a scale and character of development is sensitive to adjoining uses.

•         LU-18.2: Utilize design review to determine the appropriateness of new development prior to approval.

•         LU-18.3: Encourage land uses that are complimentary in form and function with existing development.

 

GOAL 19: Abatement of incompatible uses.

•         LU-19.1: Enforce land use regulations related to non-conforming land uses.

 

GOAL 20: Appropriate scale and character of development.

•         LU-20.1: Ensure development is designed with a compatible scale.

•         LU-20.2: Establish guidelines to provide design direction that encourages pedestrian activity at the street frontage.

•         LU-20.3: Encourage the development of usable pedestrian space within future developments, including urban plazas, pocket parks and other pedestrian amenities.

•         LU-20.4: Encourage the expansion of street trees to improve the pedestrian scale and character of future development.

•         LU-20.5: Encourage the development of pedestrian-friendly development through properly scaled design and amenities.

•         LU-20.6: Utilize design guidelines and development standards to ensure walls and fences provide quality design and landscape treatment.

 

GOAL 21: Preservation of neighborhood character.

•         LU-21.1: Establish design guidelines and development regulations that enhance neighborhood quality.

•         LU-21.2: Investigate the use of traffic calming measures in existing neighborhoods to reduce speeding and traffic-related hazards.

•         LU-21.3: In neighborhoods with long blocks, investigate the potential for the provision of meandering streets to reduce traffic speed and improve pedestrian quality.

•         LU-21.4: Investigate the potential for identifying unique neighborhoods where streets could be closed and redeveloped into a system of greenbelts (i.e., neighborhoods with alley access).

Planning Consideration: The creation and preservation of well-defined community “character” is a primary community goal. Land use planning should acknowledge those community attributes that define Glendora’s character including historic resources, civic facilities, established neighborhoods, natural resources and other distinctive community features.

 

GOAL 22: Preservation of important community attributes.

•         LU-22.1: Encourage the adaptive reuse of facilities and structures to preserve important community attributes.

•         LU-22.2: Establish programs that identify important community attributes that should be preserved.

•         LU-22.3: Educate the local residents on the subject of community preservation to help define those important community attributes.

 

GOAL 23: Distinctive neighborhood identities.

•         LU-23.1: Identify transition areas that buffer residential development from nonresidential uses through the incorporation of landscaping, open space and other design features.

•         LU-23.2: Encourage the development of distinctive features that further define Glendora’s residential neighborhoods.

 

TOPIC: REGIONAL CONTEXT

Planning Consideration: The city of Glendora is a part of a larger region. The land use policies adopted by the city of Glendora have an effect on and can benefit from adjacent cities and the region. Therefore, land use planning should consider the regional and subregional context to ensure land use, economic and environmental factors provide a positive contribution to and optimally benefit from adjacent communities and the region.

 

GOAL 24: Coordinated infrastructure development with land use planning.

•         LU-24.1: Ensure the city of Glendora makes diligent efforts in coordinating with adjacent jurisdictions for projects that may have an impact on Glendora’s traffic, infrastructure, water quality or other interjurisdictional topics.

•         LU-24.2: Ensure adjacent jurisdictions and other applicable agencies are properly informed on all land use and planning decisions that may be affected by development projects within Glendora.

•         LU-24.3: Provide sufficient analysis of potential infrastructure impacts associated future development and the potential impacts on adjacent jurisdictions.

 

GOAL 25: Coordinate job creation and attraction in the San Gabriel Valley.

•         LU-25.1: Encourage regional cooperation in attracting new employment and industry with the San Gabriel Valley and Los Angeles region.

•         LU-25.2: Encourage efforts at addressing the jobs/housing balance within the city and the region.

•         LU-25.3: Ensure the city of Glendora’s interests are adequately represented in a regionally significant planning efforts.

 

SPECIFIC PLAN CONSISTENCY WITH THE LAND USE ELEMENT

•         The specific plan provides for new residential development that will complement and enhance the surrounding neighborhood.

•         To complement adjacent residential neighborhoods, the specific plan proposes homesites consisting of homes with a minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet, comparable with the sizes of the adjacent residential uses.

•         The general plan land use designation for the neighborhood area is low density, which allows for development of large, single-family lots. This designation will remain unchanged.

•         To reduce privacy impact on the existing neighborhood, the specific plan will limit new development directly adjacent to some existing residences to a single-story home.

•         New houses will consist of detached, single-family homes that exemplify quality design, contemporary sustainable practices, firewise construction, energy efficiency engineering, and water conserving landscaping. Building mass and form will create a positive relationship with adjacent homes.

•         Central to all new development is a landscape plan that incorporates contemporary sustainable landscape design befitting the character and setting of the community.

•         Road improvements provide access to new residential development within the specific plan area and provide greater emergency access for the existing residences.

•         The specific plan augments existing connections to surrounding neighborhoods by providing access to new development mindful of the safety and quality of surrounding residential neighborhoods. The new circulation network which does not extend into Azusa or south of the railroad, avoids cut-through traffic. Road improvements along Milton Drive, Sierra Madre Avenue, and Yucca Ride Road will improve road conditions while enhancing walkability of these streets.

•         Improvements to Sierra Madre Avenue include widening and sidewalks and create a safer, more calm roadway for drivers and pedestrians.

•         The architecture in the specific plan de-emphasizes the garage. Each specific plan street has parkway-separated sidewalks with street trees. The living portions of the homes are placed toward the street, many will have outdoor living space such as porches, stoops, and balconies on the street elevation.

•         Garages are pushed back from the street and de-emphasized so that each home has a recognizable front entrance. This architectural design encourages neighborhood interaction, a pedestrian lifestyle, and promotes safety by allowing for “eyes on the street.”

•         A homeowner’s association (HOA) will govern the new development in the specific plan by enforcing specific codes and covenants designed to promote community consistency, maintenance, and value.

•         The specific plan increases opportunities to enjoy passive recreation by incorporating linear parkways, trails, and stretches of open space into roadway improvements and site layouts.

•         The specific plan provides public open space. Detention basins present a sustainable method of detaining excess stormwater. The specific plan also includes trails connections throughout the specific plan area and linear parkways that connect to the adjacent neighborhood.

•         The specific plan minimizes impacts on the city’s public services and infrastructure.

•         From the initial stages of planning, specific plan designers studied infrastructure impacts and spent extensive planning on street, water, and sewer improvements. The plan improves or maintains existing infrastructure to provide public services to new residents.

•         The specific plan provides on-site and off-site drainage improvements, not only to improve the drainage on the specific plan site, but they extend into the surrounding area. The improvements include on-site and off-site storm drains, a large drainage basin, and water quality facilities.

•         The specific plan will include improvements to the street system, water system, and sewer system.

 

HOUSING ELEMENT

 

CITY OF GLENDORA HOUSING ELEMENT GOALS:

1. Conserve and Improve the Condition of the Existing Affordable Housing Stock. Housing and neighborhood conservation are important to maintaining and improving quality of life. While the majority of housing in Glendora is in good condition, some of the older housing units show signs of deterioration. Efforts to improve and revitalize housing must address existing conditions, but also focus on encouraging preventive efforts to ensure that housing stock quality is maintained. The policies listed below address the issue of housing and neighborhood conservation.

 

GOAL 1: Assure the quality, safety, and habitability of existing housing and the continued high quality of residential neighborhoods.

•         Policy 1.1: Continue to monitor and enforce building and property maintenance codes in residential neighborhoods.

•         Policy 1.2: Continue to provide city services designed to maintain the quality of the housing stock and the neighborhoods.

•         Policy 1.3: Continue to promote the repair, revitalization, and rehabilitation of residential structures that have fallen into disrepair.

•         Policy 1.4: Support the preservation and maintenance of historically and architecturally significant buildings and neighborhoods.

•         Policy 1.5: Preserve the unique environmental aspects of the community, including hillsides, canyons, and other environmental amenities.

 

2. Assist in the Development of Housing for Lower and Moderate Income Households. Providing affordable housing is essential for a healthy community. In addition to a diverse mix of housing types, it is necessary to make available housing for residents of all income levels. Seeking funding from varied sources increases the opportunities for development of affordable housing units. The city actively works with both non-profit and for-profit developers in the production of affordable for-sale and rental housing.

 

GOAL 2: Assist in the provision of housing that meet the needs of economic segments of the community.

•         Policy 2.1: Facilitate homeownership opportunities for low and moderate income households.

•         Policy 2.2: Use density bonuses and other incentives to facilitate the development of new housing for extremely low, very low, and low income households.

•         Policy 2.3: Create collaborative partnerships with non-profit agencies and for-profit developers to maximize resources available for the provision of housing affordable to lower income households.

•         Policy 2.4: Address the housing needs of special populations and extremely low income households through emergency shelters, transitional housing, supportive housing, and single-room occupancy units.

•         Policy 2.5: Promote the use of energy conservation features in the design of residential development to conserve natural resources and lower energy costs.

 

3. Identify Adequate Sites to Accommodate a Variety of Housing for All Income Levels. A major element in meeting the housing needs of all segments of the community is the provision of adequate sites of all types, sizes and prices of housing. Persons and households of different ages, types, incomes, and lifestyles have a variety of housing needs and preferences that evolve over time and in response to changing life circumstances. Providing an adequate supply and diversity of housing accommodates changing housing needs of residents. The Glendora general plan and Zoning Ordinance establish where housing may locate. To provide adequate housing and maximize use of limited land resources, new development should be constructed at appropriate densities that maximize the intended use of the land.

 

GOAL 3: Provide suitable sites for housing development which can accommodate a range of housing by type, size, location, price, and tenure.

•         Policy 3.1: Implement land use policies that allow for a range of residential densities and products, including low-density single-family uses, moderate-density townhomes, and higher-density apartments, condominiums, and units in mixed-use development.

•         Policy 3.2: Encourage development of residential uses in strategic proximity to employment, recreational facilities, schools, neighborhood commercial areas, and transportation routes.

•         Policy 3.3: Encourage compatible residential development in areas with recyclable or underutilized land.

•         Policy 3.4: Maintain development standards, regulations and design features which encourage a variety of housing types appropriate for the neighborhoods in which they are located.

 

4. Address and Remove Governmental Constraints to the Maintenance, Improvement, and Development of Housing. Market factors and government regulations can significantly impact the production and affordability of housing. Although market conditions are often beyond the direct influence of any jurisdiction, efforts can be directed at ensuring the reasonableness of land use controls, development standards, permit-processing, fees and exactions, and governmental requirements to encourage housing production.

 

GOAL 4: Where appropriate, mitigate unnecessary governmental constraints to the maintenance, improvement, and development of housing.

•         Policy 4.1: Periodically review the city’s regulations, ordinances, fees/exactions to ensure they do not unduly constrain the production, maintenance, and improvement of housing.

•         Policy 4.2: Offer regulatory incentives and concessions for affordable housing, such as relief from development standards, density bonuses, or fee waivers where deemed to be appropriate.

•         Policy 4.3: Provide for streamlined, timely, and coordinated processing of residential projects to minimize holding costs and encourage housing production.

•         Policy 4.4: Support infill development at suitable locations and provide, where appropriate, incentives to facilitate their development.

 

5. Promote Housing Opportunities for All Persons. Ensuring fair and equal housing opportunity is an important goal. Whether through mediating disputes, investigating bona fide complaints of discrimination, or through the provision of education services, the provision of fair housing services is an important tool to ensure fair and equal access to housing. The following policies are designed to continue implementation of applicable fair housing laws.

 

GOAL 5: Ensure fair and equal housing opportunity for all persons regardless of race, color, religion, sex, marital status, familial status, ancestry, national origin, age, disability, sexual orientation, source of income, or other arbitrary factors.

•         Policy 5.1: Provide fair housing services to residents and assure that residents are aware of their rights and responsibilities with respect to fair housing.

•         Policy 5.2: Discourage discrimination in the sale, rental, or occupancy of housing on the basis of state or federal protected classes.

•         Policy 5.3: Implement appropriate action items identified in the city’s Analysis of Impediments to ensure fair and equal access to housing.

 

SPECIFIC PLAN CONSISTENCY WITH THE HOUSING ELEMENT

1.       The specific plan creates new housing opportunities.

2.       Altogether, development in the specific plan area will provide 124 additional detached single-family dwelling units.

3.       The development of the Monrovia Nursery property under this specific plan will settle the issue of 95 undeveloped acres in the center of an established Glendora neighborhood, thereby it will “Conserve and Improve the Condition of the Existing” residential neighborhood.

 

CIRCULATION ELEMENT

 

TRAFFIC SAFETY

Planning Consideration: The city of Glendora understands that the safe and efficient movement of vehicles and pedestrians contributes to overall community safety. Planning, design and maintenance of existing and future transportation infrastructure should seek to enhance the safety of vehicular traffic and pedestrians utilizing local roadways.

 

GOAL CIR-1: Safety for motorists and pedestrians on local roadways.

•         CIR-1.1: Determine appropriate design of local roadway system considering all potential users including automobile, bicycle, and pedestrian users.

•         CIR-1.2: Based on traffic counts, add audible and “countdown” signals to enhance pedestrian safety.

•         CIR-1.3: Initiate public education programs that address the following components:

è Pedestrian rights, legal movements

è Location of bike lanes and routes

è Youth involvement/programs with police (e.g. bike rodeos, etc.).

•         CIR-1.4: Improve public directional and safety signage.

•         CIR-1.5: Enforce speeds and traffic laws on all city streets.

•         CIR-1.6: Employ traffic calming measures where appropriate to deter speeding.

•         CIR-1.7: Explore opportunities to fund sidewalk safety enhancements through the Safe Routes to School program.

 

LOCAL COORDINATION OF LAND USE AND CIRCULATION PLANNING

Planning Consideration: Local land use planning significantly influences the safe and efficient function of the local roadway system. The ability to adequately serve the transportation needs of the community should be a primary consideration in all land use planning decisions so that impacts of growth and development are reflected by appropriate improvements.

 

GOAL CIR-2: Coordinated transportation and land use planning.

•         CIR-2.1: Ensure transportation planning is fully evaluated in the context of future land use planning decisions.

•         CIR-2.2: Ensure that the evaluation of potential transportation impacts is an integral component of all land use decisions.

•         CIR-2.3: Encourage the sharing of land use and transportation data between the city and adjacent jurisdictions to ensure transportation impacts are properly mitigated.

•         CIR-2.4: Support Caltrans’ efforts to improve traffic flow on the I-210 freeway.

•         CIR-2.5: Support the efforts of the MTA in providing alternative transportation modes within Glendora that would compliment land use planning efforts.

•         CIR-2.6: Enhance business and directional signage.

•         CIR-2.7: Explore better use of uninterrupted roadways (e.g., Gladstone and Foothill).

•         CIR-2.8: Create a funding or fee assessment mechanism, such as traffic impact fee or improvement district, to implement roadway or intersection improvements in the city or those necessary to support new development or redevelopment.

•         CIR-2.9: Incorporate the Gold Line Extension into the local planning program.

Program: Provide adequate station facilities that support and enhance surrounding land uses.

•         CIR-2.10: Plan for adequate bus service to meet Glendora’s future needs.

Program: Work with Foothill Transit on new route development.

Program: Develop a fixed route local shuttle service, using either public or private franchises.

Program: Enhance bus stop facilities with shaded seating areas, waste receptacles and route information.

•         CIR-2.11: Ensure future development along existing railroad rights-of-way includes appropriate public dedications or public easements to include opportunities for additional open space, and/or pedestrian and bicycle pathways.

 

GOAL CIR-3: Infrastructure improvements coordinated with local growth.

•         CIR-3.1: Continue to update traffic count database every five years.

Planning Consideration: Design considerations that minimize the intrusion of traffic into local neighborhoods and divert through traffic onto appropriate roadways should be encouraged.

 

GOAL CIR-4: Reduced transportation impacts in local neighborhoods.

•         CIR-4.1: Designate routes to regional commerce that have minimum impact on schools and homes.

•         CIR-4.2: Clearly designate and understand arterials versus neighborhood streets.

•         CIR-4.3: Provide alternative options for local travel.

Program: Provide opportunities for local shuttle/ jitney service.

Program: Implement a pedestrian and bikeway master plan.

 

REGIONAL COORDINATION

Planning Consideration: The city of Glendora understands circulation impacts from local planning decisions also affect the function and quality of circulation in adjacent jurisdictions. Conversely, planning decisions of adjacent jurisdictions can affect the function and quality of the circulation system within the city of Glendora. While the city of Glendora understands that it is part of the regional transportation system, the city seeks to discourage the use of non-arterials as major circulation routes and protect existing and future Glendora neighborhoods from unwanted traffic intrusions.

 

GOAL CIR-5: Appropriate coordination of transportation planning with adjacent jurisdictions.

•         CIR-5.1: Coordinate local and regional circulation planning with County Congestion Management Plan.

•         CIR-5.2: Continue to stay involved and aware of local jurisdiction developments (e.g., Monrovia Nursery in Azusa).

•         CIR-5.3: Coordinate signals on inter-city thoroughfares such as Grand Avenue, Lone Hill, and Route 66.

•         CIR-5.4: Support regional transportation planning including the Gold Line extension, bus network planning, and regional bikeway and hiking networks.

•         CIR-5.5: Except where required to support emergency access, no public or private streets shall connect to the planning areas of adjoining communities.

Program: For new development the city shall not permit vehicular connections into the planning area from adjoining cities as condition of development approval.

Program: For new development, the city shall not permit vehicular connections into the planning area from adjoining cities except where emergency access is deemed appropriate. The city shall require appropriate limited access devices and improvements in its environmental review and land development processes to ensure vehicular connections are limited to emergency vehicles only.

 

TRANSPORTATION AND UTILITY SYSTEM EFFICIENCY

Planning Consideration: The city of Glendora is approaching buildout conditions. As future growth will continue to impact the existing circulation and infrastructure systems, specific strategies should be implemented to maximize infrastructure efficiency. Emphasizing strategies that reduce demand for and that implement physical improvements that promote system efficiency will contribute to a well functioning circulation system.

 

GOAL CIR-6: Acceptable level of service on local roadways.

•         CIR-6.1: Improve the function of the circulation system through transportation system management strategies.

 

GOAL CIR-7: Improved access to alternative modes of transportation.

•         CIR-7.1: Explore funding for alternative transportation.

•         CIR-7.2: Enhance alternative transportation services (mini-bus, seniors and private shuttle franchise service).

•         CIR-7.3: Initiate a citywide campaign to promote for carpooling/park-n-ride.

•         CIR-7.4: Create and implement a masterplan(s) for pedestrians, trails and bikeways.

•         CIR-7.5: Ensure adequate pedestrian/bike amenities at key destinations such as the Village, the Marketplace and other retail service areas such as along Route 66.

 

GOAL CIR-8: Controlled utility and infrastructure access between Glendora and adjoining jurisdictions.

Policies infrastructure for new development shall be limited to the service of properties within the city’s planning area.

Programs:

1.       The city shall prohibit city-controlled infrastructure connections through its development approval process and public works contract bidding process.

 

SPECIFIC PLAN CONSISTENCY WITH THE CIRCULATION ELEMENT

1.       The specific plan promotes a circulation system that avoids negative impacts to the surrounding community, and incorporates alternative forms of transportation. New sidewalks are proposed throughout the site to improve overall pedestrian circulation.

2.       The proposed Gold Line Foothill Extension will run adjacent to the specific plan area. The future Metro Gold Line Citrus Station will be across from the specific plan Area and will provide area residents with public transportation connections to other cities and areas in the Los Angeles region.

3.       The specific plan proposes to improve conditions on existing roads to create more efficient, more safe, and more pleasant neighborhood roadways. The specific plan includes significant road and sidewalk improvements to existing streets and incorporates contemporary engineering standards to all new roads.

4.       The specific plan proposes new roadways to provide efficient circulation.

5.       In addition to public transit, the specific plan encourages other alternative forms of transportation. Parkway separated sidewalks and a street network that slows or limits traffic through residential areas all help create pedestrian friendly circulation.

6.       The specific plan proposes no new road connections into adjoining communities. Only emergency access is provided.

 

OPEN SPACE ELEMENT

 

CITY OF GLENDORA OPEN SPACE ELEMENT GOALS:

Planning Consideration: The city of Glendora understands the importance of preserving open space and natural resources within and contiguous to the city’s boundaries. The city’s location, adjacent to United States Forest Service lands, and other significant open space, sensitive habitats and natural systems demonstrates the importance of coordinated efforts. Ensuring the conservation and preservation of these areas and resources within the city through coordination with public and private entities is a priority of the Glendora community.

 

GOAL 1: Preserve open space resources.

•         OSR-1.1: Promote the preservation of open space resources through increased public awareness about the importance of protecting and maintaining natural open space areas.

•         OSR-1.2: Promote coordination with public and private entities such as local and regional water districts and utility companies to enhance and preserve open space resources such as an “adopt-a-park” program and/or creating park partnership programs.

•         OSR-1.3: Continue to work in conjunction with the Glendora Community Conservancy to investigate open space preservation opportunities.

•         OSR-1.4: Investigate opportunities for open space land acquisition for the preservation of natural resources and sensitive habitats.

•         OSR-1.5: Continue to partner with the Glendora Community Conservancy to determine funding opportunities for open space land acquisition for the preservation of natural resources and sensitive habitats.

•         OSR-1.6: Pursue partnerships with other organizations, such as the United States Forest Service to ensure preservation of natural resources and sensitive habitats.

•         OSR-1.7: Recognize the value of major institutional passive open spaces, such as cemeteries, as important components of the total open space systems and protect their visual character.

•         OSR-1.8: Support regional and local efforts to acquire, develop, and maintain open space linkages.

•         OSR-1.9: Consult with regional and sub-regional agencies such as the San Gabriel and Lower Los Angeles Rivers and Mountains Conservancy Master Plan in evaluating new development projects for opportunities for open space conservation where applicable.

•         OSR-1.10: Develop a land management/land maintenance plan of city-owned wilderness parks to increase fire safety, minimize potential naturally occurring safety hazards in wilderness park areas, protect biodiversity and native plant species.

•         OSR-1.11: Create and update best management practices for all of the city’s open space resources.

Planning Consideration: Land use planning should acknowledge the potential environmental challenges associate with growth while it considers opportunities and challenges for rural, hillside development. A balance between the need for preservation and the management of stormwater run-off, wildfires, habitat destruction and other sensitive land resources is vital. The city should evaluate policies and programs that would effectively address preservation of foothills/hillsides, while acknowledging the rights of property owners.

 

GOAL 2: Coordinated land use and environmental planning.

•         OSR-2.1: Develop and implement a comprehensive hillside development strategy.

•         OSR-2.2: Require a constraints analysis for proposed hillside residential development to ensure that significant land and natural resource features are avoided, such as ridgelines, significant watershed areas, tributaries and streams, and rare, threatened or endangered species habitat.

•         OSR-2.3: Control the grading of land to minimize the potential for erosion, landsliding, and other forms of land failure, as well as to limit the negative aesthetic impact of excessive modification of natural landforms.

•         OSR-2.4: Encourage residential clustering as a means of preserving open space.

 

SPECIFIC PLAN CONSISTENCY WITH THE OPEN SPACE ELEMENT

1.       The specific plan identifies the following in the development of the specific plan area: landscaped areas, slope open spaces, detention and water quality basins, street landscaping and trails.

2.       A pedestrian trail is an important part of the specific plan. The trail will connect the development through to Azusa and the future Metro Gold Line light rail station. The trail will follow along the north side of the railroad.

3.       The specific plan embraces the area’s existing natural features, including the San Gabriel Mountains, and the adjacent rural residential neighborhoods.

4.       The detention basin and water quality basins provide additional sources of visual relief. The detention and water quality basins also collect and drain stormwater runoff, which helps to preserve watershed areas.

5.       The drainage master plan includes new on-site and off-site storm drain facilities designed to safely manage storm flows and address potential flooding and erosion.

 

CONSERVATION ELEMENT

 

WATER CONSERVATION

Planning Consideration: Water is a limited resource in Southern California. The city of Glendora understands water conservation should be a consideration in future land use planning decisions and everyday activities. Future population growth will increase both water needs and carrying capacity needs. Through the establishment of effective water conservation and reuse programs, the city can contribute to local, regional and state efforts to reduce the demand and use of water resources.

 

GOAL 1: Protection and conservation of Glendora’s water resources.

•         CON-1.1: Establish a comprehensive program for the utilization of recycled water for irrigation purposes.

•         CON-1.2: Reduce water demand for irrigation purposes through the utilization of water conserving landscape materials.

•         CON-1.3: Establish specific requirements for the use of water conserving landscape materials in new development and redevelopment projects, parks and municipal facilities.

•         CON-1.4: Establish outreach and incentive programs to educate residents on methods of water conservation and to encourage their use.

•         CON-1.5: Establish methods to analyze water conservation issues when determining the need and development of future parks.

 

GOAL 2: Utilization of water conservation technologies and practices.

•         CON-2.1: Establish a comprehensive program for the utilization of recycled water for irrigation purposes.

•         CON-2.2: Reduce water demand for irrigation purposes through the utilization of water-conserving landscape materials.

•         CON-2.3: Establish specific requirements for the use of water conserving landscape materials in new development and redevelopment projects, parks and municipal facilities.

•         CON-2.4: Establish and implement water conservation methods for all municipal facilities.

 

GOAL 3: Effective and well-maintained water infrastructure system.

•         CON-3.1: Ensure the city’s water master plan provides an accurate projection of future water demand and conveyance.

•         CON-3.2: Ensure existing water infrastructure systems are properly maintained.

•         CON-3.3: Ensure infrastructure for new development is limited to serving properties within the planning area or water service area.

Planning Consideration: The city of Glendora understands that future population growth will increase wastewater and energy demand as well as solid waste generation. Glendora understands that effective strategies of source reduction and conservation will lessen the impacts of population increases on wastewater, solid waste and energy demand.

 

GOAL 4: Adequate conveyance and disposal of wastewater.

•         CON-4.1: Ensure the wastewater infrastructure system within the city is effective and adequately maintained.

•         CON-4.2: Ensure new development and redevelopment projects adequately analyze potential impacts to the existing wastewater infrastructure system.

•         CON-4.3: Incorporate project-level stormwater mitigation measures to reduce potential impacts to water quality and ensure mitigation measures are adequately monitored.

•         CON-4.4: Establish programs to educate residents regarding impacts of stormwater runoff on water quality and provide a variety of opportunities for Glendora residents to dispose of hazardous materials.

•         CON-4.5: Protect the planning area from unnecessary stormwater run-off from outside the planning area that would have the potential to require additional stormwater conveyance or treatment facilities maintained by the city.

•         CON-4.6: Ensure new development and redevelopment projects adequately analyze potential impacts to the existing wastewater infrastructure system.

•         CON-4.7: Protect the planning area from the conveyance of wastewater from outside the planning area that would have the potential to require additional wastewater conveyance or treatment facilities.

 

GOAL 5: Reduced demand for energy resources through the use of conservation techniques.

•         CON-5.1: Investigate and implement opportunities for energy conservation at all city-maintained facilities.

•         CON-5.2: Encourage the incorporation of energy conservation features in the design of all new construction and substantial rehabilitation projects and encourage the installation of conservation devices in existing developments.

•         CON-5.3: Encourage private energy conservation programs that minimize high energy demand and that use alternative energy sources.

•         CON-5.4: Require all new developments to incorporate energy-efficient lighting, heating, and cooling systems pursuant to the Uniform Building Code.

•         CON-5.5: Provide education and outreach to residents and businesses on opportunities to decrease energy consumption.

 

GOAL 6: Reduced generation of solid waste within Glendora.

•         CON-6.1: Provide education and outreach to residents and businesses to encourage their involvement in source reduction and recycling.

•         CON-6.2: Continue to work towards fulfilling the requirements established in the California Integrated Waste Management Act for the diversion of solid waste.

•         CON-6.3: Establish a tree master plan to expand the urban forest throughout the city.

•         CON-6.4: Ensure appropriate placement and proper maintenance of tree resources within the city.

GOAL 7: A comprehensive citywide landscape strategy.

•         CON-7.1: Establish a cohesive landscape plan to ensure consistent landscaping throughout the city.

•         CON-7.2: Establish specific requirements for consistent landscaping in new development and redevelopment projects, parks and municipal facilities.

 

STORMWATER POLLUTION

Planning Consideration: The potential environmental impacts of stormwater runoff are a significant concern to Glendora residents. Stormwater runoff can carry pollutants into the watershed, negatively affecting local and regional water quality. Maintenance and improvement of the city’s stormwater system to reduce potential impacts to water quality should be a priority.

 

GOAL 8: Proper conveyance and treatment of stormwater and implementation of techniques to reduce pollutants consistent with federal, state and regional regulations and standards.

•         CON-8.1: Ensure existing drainage facilities are properly maintained.

•         CON-8.2: Ensure all new development and redevelopment projects comply with federal, state, regional and city regulations and ordinances related to stormwater.

•         CON-8.3: Incorporate project-level stormwater mitigation measures to reduce potential impacts to water quality and ensure mitigation measures are adequately monitored.

•         CON-8.4: Establish programs to educate residents regarding impacts of stormwater runoff on water quality and provide a variety of opportunities for Glendora residents to dispose of hazardous materials.

•         CON-8.5: Continue to support regional and state efforts in controlling point and non-point sources of water pollution.

•         CON-8.6: Investigate the potential to create city or multi-jurisdictional facilities which remove or reduce stormwater pollutants.

 

CONSERVATION AND PRESERVATION OF SENSITIVE LANDS

Planning Consideration: The city’s residents acknowledge the importance of conserving the city’s open space and natural resources for the benefit of community residents, and the region. Glendora’s location adjacent to United States Forest Service lands, as well as the variety of other sensitive habitats and natural systems within and contiguous to the community should be acknowledged in land use planning efforts. With planning and action to protect tributaries and ridgelines, sustainable and long-term results from healthy native species of plants and wildlife may be anticipated.

 

GOAL 9: Preservation and conservation of natural resources and sensitive habitats.

•         CON-9.1: Investigate opportunities for open space land acquisition for the preservation of natural resources and sensitive habitats.

•         CON-9.2: Continue to partner with the Glendora Community Conservancy to determine funding opportunities for open space land acquisition for the preservation of natural resources and sensitive habitats.

•         CON-9.3: Pursue partnerships with other organizations, such as the United States Forest Service to ensure preservation of natural resources and sensitive habitats.

•         CON-9.4: Ensure the preservation of the natural plant communities in the hillside areas.

•         CON-9.5: Ensure land use decisions consider the preservation of sensitive plant and animal species, critical habitat, wildlife corridors and biologically sensitive areas.

•         CON-9.6: Develop a land management/land maintenance plan, including best management practices, of city-owned conservation areas to increase fire safety, protect biodiversity and preserve native plant species.

•         CON-9.7: Ensure preservation of local watersheds in development to maintain native plant habitats and ensure connectivity of wildlife corridors.

 

PRESERVATION AND ENHANCEMENT OF LANDSCAPE RESOURCES

Planning Consideration: The city of Glendora is proud of its naturally landscaped hillsides and its mature residential and commercial landscapes. Preservation, enhancement, care and maintenance of these important landscape resources will continue providing a positive contribution to the quality and character of Glendora.

GOAL 10: A tree preservation strategy.

•         CON-10.1: Involve residents in the maintenance and preservation of individual trees by providing them with a choice of trees planted.

•         CON-10.2: Maintain the tree preservation ordinance to ensure the preservation of existing tree resources.

•         CON-10.3: Establish a tree master plan to expand the urban forest throughout the city.

•         CON-10.4: Ensure appropriate placement and proper maintenance of tree resources within the city.

 

SPECIFIC PLAN CONSISTENCY WITH THE CONSERVATION ELEMENT

1.       The specific plan promotes conservation of natural resources.

2.       The series of water quality facilities planted with riparian habitat designed to foster groundwater recharge and biofiltration to remove urban pollutants from the storm runoff.

3.       Development of the specific plan property will replace the undeveloped nature of the existing property, which will reduce the amount of Particulate Matter 10 microns (PM10) currently released from the Nursery site. The South Coast Air Basin is designated as a non-attainment area for PM10 because of noncompliance with the State and Federal Clean Air Acts. Therefore, development of the specific plan property has the potential to reduce PM10 emissions.

 

SAFETY AND NOISE ELEMENTS

City of Glendora Safety and Noise Element Goals:

Planning Consideration: The most significant contributors to noise impacts are generated from transportation sources. The city of Glendora seeks to minimize the noise impacts associated with transportation to the greatest extent feasible. Minimizing these impacts requires the evaluation of existing noise sources and coordination of appropriate mitigation through design and policy considerations.

 

GOAL 1: Reduced noise impacts from transportation sources.

•         N-1.1: Ensure traffic noise mitigation measures are included and implemented in the design of new development.

•         N-1.2: Encourage the State Department of Transportation (Caltrans) to continue programs that lead to the reduction of the noise levels on I-210.

•         N-1.3: Limit construction, delivery, and through truck traffic to designated routes.

•         N-1.4: Mitigate transportation equipment impacts at construction sites.

 

NON-TRANSPORTATION NOISE IMPACTS

Planning Consideration: Non-transportation noise sources, including those generated from commercial/industrial activities, construction equipment and various community activities, have the potential of introducing undesirable impacts within the city. Development policy and regulatory standards should consider the reduction of these nontransportation noise impacts and mitigate them to a less than significant level.

 

GOAL 2: Reduced noise impacts from non-transportation sources.

•         N-2.1: Review and update the Noise Ordinance, on a regular basis, to ensure noise-generating uses are adequately addressed.

•         N-2.2: Strive to resolve existing and potential conflicts between noise generating uses and human activities.

•         N.2.3: Prohibit significant noise generating activities from locating adjacent to residential neighborhoods and near schools.

•         N-2.4: Ensure that construction noise does not cause an adverse impact to the residents of the city by requiring that noise mitigation techniques be incorporated into all construction-related activities.

•         N-2.5: Consider developing maximum noise standards for ventilation systems (i.e., air conditioning units) in residential areas.

 

COORDINATION WITH LAND USE PLANNING

Planning Consideration: Land use planning has a direct relationship with objectionable noise. The location and type of land uses should consider the potential noise impacts generated. Therefore, the evaluation of potential noise generation should be a consideration in all land use decisions.

 

GOAL 3: Coordinated land use planning and noise mitigation.

•         N-3.1: Ensure Community Noise Equivalent Levels (CNEL) levels for noise sensitive land uses meet or exceed normally acceptable levels, as defined by State of California standards.

•         N-3.2: Enforce all noise standards as outlined in the city’s Noise Ordinance.

•         N-3.3: Enforce limits set by the State of California to control noise levels, particularly those governing motor vehicles.

•         N-3.4: Ensure that all new development is consistent with exterior and interior noise standards.

•         N-3.5: Incorporate noise reduction measures into all development proposals, as necessary.

•         N-3.6: Consider noise impacts associated with the development of non-residential uses in the vicinity of residential uses.

•         N-3.7: Require acoustical materials in all new residential and commercial developments where noise levels exceed the compatibility standards outlined in the Noise Element.

•         N-3.8: Encourage the use of double-paned windows for residential uses adjacent to the freeways and along major arterials.

•         N-3.9: Encourage programs to retrofit existing homes to reduce noise impacts in the homes.

 

SPECIFIC PLAN CONSISTENCY WITH THE SAFETY AND NOISE ELEMENTS

1.       The specific plan environmental review which assesses noise impacts and seismic, geologic, and geotechnical investigation addresses the following:

•         The liquefaction hazard analysis includes recommendations to remove topsoil in selected areas to minimize potential liquefaction hazards.

•         The homes in the specific plan area will be buffered and setback from the future Gold Line rail line to reduce noise and vibration from trains.

•         Noise impact studies and noise contour maps suggest that the specific plan is compliant to the city’s noise/land use compatibility guidelines.

•         The specific plan provides for on-site and off-site drainage improvements, a detention basin, and a series of other water quality facilities to minimize impacts from flooding.

(Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.A2 Appendix 2—Fairmount Cemetery.
Master Plan



 

Specific Plan Consistency with the Fairmount Cemetery Agreements

The specific plan design takes into account known, executed, and directly applicable agreements regarding the Fairmount Cemetery as of October 2010. The specific plan includes provisions for a development-free “buffer” on the perimeter of the Fairmount Cemetery to account for potential imprecise burials, and a design that provides parking.

Should future agreements and covenants prompt modifications to this specific plan they shall adhere to the provisions of this specific plan, or the specific plan will have to be modified in accordance with the procedures of the city of Glendora. (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.A3 Appendix 3—Private agreements.
 

Master Plan



Specific Plan Consistency with Private Agreements

The specific plan design takes into account known, executed, and directly applicable private agreements regarding the property at 1326 West Sierra Madre Avenue as of October 2010. The specific plan includes a concept for a driveway to this residence from the Private Drive.

Should future agreements and covenants prompt modifications to this specific plan they shall adhere to the provisions of this specific plan, or the specific plan will have to be modified in accordance with the procedures of the city of Glendora. (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.A4 Appendix 4—City of Azusa agreements.
 

Master Plan



Specific Plan Consistency with City of Azusa Agreements

The specific plan design takes into account known, executed, and directly applicable agreements regarding the city of Azusa as of October 2010. Should future agreements and covenants prompt modifications to this specific plan they shall adhere to the provisions of this specific plan, or the specific plan will have to be modified in accordance with the procedures of the city of Glendora. (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.A5 Appendix 5—Annexation.
 

Unincorporated Lands in the Vicinity of the Specific Plan



Annexation

All properties in the specific plan area that are not in the city of Glendora will be annexed into the city of Glendora prior to development. (Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

 

21.13.A6 Appendix 6—Closure of Milton Drive.
 

Exhibit A



Exhibit B



 

Exhibit C



(Ord. 1944 §§ 1, 2 (Exh. A), 2011)

Chapter 21.14 ARROW HIGHWAY SPECIFIC PLAN
21.14.010 Adopted by reference.
The city adopts by reference the Arrow Highway specific plan pursuant to Ordinance 2031. The Arrow Highway specific plan identifies land use districts, with a matrix of permitted and conditionally permitted uses. The Arrow Highway specific plan establishes development standards, parking standards, design guidelines, a mobility and infrastructure component, administration and implementation plan, and other requirements to ensure the orderly development of the specific plan area. (Ord. 2031 § 1, 2018)

 

21.14.020 Amendments.
Amendments to the specific plan shall follow procedures provided in Section 21.01.050. (Ord. 2031 § 1, 2018)

Appendix 21.A TABLES
21.A.A Table A—Development standards, single-family residence zones.
 

Table A
Single-Family Residence Zones
Development Standards

Zone

Minimum Lot Area

Minimum Lot Width

Minimum Lot Depth

Minimum Front Setback 

Minimum Side Setback

Minimum Street Side Setback

Minimum Rear Setback

Maximum Floor Area

Maximum Second Floor Area

Maximum Height

R1

7,500 sq ft

70 ft

100 ft

20 ft

5 ft

10 ft

25 ft

35% 

75% 

Two stories not to exceed 25 ft

E3

8,000 sq ft

70 ft

100 ft

25 ft

7 ft

15 ft

35 ft

35%

75% 

Two stories

E4

8,500 sq ft

75 ft

100 ft 

25 ft 

7 ft 

15 ft

35 ft

35%

75% 

Two stories

E5

10,500 sq ft

85 ft

100 ft 

25 ft 

7 ft 

15 ft 

35 ft

35%

75% 

Two stories

E6

12,500 sq ft 

100 ft

100 ft 

25 ft

7 ft 

15 ft 

35 ft 

35%

75% 

Two stories

E7

See official zoning map

100 ft

100 ft 

25 ft 

7 ft 

15 ft 

35 ft 

35%

75% 

Two stories

RHR

43,560 sq ft

200 ft 

200 ft 

40 ft

30 ft 

30 ft

50 ft 

n/a

35%

75% 

Two stories
 

 

Notes:

*                 For lots fronting on a cul-de-sac, seventy-five ft in the R and E zones and 150 ft in the RHR zone.

**               When necessary to preserve the natural topography or other natural features, the minimum street frontage shall be sixty feet and the minimum lot width shall be two hundred feet at a point not more than four hundred feet from the front property line as measured from the street.

***            For infill development, the minimum front setback shall be the average front setback of the two adjacent residences, but not less than the minimum specified.

****          The Director may increase or decrease the minimum setbacks to preserve the natural topography or other natural features.

*****        Lots exceeding ten percent average slope are subject to Section 21.04.030 instead of the maximum floor area requirement.

******     Hillside lots may request approval of a minor modification pursuant to Section 21.02.035 to allow an increase to eighty-five percent second floor area based on findings with facts.

 

21.A.B Table B—Development standards, multiple family residence zones.
 

Table B
Development Standards
Multiple Family Residence Zones

 

 

Zone

Min. Lot Area

Min. Lot Area Per Unit

Min. Lot Width

Min. Lot Depth

Min. Front Setback

Min. Side Setback

Min. Street Side Setback

Min. Rear Setback

Max. Height

Min. Floor Area Bachelor

Min. Floor Area 1 Bdr

Min. Floor Area 2 Bdr

Min. Floor Area 3 Bdr

Min. Floor Area 4 Bdr

LGA

40,000 sq ft

5,500 sq ft

120 ft

125 ft

20 ft

5 ft: one story—10 ft—two story

20 ft

20 ft

2 stories not to exceed 25 ft—20 ft within 40 ft of an SFR zone

600 sq ft

800 sq ft

1,000 sq ft

1,200 sq ft

1,400 sq ft

GA

40,000 sq ft

4,000 sq ft

120 ft

 

R2

10,000 sq ft

3,000 sq ft

80 ft

R3

10,000 sq ft

2,200 sq ft

80 ft

 

 

21.A.C Table C—Permitted and conditionally permitted uses.
 

Table C
Permitted and Conditionally Permitted Uses

 

P (Permitted), CUP (Conditional Use Permit), MCUP (Minor CUP), blank (Not Permitted)

 

 

Use

 

Zone

 

CCAP Zone

C1

C2

C3

CM

M1

M1A

IP

T4

T5

T5A

Adult business

 

 

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

 

 

Alcohol, off-sales

 

 

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

CUP

CUP

Animal care facility (hospital, veterinarian, kennel, grooming)

 

 

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

 

Antique sales

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Antique store

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Apparel and accessories manufacturing

 

 

 

MCUP

P

P

P

 

 

 

Apparel and accessories sales

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Appliance sales and services

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Arcade

 

 

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

 

 

Art stores

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Artist studios

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Assembly or treatment of articles made from the following previously prepared materials: cellophane, cork, fiber, fur, glass, leather, paper (no milling), precious or semi-precious stones or metals, plaster, plastics, rubber, and textiles

 

 

 

CUP

P

P

P

 

 

 

Audio/video equipment sales, rental, service

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Bakeries, retail

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Barber shops

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Beauty shops

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Beauty/health spas

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Beer and wine, off-sales

 

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

CUP

CUP

Bicycle sales, rental, and service

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Blueprinting

 

P

P

P

P

P

 

 

 

P

Body art/body art establishment

 

 

 

CUP**

 

 

 

 

 

 

Book sales

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Candy and confectioneries manufacturing

 

 

 

MCUP

P

P

P

 

 

MCUP

Candy and confectioneries sales

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Carpet cleaning and manufacturing

 

 

 

 

P

P

 

 

 

 

Catering services

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

City facilities

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

P

P

Clubs and similar group uses

 

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

 

 

Coin dealer

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Convenience stores

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Cosmetics manufacturing

 

 

 

MCUP

P

P

 

 

 

 

Dancing

 

 

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

 

 

Day care services

 

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

 

CUP

Day care services (accessory use)

MCUP

MCUP

MCUP

MCUP

MCUP

MCUP

MCUP

 

 

MCUP

Dental clinics

P

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Department stores

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Drive-in/drive-through businesses

 

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

 

 

Dry cleaning services

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P2

P2

Electrical instrument manufacturing

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

Entertainment

 

 

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

CUP

CUP

Equipment rental yards

 

 

 

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

Financial services and institutions

P

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Firearms

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

 

Florists

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Food products manufacturing

 

 

 

MCUP

P

P

P

 

 

 

Food sales

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Fortunetelling

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

 

Furniture, furnishings, and fixture sales

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Furniture manufacturing

 

 

 

MCUP

P

P

P

 

 

 

Furniture repair and upholstery

 

 

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

P

Gift sales

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Gold and silver dealer

 

 

 

P****

 

 

 

 

 

 

Gyms

 

 

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

CUP

CUP

Hazardous materials

 

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

Hazardous waste facilities

 

 

 

 

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

Health clinics

P

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Hotels

 

 

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

 

 

Irrigation equipment manufacturing

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

Janitorial services and supplies

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

 

Laboratories

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

Landscaping services (No outdoor storage)

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

 

 

 

Laundry, self-service

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

P

Libraries, public

P

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Liquid propane gas storage and sales

 

 

 

 

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

Lodges and similar group uses

 

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

 

 

Machine shop

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

Magazine sales

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Mail service, private

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Markets

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Massage therapy in conjunction with a beauty/health spa or gym

 

CUP***

CUP***

CUP***

 

 

 

 

CUP***

CUP***

Mechanical instrument manufacturing

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

Medical clinics

P

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Medical instrument and products manufacturing

 

 

 

MCUP

P

P

P

 

 

 

Motels

 

 

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

 

 

Motion picture theater

 

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Museums, public

P

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Music stores

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Nurseries and garden supply sales with enclosed storage areas

 

 

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

 

Office equipment manufacturing

 

 

 

MCUP

P

P

P

 

 

 

Offices

P

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Outdoor displays of goods and materials that are permitted to be sold (subject to Title 5)

 

 

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

 

Outdoor storage as an accessory use to a permitted use

 

 

 

MCUP

P

P

P

 

 

 

Parking facilities where fees are charged

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

CUP

CUP

Parks and recreational facilities, public

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

P

P

Pawn shop

 

 

 

CUP****

 

 

 

 

 

 

Pet and pet supply sales

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Pharmaceutical manufacturing

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

Pharmacies

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Photocopying

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Photography stores

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Photography studios

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Plumbing, heating, ventilation, air conditioning, and electrical services (no outdoor storage)

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

 

 

 

Pool services

 

 

 

MCUP

P

 

 

 

 

 

Postal service, private

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Precision machine shops

 

 

 

MCUP

P

P

P

 

 

 

Printing

 

 

P

P

P

P

P

 

 

MCUP

Public buildings and facilities

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

Public utility buildings and facilities

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

 

 

Publishing

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

 

 

Recreation facilities, commercial

 

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

 

CUP

Restaurants

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Restaurants, dining

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

With entertainment and/or sales of alcoholic beverages

 

 

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

CUP

CUP

With sales of beer and wine or alcoholic beverages, but without a cocktail lounge, bar, entertainment, or dancing

 

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

CUP

CUP

Retail sales accessory to the manufacturing use on-site

 

 

 

P5

MCUP5

MCUP5

MCUP5

 

 

 

Rug cleaning and manufacturing

 

 

 

 

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

Schools

 

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

 

CUP

Scientific instruments and equipment manufacturing

 

 

 

MCUP

P

P

P

 

 

 

Secondhand store

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Service stations

 

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

Shoe repair

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Sign manufacturing

 

 

 

MCUP

P

P

P

 

 

 

Spas

 

 

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

CUP

CUP

Sporting goods sales

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Stamp and coin sales

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Stamp manufacturing

 

 

 

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

Stationery sales

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Storage facilities, indoor public

 

 

 

 

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

Storage facilities, outdoor building materials

 

 

 

 

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

Storage facilities, outdoor contractors’

 

 

 

 

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

Swap meets, indoor

 

 

 

CUP

 

 

 

 

 

 

Swimming pool supplies sales

 

 

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Tailors

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Television, radio, and other transmission facilities

 

 

 

 

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

Thrift store

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Transportation facilities

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

Travel agencies

P

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Vehicles, including motor and recreational

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Parts and supplies sales

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Rentals, outdoor

 

 

 

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

Rentals, outdoor (automobiles only)

 

 

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

Rentals, outdoor (automobiles only, less than 6)

 

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

Sales, outdoor

 

 

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

Sales and rentals, indoor

 

 

P

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

Service and repair, major

 

 

 

 

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

Service and repair, minor

 

 

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

Storage, outdoor

 

 

 

 

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

Washing and detailing

 

 

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 

 

 

Video sales and rental

 

P

P

P

 

 

 

 

P

P

Warehousing of materials used in the manufacture of products on the property

 

 

 

CUP

P

P

P

 

 

 

Warehousing of products manufactured on the property

 

 

 

MCUP

P

P

P

 

 

 

Welding

 

 

 

 

P

P

 

 

 

 

Wholesaling

 

 

 

MCUP

P

P

CUP

 

 

 

Window, door, screen, glass and mirror services (no outdoor storage)

 

 

 

P

P

P

P

 

 

 

Wine/beer-tasting room

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CUP

CUP

Wood products manufacturing

 

 

 

CUP

P

P

P

 

 

 

Residential Uses

Home occupations

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

P4

P4

P4

Mixed use (multifamily residential and commercial)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CUP1

CUP

Multifamily

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

P3

P1, 3

P3

Single-family

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

P

 

P

 

1       For properties fronting on Glendora Avenue, only allowed on second and third floors. The use may be permitted in the T5 district if the entrance is at the rear of the building.

2       Dry cleaning pick up and delivery only, no cleaning plant.

3       Permitted with approval of a development plan review pursuant to Section 21.02.040.

4       Follow Section 21.04.010(B)(3), Home occupations.

5       Retail sales of beer, wine, or alcohol for on-premises or off-premises consumption accessory to the manufacturing use requires a CUP (in lieu of a MCUP where otherwise required).

*       All sales are retail unless otherwise indicated.

*       All uses are indoor unless otherwise indicated.

**    A minimum separation distance of five hundred feet is required between each commercial manufacturing zoned parcel containing a body art use, and no more than one body art use is allowed per parcel. No body art uses are allowed on commercial manufacturing zoned parcels that abut residentially zoned parcels. No body art uses are allowed on commercial manufacturing zoned parcels that are located within fifty-nine feet of a residentially zoned parcel. No ingress or egress is allowed onto a residential street from a commercial manufacturing zoned parcel containing a body art use.

***  Ancillary massage therapy use may not occupy more than thirty percent of the gross floor area of the primary use. Refer to Title 5 of the Glendora Municipal Code.

**** See Section 21.05.010(D)(11) for development standards.

 

21.A.D Table D—Development standards, commercial and industrial zones.
 

Table D
Development Standards
Commercial and Industrial Zones

 

 

Zone

Minimum Lot Area

Minimum Lot Width

Minimum Lot Depth

Minimum Front Setback

Minimum Side Setback

Minimum Street Side Setback

Minimum Rear Setback

Minimum Rear Setback Adjacent To Res. Zone

Maximum Lot Coverage

Minimum Gross Floor Area For Each Building

Maximum Height

C1, C2, C3, CM

10,000
sq ft

100 ft

n/a

15 feet for lots under 200 ft in depth. 20 ft for all other lots.

20 ft when adjacent to residential zone.

15 ft for lots under 200 ft in depth. 20 ft for all other lots.

10 ft*

20 ft

n/a

1,600 sq ft

2 stories not to exceed
35 ft

M1

10,000
sq ft

100 ft

100 ft

20 ft

10 ft

20 ft

10 ft

20 ft

n/a

n/a

M1A

1 acre

200 ft

30 ft

20 ft

30 ft

20 ft

40 ft

50%

IP

40,000
sq ft

40%

 

*       Not required when adjacent to a flood control, railroad, or public utility right-of-way to the rear.

 

21.A.E Table E—Zoning actions and appropriate reviewing body.
 

Table E
Zoning Actions and Appropriate Reviewing Body

 

 

 

Planning Director

Planning Commission

City Council

1

Administrative Review

Commercial Construction over 5,000 sq. ft.

Gated Communities*

2

Cantilevered Decking

Conditional Use Permits

General Plan Amendments*

3

Lot Line Adjustments

Hillside Development with Grading

Planned Redevelopment*

4

Minor Conditional Use Permit

Civic Center Area Plan Development

Final Maps

5

Minor Modifications

Mobilehome Park Overlay 

Planned Development*

6

Radio and Television Broadcasting Antennae, Private Transmitting Antennae and Satellite Receiving Antennae

Multifamily Residential Projects

Specific Plans*

7

Recycling Facilities

Open Space Development

Subdivisions*

8

Single-Family Second-Story Construction

Public Facilities Located in Residential Zones

Zoning Amendments*

9

 

Wireless Telecommunications Facilities

Zone Changes*

10

 

Relocated Structures

Development Incentives*

11

 

Construction Within HPOZ and/or Historic Landmark Property

 

12

 

Temporary Structures

 

13

 

Tennis Courts

 

14

 

Variances

 

 

*       For these applications, the planning commission makes a recommendation to city council.

 

(Ord. 2053 § 4, 2020; Ord. 2050 § 5, 2020; Ord. 2019 § 4, 2017; Ord. 2017 § 2, 2017; Ord. 2015 § 2, 2017; Ord. 2007 § 2, 2016; Ord. 1984 §§ 8, 9, 2014; Ord. 1969 § 2, 2013; Ord. 1962 § 4, 2012; Ord. 1958 § 5, 2012; Ord. 1937 § 2, 2010; Ord. 1933 § 4, 2010; Ord. 1924 §§ 13, 14, 2009; Ord. 1916 § 2, 2009; Ord. 1868 § 2, 2007; Ord. 1836 § 27, 2006)

Appendix 21.B DESIGN GUIDELINES
21.B.A Frontage types defined.
 



Residential Front Yard. The main façade of the building has a large setback from the front property line. The resulting front yard may be defined or undefined at the front property line by a fence or hedge. Front yard shall provide shade trees for both the building and the sidewalk area.





Porch. The main façade of the building has a smaller setback from the front property line. The resulting front yard is relatively small and is defined by a fence or hedge to spatially maintain the edge of the street. The porch can be one or two stories. A minimum six-foot porch depth is required to ensure usability.





Forecourt. A portion of the main façade of the building is at or near the front property line and a portion of the façade is recessed, creating a small courtyard or recessed entry space. The space could be used as an entry court or shared garden space for apartment buildings, or as an additional shopping or restaurant seating area within commercial zones.





Stoop. The main façade of the building is near the front property line and the stoop engages the sidewalk. The stoop shall be elevated above the sidewalk to ensure privacy within the building. Stairs from the stoop may lead directly to the sidewalk or may be side loaded. The minimum width and depth of the stoop shall be four feet clear. The entry door must be covered or recessed to provide shelter from the elements. This type is appropriate for residential uses with small setbacks.



 

 



Shop Front. The main façade of the building is at or near the front property line and a canopy or awning element overlaps the sidewalk along the majority of the frontage. The canopy is a structural, cantilevered, shed roof. The awning is canvas or similar material and can be retractable. The coverings should extend far enough from the building to provide adequate protection for pedestrians and decorative façade delineation. This type is only appropriate for spaces that have, or are designed to accommodate, retail and commercial uses because of the lack of a raised ground story.





Gallery. The main façade of the building is set back and the gallery with overlooking balcony is at the property line. This frontage type is intended for buildings with ground floor commercial or retail uses. A minimum depth of six feet is required within the development standards to ensure usability of the balcony and gallery spaces.





Arcade. The main façade of the building at sidewalk level is at or behind the front property line and a colonnade that supports habitable space above is adjacent to the sidewalk providing an expanded, shaded pedestrian path. This frontage type is intended for buildings with ground floor commercial or retail uses. A minimum depth of six feet is required within the development standards to ensure usability. This type is appropriate for ground floor commercial uses.



 

 

21.B.B Architectural styles defined.
A.      Romanesque Revival.



 

1.       Introduction. The Romanesque style is characterized by heavy masonry façades that are composed of simple rectilinear forms, articulated with a regular pattern of bays. The buildings are capped with a continuous cornice and parapet and grounded by a continuous base. Smaller building massing may also include gable forms and roof monitors. Elements such as metal awnings, signage, and ornamental parapets provide a secondary rhythm on the façade. Round arches over windows and doorways may be seen. This style is well suited for commercial, institutional and mixed residential uses.



2.       Romanesque Revival Style Typical Characteristics.

 

Massing



Simple rectilinear forms emphasizing the appearance of heavy masonry buildings.

Façade Composition



Simple and regular rhythm of bays; can be wide with vertical openings or narrow with vertical openings. Larger building massing is capped with a continuous cornice and parapet and grounded with a continuous base; brick or brick veneer walls with stone, cast stone, or cast concrete details. Round arches over doors and windows may be seen.

Roof Form



Flat or low-pitched with parapet wall. Smaller building massing may have parapet or pediment gable ends, gables with low-pitched shingle or metal roofs and roof monitors (small gable roof elements on top of the main roof that provide additional light into the interior of the building).

Windows





Vertically proportioned double hung, casement, fixed or awning windows. May be grouped with mullions.

Storefronts

One-bay, multiple-bay, or full-building wide. May have awnings or upper casement windows that form a continuous band across the front.

Elements

Balconies and galleries consistent with the façade. Ornamental brickwork and ornamental parapets.

3.       Romanesque Revival Façade Composition.



 

B.      Victorian/Queen Anne.



 

1.       Introduction. Victorian Queen Anne architecture is represented by a broad mix of styles that tend to focus on either distinctive gable roof design and/or distinctive façade detailing often with bay front window treatment. Steep pitched irregular roof shapes, dominant front-facing gable, patterned shingles, bay windows and picturesque massing are strongly represented in this general architectural style. Decorative ornamentation, partial or full-width porches of one story, multiple gables and dormers, occasional towers and turrets are also important features of Victorian Queen Anne style. Differing wall treatments are a hallmark of the style. This style is well suited for single family and apartment and condominium town home uses.



 

2.       Victorian/Queen Anne Typical Characteristics.

 

Massing



Complex picturesque forms, cross gables, bay windows. Wall surfaces are primary decorative elements. Avoid plain flat walls by use of bays, towers, overhangs and wall projections.

Façade Composition



Wood shingle and patterned brick work, terra cotta and stone work, half timbering, classical columns and spindle work.

Roof Form



Hipped with lower gable; cross-gable; front gable and flat roof bay townhome; decorative gable ends; patterned shingle and spindle gable insets.

Windows



Windows tend to be single or double hung with simple surround detailing. Decorative round lights or fan lights are also common.

Ground Floor



Full or partial width porches, elevated above the street and approached by a stairway. Classic columns or spindle work are common elements.

 

3.       Victorian Commercial/Mixed Use Façade Composition.



 

C.      Neoclassical Revival.



1.       Introduction. The Neoclassical architectural style was directly inspired by the Beaux-Arts style and the Columbian Exposition (Chicago World’s Fair of 1893). Basically the style reflects elements of Greek architecture popular in the 19th century. The style tends to include the features of classical symmetry, full-height porches with columns and temple fronts with various classical ornamentation such as dentil cornices. This style is well suited for commercial and office uses.



 

2.       Neoclassical Revival Typical Characteristics.

 

Massing



Symmetrical, balanced proportions, with temple front gable and full height column porches.

Façade Composition



Neoclassical façades are primarily represented by full classic column porches or entries and temple front gable with ornamentation; of critical importance is scale: columns, roof and cornice treatment should be in scale with the building. Materials can range from stone and brick to plain stucco finishes.

Roof Form



The Neoclassical roof is distinctive, often a symmetrical temple front gable but flat roof forms are also included. All roof forms usually have some form of dentil (decorative blocking) and cornice ornamentation. There is usually a circular window or other ornamental feature centrally located under the gable.

Windows

Windows tend to accent the symmetry of the façade. They may have arch elements or plain single pane or double hung styles.

Storefronts



Ground floor storefronts should follow the symmetry of the façade. Awnings should reflect a compatible symmetry and enhance the overall design.

Elements



Other elements can include more intricate roof line balustrades. Arched bay elements rather than columns, and decorative insets for classical sculpture and other medallions and frieze elements are also common.

 

3.       Neoclassical Revival Façade Composition.



 

D.      Main Street.



 

1.       Introduction. The Main Street architectural style is a general class of architecture that emerged in the 19th century as western cities and towns were settled. They reflected simple patterns of clean lines from earlier eras without the elaborate detailing found in some of the revival architecture. The style is characterized by symmetrical, masonry buildings usually capped with a cornice and parapet and grounded with a continuous base. Windows provide symmetrical balance and rhythm to the façade. Elements such as galleries and awnings provide a secondary rhythm for the façade and allow the buildings to engage the public realm. The style is well suited for commercial and office uses as well as second- and third-story mixed use buildings.

2.       Main Street Typical Characteristics.

 

Massing



Simple, rectilinear forms.

Façade Composition



Simple and regular rhythm of bays (repetitive vertical spaces) created by deep, vertically proportioned door and window openings. Buildings are grounded with a continuous base and capped with a continuous cornice and parapet; brick and veneer walls.

Roof Form



Flat or low-pitched with a parapet wall and cornice.

Windows



Vertically proportioned double hung or casement windows. Keystone, ornamental architecture or classical window openings.

Storefronts



Inset entries, one- and two-story galleries.

Elements

Upper floor balconies; stepped parapet details.

 

3.       Main Street Façade Composition.



 

E.       Spanish Revival.



 

1.       Introduction. The Spanish Revival style is characterized by buildings composed of picturesque combinations of simple rectilinear forms of varying heights. The buildings are capped with gabled or hipped roofs of red clay barrel tiles with little or no eave overhang. Courtyards and well-detailed structural elements, such as pergolas, trellises or loggias and arcades often provide another layer to the massing. Elements such as wood or metal balconies, towers, chimneys and other tile or wrought iron details add accents. Asymmetrical façades are common with arches over windows and doorways.



 

2.       Spanish Revival Typical Characteristics.

 

Massing



Picturesque compositions of simple rectilinear forms of varying heights with low-pitched roof forms. Larger buildings often use these forms to create enclosed or semi-enclosed courtyards.

Façade Composition



Often asymmetrical façade composition accented by chimneys, balconies and towers. The proportion of openings to wall is small in keeping with the appearance of masonry construction and the hot Mediterranean climate. Smooth, hand-troweled stucco walls.

Roof Form



Multi-level, low-pitched, gabled or hipped roof forms clad with red clay barrel tiles; shallow eaves with a stucco profile or open eaves with decorative rafters or brackets.

Windows and Doors

 

Vertically proportioned windows; recessed openings for doors and windows with stucco or cast stone sill; window grilles, small metal balconies and awnings; doors - arched openings typical for principle doors or beneath porch roofs; elaborate stucco, cast stone or stone detailing at primary entrances.

Storefronts



Accented with awnings; arched entries; arcades with arched openings; upper balconies.

Elements

 

Chimneys, often with elaborate tops and small, tiled roofs; upper floor cantilevered balconies; ground floor loggias and arcades; well-detailed pergolas and trellises; tiled fountains in courtyards or paseos; decorative metal work.

 

3.       Spanish Revival Façade Composition.



 

F.       Mission Revival.



 

1.       Introduction. The Mission style originated in southern California and was the first style to diffuse eastward from the West. The style was considered the “California counterpart” to the Georgian-inspired Colonial Revival style popular in the Northeast. Most famously, the style was adopted by both the Southern Pacific and Santa Fe Railways for train stations, resort hotels, and other rail corridor buildings, essentially as an effort to “theme” the Southwest for eastern travelers. The style includes Mission-shaped dormers and/or roof parapet; wide, overhanging eaves; exposed rafters; red-tiled roofs; stucco walls; and arched windows/doors on ground level.



 

2.       Mission Revival Typical Characteristics.

 

Massing





Large regular or irregular forms enclosing interior courtyards; often elaborate towers and bell-shaped parapets.

Façade Composition

Heavy, stucco walls with regular archways and arcades. Exterior windows are minimal to control summer heat. Parapets and gables often have elaborate “Baroque” styling.

Roof Form



Low pitched form with clay red tile; exposed rafters.

Windows and Doors

Exterior windows are minimal. Interior windows facing courtyards provide regular rhythm, arched or simple rectilinear frames. Doorways and entries are arched.

Storefronts



Arcades and galleries are typical with arched entries.

Elements



Elaborate parapets; arcades with regular arched openings; windows, balconies, and door openings; heavy timber ceiling beams; heavy stucco walls; interior courtyards; accent towers.

 

3.       Mission Revival Façade Composition.



 

G.      Craftsman Bungalow.



 

1.       Introduction. The terms “craftsman” and “bungalow” are often interchangeable. However, “craftsman” refers to the Arts and Crafts movement and more particularly to the famous Greene and Greene brothers’ architecture style of Southern California. The bungalow form is inclusive of the craftsman style but also includes other building styles with porches and galleries. Craftsman architectural style is identified by low-pitched, gabled roofs; wide overhanging eaves; exposed rafter tails; decorative brackets and corbels; front porches; and round, tapered or square porch columns. Sash windows and wood detailing of all kinds are important features.

 



 

2.       Craftsman Bungalow Typical Characteristics.

 

Massing



Picturesque one- to three-story forms with combinations of rectilinear projections. Low pitched, gabled roof lines with wide eaves give the structure an important horizontal relationship to the ground.

Façade Composition



Wide front porches with gabled roofs and decorative pillars are key features. Window openings provide important rhythmic elements. Decorative wood siding, shingles and wood trim, stone and brick work are important features.

Roof Form



The Craftsman roof is the defining element, providing shallow pitched gables, wide eaves and exposed rafter tails.

Windows and Doors



Windows are often elaborate multi-paned, vertically proportioned with a two over three or three over two pattern. Wide wood frames and mullions are typical. Doors can be highly decorative with Arts and Crafts elements of stained or leaded glass. Wood frames and trim have important detailing.

Elements



Decorative wood trim; shingle siding; stone, clinker brick and brick as base; elaborate wood doors and window trim; stained glass; leaded or etched glass; detailed light fixtures.



 

3.       Craftsman Bungalow Façade Composition.



 

H.      Prairie/Foursquare.



 



1.       Introduction. This section describes two similar architectural styles: the Prairie School architectural style developed primarily by Frank Lloyd Wright and the American Foursquare or “Prairie Box.” The Frank Lloyd Wright Prairie style is typified by broad horizontal lines and open floor plans that represent the expansive Midwest prairies but also reflect a Japanese influence regarding detail that inspired Wright. The Foursquare style more typically demonstrates a regular square construction; more vertical in feeling. A full-width front porch is often part of the design. Other than these basic form differences, the two architectural styles have much in common and are closely related through their wide eaves, window styles and use of similar materials including stucco with wood trim, solid wood siding, and different masonry, brick and stone veneers. The most important theme is one of balance and harmony.

2.       Prairie/Foursquare Typical Characteristics.

 

Massing



Picturesque irregular rectilinear forms for Prairie or regular forms for Foursquare. Prairie style will have low flat, or hipped rooflines with a wide, linear look. Foursquare can have low or slightly steeper pitched hip roofs with wide eaves but a more vertical look.

Façade Composition



Façades for both Prairie and Foursquare are regular with balanced window and door placement. Prairie may have more diversity of façade with different rectilinear projections but the overall look will still be balanced. Materials may be a wide combination of stucco, brick, stone, and wood. The critical element is balance.

Roof Form



Roof form is typically shallow-pitched hipped style with wide eaves. Prairie style tends to have wider eaves than Foursquare. Rafter tails may or may not be in evidence.

Windows and Doors



Windows provide important balanced rhythmic patterns for the design and reflect the Japanese influence that forms some of the roots of the style.

Elements



Windows with wood trim; strong, compatible porch pillar design; combinations of materials with balanced design and pattern.

 

3.       Prairie/Foursquare Façade Composition.



 

I.        Art Deco/Art Moderne.



 

1.       Introduction. Art Deco was the first widely popular style in the U.S. to break with revivalist tradition represented by Beaux-Arts and period houses. Art Deco uses a style of decoration applied to jewelry, clothing, furniture, handicrafts, and buildings. Industrial designers used art deco designs to decorate streamlined cars, trains, and kitchen appliances. Art Deco takes its name from the Exposition Internationale des Arts Decoratifs and Industriels Modernes, held in Paris 1925. A showcase for works of “new inspiration and real originality.” The style strove for a modern and artistic expression to complement the Machine Age. An emphasis on the future rather than the past was the style’s principal characteristic. Both Art Deco and its cousin, Art Moderne, were rarely used for houses; they were more common for commercial buildings and skyscrapers, and occasional institutional buildings. The styles were most popular in New York City, though they ultimately diffused widely across the country.

2.       Identifying Features.

a.       Art Deco. Smooth wall surface, often stucco; smooth-faced stone and metal; polychrome, often with vivid colors; forms simplified and streamlined; geometric designs including zigzags, chevrons; towers and other vertical projections, presenting a vertical emphasis; machined and often metallic construction materials for decorative features.

b.       Art Moderne. Smooth, rounded wall surfaces, often stucco; flat roof with small ledge at roofline; horizontal grooves or lines in walls (sometimes fluted or pressed metal); asymmetrical façade; casement/corner windows or other horizontally arranged windows; metal balustrades; glass-block windows, often curved. Unlike Art Deco, Art Moderne expresses an emphasis on the horizontal.

3.       Art Deco/Art Moderne Typical Characteristics.

 

Massing



Art Deco-smooth walled with highly decorated insets, often with tower element. Moderne-smooth walled, rounded forms, more horizontal elements. Often the style includes both concepts as in a vertical design with rounded corners.

Façade Composition



Highly decorated walls and insets. Can be balanced or asymmetrical, corner or casement windows, vertical or horizontal design. Materials can be smooth coat stucco with accents of brick, metal, glass, etc. to emphasize modern, machine technology.

Roof Form



Roof form is almost always flat with tower projections or decorative parapet. Decorative banding is often used to emphasize sculptural form.

Windows



Windows provide an important decorative feature, usually multiple panes arranged either vertically or horizontally.

Storefronts



One-bay, multiple-bay, or full-building wide.

Elements



Façade ornamentation is a key element. Modern materials like glass, metal, and bright colors are all important elements. Geometric designs like zigzags, chevrons, etc. are important.

 

4.       Art Moderne/Deco Façade Composition.



 

J.       New Urbanism.



 

1.       Introduction.

a.       A growing reaction to modernist design and planning principles and suburban “sprawl” has led to the most recent trend in neighborhood design and urban development. Termed the “New Urbanism,” the fundamental tenet is to enhance community connections and alternative transportation modes while de-emphasizing the automobile. Accompanying this people-centered development model is a call for “green” building techniques that leave a reduced footprint on the physical environment. By the mid-1990s the Congress for the New Urbanism provided detailed guidelines and philosophies for integrating neotraditional planning elements into existing urban places and new urban or suburban developments. The term “neotraditional” refers to the notion that the “new urbanism” actually looks to “old” urbanism for its inspiration, namely the types of early 20th-century neighborhoods that were designed to accommodate pedestrians, mass transit, and, to a lesser extent, the automobile.

b.       Thus, new-urbanist developments since the 1990s tend to include community-oriented features such as houses built close to the street, parallel parking, alleyways, side- or rear-loading garages, mixed-use buildings with retail, residential, and/or commercial space, narrow streets, historically inspired architectural styles, and diverse mixtures of housing types and sizes to accommodate a wider range of income groups. Ideally, all of this is tied into larger metropolitan transportation networks with easy access to mass transit, such as light rail or bus.

c.       There is an environmental rationale for such development as well, including the use of less land per given population and, ideally, the use of green building methods that have gained much more attention since the 1990s. Several early prototype developments from the 1980s and 1990s still serve as the models for the New Urbanism, including the communities of Seaside and Celebration, both in Florida.

 

2.       New Urbanism Typical Characteristics.

 

Massing



Massing is variable depending on whether the project is mixed use, multistory with housing on upper floors or housing adjacent to commercial development. Massing for multistory structures will have breaks and projections to visually differentiate uses and reduce bulk. Forms range from simple rectilinear shapes to elaborate reflections of past architectural styles. Structures will often incorporate courtyards and plaza space.

Façade Composition



Façades will have extensive detail and regular or irregular bays.

Roof Form



Roofs may be flat or pitched gable forms depending upon the architectural theme.

Windows and Doors



Windows and doors must reflect the architectural theme and provide definition for the different uses if the project is mixed use.

Elements



Providing pedestrian connectivity to community areas is one of the most important elements of New Urbanism. Residential front porches and stoops close to public sidewalks enhance community interaction and connection. Parking and garages are located behind the buildings and are treated as secondary in importance to the pedestrian scale goals. Narrow streets with ample pedestrian pathways are key elements.

3.       New Urbanism Mixed Use Façade Composition.



 

(Ord. 1958 § 4, 2012)

 
 

 

 

 