HURON, CALIFORNIA - MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
the City of Huron, California 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 5, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
 
PREFACE 
The Huron, California Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1995, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 5, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of Tom Keene, city attorney's office, and Thomas Hemphill, city manager. 
The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the Title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 5, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance No. 378, passed July 17, 2019. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
Beginning with Supplement No. 5, a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Beginning with Supplement No. 5, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 5, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement No. 5, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com. 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections: 
 
1.01.010 - Adoption. 
There is adopted the "Huron Municipal Code 1995," as compiled, edited and published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. 
(Ord. 319 § 1, 1996)  
1.01.020 - Title—Citation—Reference. 
The code shall be known as the "Huron Municipal Code 1995" and it shall be sufficient to refer to the code as the "Huron Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "Huron Municipal Code." References may be made to the title, chapters, sections and subsections of the "Huron Municipal Code" and such references shall apply to those titles, chapters, sections or subsections as they appear in the code. After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, references to the "Huron Municipal Code" shall not be interpreted as references to the code which had been published some years prior to 1995. 
(Ord. 319 § 2, 1996)  
1.01.030 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to the code as the "Huron Municipal Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the City of Huron, California, codified herein, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 319 § 3, 1996)  
1.01.040 - Title, chapter and section headings. 
Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section of this code. 
(Ord. 319 § 4, 1996)  
1.01.050 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 319 § 5, 1996)  
1.01.060 - Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code. 
The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance 311, passed August 2, 1995. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance 311, but prior to adoption of this code are adopted and made a part of this code: 
A.  Ordinance 312, "An Urgency Ordinance of the City Council of the City of Huron Amending Ordinance Number 290 Repealing Obsolete, Superseded or Unconstitutional Ordinances and Portions Thereof, Providing For the Urgency Thereof and to Go Into Immediate Effect"; and 
B.  Ordinance 313, "An ordinance of the City Council of the City of Huron Providing For a Cross-Connection Control Program to Protect the Public Water System"; and 
C.  Ordinance 314, "An Ordinance of the City Council of the City of Huron Amending Title 17 of the Municipal Code by Adding Chapter 17.89 thereto Concerning Conditional Use Permits and Alcoholic Beverage Sales"; and 
D.  Ordinance 315, "An Ordinance of the City Council of the City of Huron Amending Ordinance Number 290 and Repealing Ordinance Number 312 In Order to Correct a Mistake or Integration and More Accurately Reflect the Intent of the City Council with Regard to the Business License Tax"; and 
E.  Ordinance 316, "An Ordinance of the City of Huron, State of California, amending Title 12 (Public Streets) adding Chapter 12.09 (Designated Truck Routes and Commercial Vehicle Prohibitions)"; and 
F.  Ordinance 317, "An Ordinance of the City Council of the City of Huron Amending Chapter 2.48 of Title 2 of the Municipal Code by Adding Certain Provisions Thereto Concerning Refund of Taxes and Certain Fees and Amending Title 3, Chapters 3.08, 3.16 and 3.20, (Adopted by Ordinance 104, Section 10, Ordinance 94, Section 13 and Ordinance 272, Section 14), and Title 5, Chapter 5.04, (Adopted by Ordinance 116), to Conform Thereto." 
(Ord. 319 § 6, 1996)  
1.01.070 - Effect of code on past actions and obligations. 
The adoption of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of this code, does not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this code, and does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed or deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. 
(Ord. 319 § 7, 1996)  
1.01.080 - Constitutionality. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 
(Ord. 319 § 8, 1996)  
1.01.090 - Reference to prior code. 
References in city forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and sections of the former municipal code shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this Huron Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 319 § 9, 1996)  
Chapter 1.08 - ELECTIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.08.010 - Municipal election date. 
A.  In accordance with California Government Code Section 36503.5, the municipal election for the City of Huron shall be held on the same day as the statewide general election. 
B.  No term of municipal office shall be increased by more than ten months as a result of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 209 §§ 1, 2, 1984)  
1.08.020 - Mail ballot elections. 
The city council of the City of Huron is authorized to conduct elections wholly by mail ballot as set forth in Section 1.08.030 of this chapter. The city council shall determine whether an election will be conducted by mail at the time the election is called. Actions of the city council pursuant to this section shall be set forth in a resolution approved at a regular or special meeting of the city council. 
(Ord. 338 § 1, 2004)  
1.08.030 - Subjects approved for all-mail elections. 
The following items may be the subject of an all-mail election: 
A.  Any election to approve a special tax as required or authorized by Article XIIIC of the California Constitution; 
B.  Any election to approve a property-related fee or charge as required or authorized by Article XIIID of the California Constitution; 
C.  Any assessment ballot proceeding required or authorized by Article XIIID of the California Constitution; provided, however, that such a proceeding shall be denominated an "assessment ballot proceeding" rather than an election. 
(Ord. 338 § 2, 2004)  
1.08.040 - Date of elections. 
Elections authorized by this chapter shall not occur on the same date as a statewide direct primary election or statewide general election. 
(Ord. 338 § 3, 2004)  
1.08.050 - Procedures for conduct of all-mail elections. 
Elections authorized by this chapter shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions for mail ballot elections set forth in Elections Code Section 4100 and following, as now exist or may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. 338 § 4, 2004)  
1.08.060 - Enabling authority. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Elections Code Section 4000(c)(9). 
(Ord. 338 § 5, 2004)  
Chapter 1.12 - ARREST AND CITATION PROCEDURE 
Sections: 
 
1.12.010 - Citation of violators. 
A.  Pursuant to the provisions of Part 2, Title 3, Chapter 5C of the Penal Code of the State of California, if any person is arrested for a violation of any provision of this code or of any other ordinance of the City of Huron, the violation of which is punishable as a misdemeanor, and such person is not immediately taken before a magistrate as set forth in said Penal Code, the arresting officer shall prepare in duplicate a written notice to appear in court, containing the name and address of such person, the offense charged, and the time and place where and when such person shall appear in court. 
B.  The time specified in the notice to appear must be at least ten days after such arrest. 
C.  The place specified in the notice to appear shall be either: 
1.  Before a judge of the Court of the Coalinga Judicial District; or 
2.  Before an officer authorized by the County or City to receive a deposit of bail. 
D.  The officer shall deliver one copy of the notice to appear to the arrested person, and the arrested person in order to secure release must give his written promise so to appear in court by signing the duplicate notice which shall be retained by the officer. Thereupon the arresting officer shall forthwith release the person arrested from custody. 
E.  The officer shall, as soon as practicable, file the duplicate notice with the magistrate specified therein. Thereupon, pursuant to said Chapter 5C of said Penal Code, the magistrate shall fix the amount of bail which in his judgment, in accordance with the provisions of Section 1275 of the Penal Code of the State of California, will be reasonable and sufficient for the appearance of the defendant and shall endorse upon the notice of a statement signed by him in the form set forth in Section 815a of the Penal Code of the State of California. The defendant may, prior to the date upon which he promised to appear in court, deposit with the magistrate the amount of bail thus set. Thereafter, at the time when the case is called for arraignment before the magistrate, if the defendant shall not appear, either in person or by counsel, the magistrate may declare the bail forfeited, and may in his discretion order that no further proceedings shall be held in such case. 
Upon the making of such order that no further proceedings be had, all sums deposited as bail shall forthwith be paid into the county treasury for distribution pursuant to Section 1463 of said Penal Code. 
F.  No warrant shall issue on such charge for the arrest of a person who has given such promise to appear in court unless and until he has violated such promise or has failed to deposit bail, to appear for arraignment, trial or judgment, or to comply with the terms and provisions of the judgment, as required by law. 
(Amended during 1995 codification; Ord. 304 § 2, 1995; Ord. 270 § 2, 1991)  
1.12.020 - Failure to appear as misdemeanor. 
Any person wilfully violating his written promise to appear in court is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested. 
(Ord. 270 § 3, 1991)  
Chapter 1.16 - GENERAL PENALTY 
Sections: 
 
1.16.010 - Violation—Infraction. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provisions or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this code or the provisions of any code adopted by reference by this code. Any person violating any of such provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this code, except as provided otherwise herein, shall be guilty of an infraction. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this code, or the provisions of any code adopted by reference by this code is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly. 
Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this code shall be punishable for a first conviction by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), for a second conviction within the period of one (1) year by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), and for a third or any subsequent conviction within the period of one (1) year by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
In addition to the penalties provided by this section, or provided otherwise herein, any conditions caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this code, or the provisions of any code adopted by reference to this code, or any subdivision, building, wiring, plumbing, or other similar activity in violation of the provisions of this code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. 303 § 2, 1995: Ord. 280 § 2, 1992)  
1.16.020 - Enforcement of provisions—Attorney's fees. 
In any civil action to enforce the provisions of this code, the city shall be awarded court costs and reasonable attorney's fees, in addition to any other relief granted or other costs awarded, if the City prevails in such action. 
(Ord. 225 § 1, 1986)  
Chapter 1.18 - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.18.010 - Legislative findings and statement of purpose. 
A.  The city council hereby finds that there is a need for an alternative method of enforcement for minor violations of the Huron Municipal Code, or state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the Huron Municipal Code. The city council further finds that an appropriate method of enforcement for minor violations is an administrative citation program as authorized by Government Code Section 53069.4. 
B.  The procedures established in this chapter shall be in addition to criminal, civil or any other legal remedy established by law, which may be pursued to address violations of the Huron Municipal Code and state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the Huron Municipal Code. 
C.  The city council hereby finds and determines that enforcement of the Huron Municipal Code, other ordinances adopted by the City, conditions on entitlements and terms and conditions of City agreements are matters of local concern and serve important public purposes. Consistent with its powers as a General Law City, the City of Huron adopts this administrative citation program provision in order to achieve the following goals, and: 
(1)  To protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Huron; 
(2)  To gain compliance with the Huron Municipal Code and state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the Huron Municipal Code in a timely and efficient manner; 
(3)  To provide a method to hold parties responsible when they fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of the Huron Municipal Code and state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the Huron Municipal Code; 
(4)  To minimize the expense and delay where the sole remedy is to pursue responsible parties in the civil or criminal justice system; 
(5)  To provide for an administrative process to appeal the imposition of administrative citations and fines. 
D.  The purpose of this Chapter is to enable the City, acting as a General Law City pursuant to Article XI, Section 5 and 7 of the state Constitution, to impose and collect civil administrative fines in conjunction with the enforcement of provisions of the Huron Municipal Code or state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the Huron Municipal Code. Notwithstanding the provisions herein, the City has and shall continue to employ the philosophy of voluntary compliance when seeking compliance with the Huron Municipal Code and state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the Huron Municipal Code. 
Prior to the implementation of the enforcement policies and penalties stated herein, voluntary compliance approaches, when practical, should first be used in order to educate City property owners and businesses concerning the requirements of the Huron Municipal Code, or state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the Huron Municipal Code, and the corrective action necessary to correct a violation of the Huron Municipal Code and state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the Huron Municipal Code. 
E.  Use of this Chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the City. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 10-7-09)  
1.18.020 - Definitions. 
A.  Responsible person shall mean any individual or entities who are the registered owner or occupant of real property, owner or authorized agent of any business, company, or entity, or the parent or the legal guardian of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, who causes or maintains a violation of the Huron Municipal Code or state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the Huron Municipal Code. 
B.  Enforcement officer shall mean any officer or employee with the authority to enforce the Huron Municipal Code, and state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the Huron Municipal Code as provided in Chapters 1.60, 3.04, 3.24 and 6.16. 
C.  Hearing officer shall mean any person appointed by the city manager to preside over the administrative hearings provided for in Section 1.60.110.080. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 10-7-09)  
1.18.030 - Authority. 
A.  Any person violating any provision of the Huron Municipal Code, or state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the Huron Municipal Code may be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement officer as provided in this Chapter. A violation of this Code includes, but is not limited to all violations of the Huron Municipal Code, and applicable state codes, ordinances or regulations adopted by the city council, failing to comply with any condition imposed by any entitlement, permit, agreement or environmental document issued or approved under the provisions of this Code. 
B.  Each and every day a violation exists may constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
C.  A civil fine shall be assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by the enforcement officer and shall be payable directly to the City of Huron. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 10-7-09)  
1.18.040 - Violations, penalties and enforcement. 
The City Council of the City of Huron intends to secure compliance with the provisions of the Huron Municipal Code, and state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the Huron Municipal Code. To the extent that such compliance may be achieved by less drastic methods of enforcement the following alternate, separate and distinct methods may be utilized. Each method set forth herein is intended to be mutually exclusive and does not prevent concurrent or consecutive methods being used to achieve compliance against continuing violations. Each and every day any such violations exist constitutes a separate offense. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Huron Municipal Code, and state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the Huron Municipal Code, each violation of the provisions of this Code may be enforced alternatively as follows: 
A.  Infraction. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of the Huron Municipal Code, and state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the Huron Municipal Code, may be prosecuted for an infraction. Written citations for infractions may be issued by police officers or non-safety employees designated by Huron Municipal Code Chapters 1.60, 3.04, 3.24 and 6.16. Fines shall be assessed in the amounts specified as follows: 
1.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation; 
2.  A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same ordinance within twelve (12) months; 
3.  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of the same ordinance within twelve (12) months. 
B.  Misdemeanor. In the alternative, with the concurrence of the city attorney, any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of the Huron Municipal Code, and state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the Huron Municipal Code, may be prosecuted for a misdemeanor. Written citations for misdemeanors may be issued by police officers or by non-safety employees designated by Huron Municipal Code Chapters 1.60, 3.04, 3.24 and 6.16. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of the Huron Municipal Code, and state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the Huron Municipal Code, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
C.  Civil Action. The city attorney, or an attorney hired for such purposes by and at the request of the city council, may institute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to restrain, enjoin or abate the condition(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of the Huron Municipal Code, or state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the Huron Municipal Code, as provided by law. 
D.  Administrative Citation. Upon a finding by the city official vested with the authority to enforce the various provisions of the Huron Municipal Code, or state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the Huron Municipal Code, that a violation exists, he or she may issue an administrative citation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 10-7-09)  
1.18.050 - Service procedures. 
A.  An administrative citation on a form approved by the city manager shall be issued to the responsible person by an enforcement officer for violations of the Huron Municipal Code, or state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the Huron Municipal Code, in the following manner: 
(1)  Personal Service. In any case where an administrative citation is issued: 
i.  The enforcement officer shall attempt to locate and personally serve the responsible person and obtain the signature of the responsible person on the administrative citation. 
ii.  If the responsible person served refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the administrative citation or of subsequent proceedings. 
(2)  Service of Citation by Mail. If the enforcement officer is unable to locate the responsible person, the administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible person by certified mail, postage prepaid with a requested return receipt. Simultaneously, the citation may be sent by first class mail. If the citation is sent by certified mail and returned unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective pursuant to first class mail, provided the citation sent by first class mail is not returned. 
(3)  Service by Citation by Posting Notice. If the enforcement officer does not succeed in serving the responsible person personally, or of certified mail or regular mail, the enforcement officer shall post the administrative citation on any real property within the City where the City has knowledge that the responsible person has a legal interest, and such posting shall be deemed effective service. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 10-7-09)  
1.18.060 - Contents of notice. 
A.  Each administrative citation shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Date, approximate time, and address or definite description of the location where the violation(s) was observed; 
(2)  The code sections or conditions violated and a description of the violation(s); 
(3)  An order to the responsible person to correct the violations within the time specified, and an explanation of the consequences of failure to correct the violation(s); 
(4)  The amount of the fine for the violation(s); 
(5)  An explanation of how the fine shall be paid and the time period by which it shall be paid; 
(6)  Identification of rights of appeal, including the time within which the citation may be contested and the place to obtain a request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation; 
(7)  The name and signature of the enforcement officer; and 
(8)  If possible, the signature of the responsible person. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 10-7-09)  
1.18.070 - Satisfaction of administrative citation. 
A.  Upon receipt of a citation, the responsible person shall: 
(1)  Pay the fine to the City within fifteen (15) working days from the issuance date of the administrative citation. All fines assessed shall be payable to the City of Huron. Payment of a fine shall not excuse or discharge the failure to correct the violation(s) nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the City and; 
(2)  Remedy the violation(s). If the responsible person fails to correct the violation(s), subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same violation(s). The amount of the fine for failure to correct the violation shall increase at a rate specified in this chapter or by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 10-7-09)  
1.18.080 - Appeal of administrative citation. 
A.  Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation of the Huron Municipal Code, or state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the Huron Municipal Code or that he or she is the responsible person by completing a request for hearing form and returning it to the City within fifteen (15) working days from the issuance date of the administration citation, together with an advanced deposit (full amount) of the fine. Any administrative citation fine, which has been deposited, shall be refunded if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person charged in the administrative citation was not the responsible person for the violation(s) or that there was no violation(s) as charged in the administrative citation. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 10-7-09)  
1.18.090 - Hearing officer. 
A.  The Huron City Manager shall designate the hearing officer for the administrative citation hearing. The hearing officer shall not be a Huron city employee. The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of the hearing officer, if any, shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the amount of administrative citation fines upheld by the hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 10-7-09)  
1.18.100 - Hearing procedure. 
A.  No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a hearing officer shall be held unless and until a request for hearing form has been completed and submitted and, the fine has been deposited in advance. 
B.  A hearing before the hearing officer shall be set for a date that is not less than fifteen (15) working days and not more than sixty (60) working days from the date that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten working days prior to the date of the hearing. 
C.  The enforcement hearing officer shall only consider evidence that is relevant to whether the violation(s) occurred and whether the responsible person has caused or maintained the violation(s) of the Huron Municipal Code, or state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of the Huron Municipal Code, on the date(s) specified in the administrative citation. 
D.  The responsible person contesting the administrative citation shall be given the opportunity to testify and present witnesses and evidence concerning the administrative citation. 
E.  The failure of any recipient of an administrative citation to appear at the administrative citation hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine and a failure to exhaust their administrative remedies. 
F.  The administrative citation and any additional documents submitted by the enforcement officer shall constitute prima facia evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. 
G.  If the enforcement officer submits an additional written report concerning the administrative citation to the hearing officer for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of this report also shall be served by mail on the person requesting the hearing at least five working days prior to the date of the hearing. At least ten working days prior to the hearing, the recipient of an administrative citation shall be provided with copies of the citations, reports and other documents submitted or relied upon by the enforcement officer. No other discovery is permitted. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply. 
H.  The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the enforcement officer or the recipient of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 10-7-09)  
1.18.110 - Hearing officer's decision. 
A.  After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision within ten working days of the close of the hearing to uphold or deny the administrative citation and shall list in the decision the reasons for that decision. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final, subject to judicial review. 
B.  If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld then the fine amount on deposit with the City shall be retained by the City. 
C.  If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be dismissed, the City shall refund the amount of the deposit within ten working days of the date of its receipt of the decision. 
D.  The recipient of the administrative citation shall be served with a copy of the hearing officer's written decision in the manner prescribed above. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 10-7-09)  
1.18.120 - Failure to pay fines. 
A.  The failure of any person to pay the civil fines assessed by an administrative citation within the time specified on the citation may result in the matter being referred to the City of Huron - Finance, to file a claim with the Small Claims Court. Alternatively, the City may pursue any other legal remedy to collect the civil fines. The city may also recover all of its collections costs. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 10-7-09)  
1.18.130 - Right to judicial review. 
A.  Any person aggrieved by a decision of a hearing officer on an administrative citation may obtain review of the administrative decision by filing a petition for review with the Huron County Municipal Court in accordance with the timelines and provisions as set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 10-7-09)  
1.18.140 - Notices. 
A.  The administration citation and all notices to be given by this chapter shall be served on the responsible person in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Failure to receive any notice specified in this chapter does not affect the validity of proceedings conducted here under. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 10-7-09)  
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapters:  
Chapter 2.04 - CITY COUNCIL 
Sections: 
 
2.04.010 - Council meetings. 
The first and third Wednesday of each and every month are established as the regular meeting dates of the city council of the City of Huron, the hour of the meetings to be six p.m. 
The regular meeting place of the city council shall be held at 36311 Lassen Avenue, known as the Huron City Hall, Council Chamber, Huron, California. 
(Ord. 339 § 1, 2005: Ord. 192 §§ 1, 2, 1983)  
2.04.020 - Compensation. 
Each member of the council shall receive, as salary, the sum of two hundred seventy-eight dollars and sixty-eight cents ($278.68) per month as set forth in Section 36516 of the Government Code of the State. Said sum shall commence on 1/1/95. 
(Ord. 289 § 2, 1994: Ord. 227 § 1, 1986)  
2.04.030 - Posting of ordinances. 
The following locations within the city limits of the City of Huron are designated for the posting of ordinances passed by the city council of the City of Huron: 
A.  The bulletin board in Huron City Hall, located at 36311 Lassen Avenue; 
B.  The bulletin board in United Health Center, located at 16928 Eleventh Street; 
C.  The bulletin board in Huron Branch Library, located at 36059 O Street. 
(Ord. 339 § 2, 2005: Ord. 302 § 2, 1995; Ord. 76 § 2, 1959)  
Chapter 2.08 - CITY MANAGER 
Sections: 
 
2.08.010 - Office created. 
The office of the city manager of the City of Huron is created and established. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council wholly on the basis of his administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the city council. 
(Ord. 133 § 1, 1975)  
2.08.020 - Residence. 
Residence in the City at the time of appointment of a city manager shall not be required as a condition of the appointment, but within one hundred eighty (180) days after reporting for work the city manager must become a resident of the City unless the city council approves his residence outside the City. 
(Ord. 133 § 2, 1975)  
2.08.030 - Acting city manager. 
The assistant city manager shall serve as manager pro tempore during any temporary absence or disability of the city manager. In the event there is no assistant city manager, the city manager, by filing a written notice with the city clerk, shall designate a qualified city employee to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during his temporary absence or disability. In the event the city manager's absence or disability extends over a two-month period, the city council may, after the two-month period, appoint an acting city manager. 
(Ord. 133 § 3, 1975)  
2.08.040 - Compensation and reimbursement. 
The city manager shall receive such compensation as the council shall from time to time determine. Such compensation shall be fixed by resolution and shall be a proper charge against such funds of the City as the council shall designate. 
In addition, the city manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him in the performance of his duties or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the City under the direction of the council. Reimbursement shall only be made when a claim, setting forth the sums expended for such business for which reimbursement is requested, has been presented to the council for approval and has been so approved. 
The city manager shall be paid an automobile allowance for City business or, in the discretion the council, shall be furnished with the use of a City-owned automobile. 
(Ord. 133 § 4, 1975)  
2.08.050 - Powers and duties. 
The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the City under the direction and control of the city council except as otherwise provided in this chapter. He shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the City which are under his control. In addition to his general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his duty and he shall have the powers set forth in the following subsections. 
A.  Law Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce all laws and ordinances of the City and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully observed. 
B.  Authority over Employees. It shall be the duty of the city manager, and he shall have the authority to control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the City under his jurisdiction through their department heads. 
C.  Power of Appointment and Removal. It shall be the duty of the city manager to recommend to the city council the appointment or removal of all officers and employees of the City. Such recommendation shall be made subject to applicable personnel ordinances, rules and regulations. In addition, the city council shall have special authority to investigate citizen complaints against police officers and has the authority to advise, impose or review discipline imposed on police officers alleged in such complaints. 
D.  Administrative Reorganization of Offices. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city manager to conduct studies and effect such administrative reorganization of offices, positions or units under his direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city's business. 
E.  Ordinances. It shall be the duty of the city manager and he shall recommend to the city council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he deems necessary. 
F.  Attendance at Council Meetings. It shall be the duty of the city manager to attend all meetings of the city council unless at his request he is excused therefrom by the mayor individually or the city council, except when his removal is under consideration. 
G.  Financial Reports. It shall be the duty of the city manager to keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city. 
H.  Budget. It shall be the duty of the city manager to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the city council for its approval. 
I.  Expenditure Control and Purchasing. It shall be the duty of the city manager to see that no expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the city council except on approval of the city manager or his authorized representative. The city manager, or his authorized representative, shall be responsible for the purchase of all supplies for all the departments or divisions of the City. 
J.  Investigation and Complaints. It shall be the duty of the city manager to make investigations into the affairs of the City and any department or division thereof, and any contract or the proper performance of any obligations of the City. Further, it shall be the duty of the city manager to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the City government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in said City. 
1.  The city manager has special authority to investigate citizen complaints against police officers and has authority to advise, impose and review discipline imposed on police officers for misconduct alleged in such complaints. 
K.  Public Buildings. It shall be the duty of the city manager and he shall exercise general provision over all public buildings, public parks, and all other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the city council. 
L.  Additional Duties. It shall be the duty of the city manager to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other official action of the city council. 
(Ord. 239, 1988; Ord. 133 § 5, 1975)  
2.08.060 - Internal relations. 
A.  Council-Manager Relations. The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the City only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders or instructions to any subordinates of the city manager. The city manager shall take his orders and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly convened meeting of the city council and no individual councilman shall give any orders or instructions to the city manager. 
B.  Departmental Cooperation. It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and the city clerk, city treasurer and city attorney to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the City efficiently, economically and harmoniously. 
C.  Attendance at Commission Meetings. The city manager may attend any and all meetings of the planning commission, recreation and park commission, and any other commissions, boards or committees created by the city council, upon his own volition or upon direction of the city council. At such meetings which the city manager attends, he shall be heard by such commission, boards or committees as to all matters upon which he wishes to address the members thereof, and he shall inform said members as to the status of any matter being considered by the city council, and he shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, boards or committees appointed by the city council. 
(Ord. 133 § 6, 1975)  
2.08.070 - Removal procedure. 
A.  Removal of City Manager. The removal of the city manager shall be effected only by a majority vote of the whole city council as then constituted, convened in a regular council meeting, subject, however, to the provisions of the next succeeding subsections. In case of his intended removal by the city council, the city manager shall be furnished with a written notice stating the council's intention to remove him, at least thirty (30) days before the effective date of his removal. If the city manager so requests, the city council shall provide in writing reasons for the intended removal, which shall be provided the city manager within seven days after the receipt such request from the city manager, and at least fifteen (15) days prior to the effective date of such removal. 
B.  Hearing. Within seven days after the delivery to the city manager of such notice of intention to remove, he may by written notification to the city clerk, request a hearing before the city council. Thereafter the city council shall fix a time for the hearing which shall be held at its usual meeting place, but before the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, at which time the city manager shall appear and be heard, with or without counsel. 
C.  Suspension Pending Hearing. After furnishing the city manager with written notice of intended removal, the city council may suspend him from duty, but his compensation shall continue until his removal by action of the council passed subsequent to the aforesaid hearing. 
D.  Discretion of Council. In removing the city manager, the city council shall use its uncontrolled discretion and its action shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearing, the purpose of which is to allow the city manager to present to said city council his grounds of opposition to his removal prior to its action. 
E.  Limitation on Removal. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections A through D of this section, the city manager shall not be removed from office, other than for misconduct in office, during a period of ninety (90) days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the City at which election a member of the city council is elected or when a new city councilman is appointed; the purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected or appointed member of the city council or a reorganized city council to observe the actions and ability of the city manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his office. After the expiration of the ninety (90) day period aforementioned, the provisions of this section as to the removal of the city manager shall apply and be effective. 
(Ord. 133 § 7, 1975)  
2.08.080 - Agreements on employment. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the power or authority of the city council to enter into any supplemental agreement with the city manager delineating additional terms and conditions of employment not inconsistent with any provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 133 § 8, 1975)  
Chapter 2.12 - PLANNING COMMISSION 
Sections: 
 
2.12.010 - Established. 
In conformity with the laws of the State of California, it is established the city planning commission of the City of Huron, which commission shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by the mayor of the City of Huron with the approval of the city council. All candidates or potential appointed members must reside in the City limits of the City of Huron and only one domicile residence is allowed. 
(Ord. 340 § 1, 2006: Ord. 29 § 1, 1952)  
2.12.020 - Terms. 
The terms of office of the members of the city planning commission shall be for four years, provided, however, to members of the first city planning commission they shall be appointed as follows: two for one year; one for two years; one for three years, and one for four years. Their successors shall be appointed for four-year terms; provided, however any unexpired term shall be filled by appointment by the mayor of the City of Huron for the unexpired term with the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. 29 § 2, 1952)  
2.12.030 - Duties. 
The duties of the city planning commission of the City of Huron shall be the duties established by the laws of the State of California and such additional duties as may be lawfully prescribed by the city council of the City of Huron. 
(Ord. 29 § 3, 1952)  
Chapter 2.16 - REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
Sections: 
 
2.16.010 - Findings. 
The city council has determined that there is a community need for a redevelopment agency in the City of Huron and does so declare that there is a need for a redevelopment agency to function within the City of Huron pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 33300 et. seq. 
(Ord. 208 § 1, 1984)  
2.16.020 - Agency established. 
The city council declares itself to be the redevelopment agency of the City of Huron pursuant to Section 33200 of the Health and Safety Code and finds that such action will serve the public interest and promote the public safety and welfare in an effective manner. The city council further declares that all of the rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities of the Community Redevelopment Law are vested in the city council. 
(Ord. 208 § 2, 1984)  
2.16.030 - Designated. 
The redevelopment agency created herein is designated as "The Redevelopment Agency of the City of Huron." 
(Ord. 208 § 3, 1984)  
2.16.040 - Compensation. 
Inasmuch as the population of the City of Huron is less than two hundred thousand (200,000), compensation of the members of the redevelopment agency is established pursuant to Section 33114.5 of the Health and Safety Code, as such section may be amended from time to time. Provided, however, that no members shall receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the discharge of their duties. 
(Ord. 208 § 4, 1984)  
Chapter 2.20 - POLICE OFFICER STANDARDS AND TRAINING 
Sections: 
 
2.20.010 - Penal code requirements accepted. 
A.  The City of Huron declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the State of California under the provisions of Section 13522, Chapter 1, of Title 4, Part 4, of the California Penal Code. 
B.  Pursuant to Section 13510(c), Chapter 1, the Huron police department will adhere to standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST). 
C.  Pursuant to Section 13512, Chapter 1, the Commission and its representatives may make such inquiries as deemed appropriate by the Commission to ascertain that the Huron police department's public safety dispatcher personnel adhere to standards for selection and training established by the Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. 
(Ord. 273 §§ 1—3, 1991: Ord. 127 §§ 1, 2, 1974)  
2.20.020 - Designation of reserve or auxiliary officers as peace officers. 
No person shall be hired, employed or appointed as a reserve officer of the Huron Police Department, unless that person certifies to the satisfaction of the chief of police that the person has undergone the basic training requirement for peace officers prescribed by the commission on peace officer standards and training. Every person employed, hired or appointed as a reserve or auxiliary police officer is designated pursuant to Penal Code § 830.6(a)(2) as a peace officer possessing the full powers and duties of a peace officer as provided for by Penal Code § 830.1 and as Level I Reserve Officers pursuant to the provisions of Penal Code § 832.6(a)(1). 
( Ord. No. 2014-368, § 1, 11-5-14 )  
Chapter 2.24 - EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS 
Sections: 
 
2.24.010 - Purposes. 
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this City in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization, and the coordination of the emergency functions of this City with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected private persons. 
(Ord. 163 (part), 1979)  
2.24.020 - Emergency defined. 
As used in this chapter, "emergency" shall mean the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this City caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of this City, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. 
(Ord. 163 (part), 1979)  
2.24.030 - Disaster council membership. 
The Huron disaster council is created and shall consist of the following: 
A.  The mayor, who shall be chairman; 
B.  The director of emergency services, who shall be appointed by the city council; 
C.  The assistant director of emergency services, who shall be vice chairman; 
D.  Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of this City, adopted pursuant to this chapter; 
E.  Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Ord. 163 (part), 1979)  
2.24.040 - Disaster council powers and duties. 
It shall be the duty of the Huron disaster council, and it is empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairman, or, in his absence from the City or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice chairman. 
(Ord. 163 (part), 1979)  
2.24.050 - Director and assistant director of emergency services—Office created. 
A.  There is created the office of director of emergency services. The director is appointed by the city council. 
B.  There is created the office of assistant director of emergency services, who shall be appointed by the director. 
(Ord. 163 (part), 1979)  
2.24.060 - Director and assistant director of emergency services—Powers and duties. 
A.  The director is empowered to: 
1.  Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven (7) days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect; 
2.  Request the Governor to proclaim a state of emergency when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency; 
3.  Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this City for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter; 
4.  Direct cooperation between the coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this City; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them; 
5.  Represent this City in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein; 
6.  In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as herein provided, the proclamation of a state of emergency by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a state of war emergency, the director is empowered: 
a.  To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council, 
b.  To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the City for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use, 
c.  To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a state of emergency in the county in which this City is located or the existence of a state of war emergency to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by stated law for registered disaster service workers, 
d.  To requisition necessary personnel or material of any City department or agency, and, 
e.  To execute all of his ordinary power as director all of the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the city council, all powers conferred upon him by any status, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority. 
B.  The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council. 
C.  The director shall, under the supervision of the council and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this City, and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the council. 
(Ord. 163 (part), 1979)  
2.24.070 - Emergency organization. 
All officers and employees of this City, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency and all groups, organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Section 2.24.060(A)(6)(c), be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this City during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the City of Huron. 
(Ord. 163 (part), 1979)  
2.24.080 - Emergency plan. 
The Huron council shall be responsible for the development of the City of Huron emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this City, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 163 (part), 1979)  
2.24.090 - Expenditures. 
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the City of Huron. 
(Ord. 163 (part), 1979)  
2.24.100 - Punishment of violations. 
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed six months or both for any person, during an emergency, to: 
A.  Wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter; 
B.  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property or inhabitants of this City, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof; 
C.  Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the State. 
(Ord. 163 (part), 1979)  
Chapter 2.28 - CLAIMS PROCEDURES 
Sections: 
 
2.28.010 - Established. 
Pursuant to the authority contained in Section 935 of the Government Code of the State of California, the following claims procedures are established for those claims against the City for money or damages not now governed by state or local laws. 
Notwithstanding the exemptions set forth in Section 905 of the Government Code of the state of California, all claims against the City for damages or money, when a procedure for processing such claim is not otherwise provided by State or local laws, shall be presented within the time limitations and in the manner prescribed by Sections 910 through 915.2 of the Government Code of the state. Such claims shall further be subject to the provisions of Sections 945 through 946 of the Government Code of the state relating to the prohibition of suits in the absence of the presentation of claims and action thereon by the council. 
(Ord. 318, 1996: Ord. 285, 1992)  
2.28.020 - Applicability of this chapter. 
Section 2.28.010 is applicable to all claims not otherwise governed by state law. Notwithstanding the foregoing, whenever the amount of any tax or any fee to which this chapter is made applicable by this section, has been overpaid or paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under one or more of the provisions to which this chapter is made applicable, it may be refunded as provided in this chapter. This chapter is specifically applicable to any sums collected pursuant to the provisions of any one or more of the following: 
A.  Chapter 3.08 of this code, (adopted by Ordinance No. 104, and amended by Ordinance 301), relating to the real property transfer tax; 
B.  Chapter 3.12 of this code, (adopted by Ordinance No. 305), relating to the sales and use tax; 
C.  Chapter 3.16 of this code, (adopted by Ordinance No. 94), relating to the transient occupancy tax; 
D.  Chapter 3.20 of this code, (adopted by Ordinance No. 272), relating to the utility user tax; 
E.  Chapter 5.04 of this code, (adopted by Ordinance No. 116, and subsequently amended by Ordinance No. 145, No. 176, No. 200, No. 202 and No. 228), relating to a fee for a business license; 
F.  Any tax adopted by either the city council or the voters of the city subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance adopting this chapter and made applicable only within the city. 
G.  Any fee charged by the City, other than a facility fee pursuant to Section 66000 et seq. of the Government Code, which is in excess of the cost of providing the services for which the fee is charged. 
(Ord. 317 § 1, 1996)  
2.28.030 - Refunds of utility user tax. 
This section shall apply only to taxes collected pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 3.20 of this code, (adopted by Ordinance No. 272), relating to the utility user tax. 
A.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 2.28.020 of this chapter, a service supplier may claim credit against utility user taxes remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established that the service user from whom the tax has been collected did not owe the tax; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of tax erroneously or illegally collected has either been refunded to the service user or credited to charges subsequently payable by the service user to the person required to collect and remit. A service supplier that has collected any amount of tax in excess of the amount of tax imposed by Chapter 3.20 of this code and actually due from a service user, may refund such amount to the service user and claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due upon any other monthly returns, provided such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than one year from the date of the overpayment. 
B.  Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a service supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction, made a refund to one or more service users of charges for past utility services, the taxes paid pursuant to Chapter 3.20 of this code on the amount of such refunded service charges may also be refunded to service users by the service supplier and the service supplier can claim credit for such refunded taxes against the amount which is due upon any monthly returns. In the event that Chapter 3.20 is repealed, any refundable taxes will be borne by the City. 
C.  A service supplier may refund the taxes collected to the service user in accordance with this section or by the service supplier's customary practice. 
(Ord. 317 § 2, 1996)  
2.28.040 - Procedure for making a claim. 
The provisions of Section 2.28.010 of this code, (adopted by Ordinance 285) shall be applicable to any claim for refund under the provisions of Section 2.28.020 and/or 2.28.030 and/or this section. Claims for a cause of action under Section 2.28.020 and/or Section 2.28.030 shall be considered to have accrued as of the date of the alleged overpayment or the date of the second payment if the claim is that it was paid more than once, or on the date of the erroneous or illegal collection if the claim is that it has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator. Any and all claims under this chapter shall be made within one year of the date of the accrual of the cause of action pursuant to the provisions of Section 915 et seq. of the Government Code, made applicable through Section 935 of the Government Code and Section 2.28.010 of this code. 
(Ord. 317 § 3, 1996)  
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 3.02 - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES 
Sections: 
 
3.02.010 - Establishment, purpose and use of development impact fees. 
A.  The city council hereby creates and establishes development impact fees for the City which shall be used to mitigate adverse impacts to public facilities attributed to new development in each of the following categories: (1) general facilities and equipment necessary for the administration of the City which are not listed in any one of the other categories of essential infrastructure; (2) law enforcement facilities, equipment and training; (3) recreational facilities; (4) sewage treatment and disposal facilities; (5) traffic control facilities; (6) storm drainage facilities; and, (7) water supply treatment and storage facilities. 
B.  For convenience, all of the development fees so established shall be referred to in this chapter in the singular, as "the fee." Specifically, the fee shall be used by the City to pay a portion of the costs of designated public facilities impacted by new development. The fee shall be based on a method designed to insure that developers pay their fair share of the cost of such public facilities required to serve the City's growing population. 
C.  Such public facilities are currently identified in the City of Huron Development Fee Study and Justification Report, prepared the city engineer and city manager's office. Facilities may be added to or deleted from the report and subsequent capital improvement plans (CIP), but the city council directs that the fee shall be used only for public facilities in any one of the categories of essential infrastructure (as that term is defined in this chapter) for which that fee was collected. 
D.  Fees charged by the City for connection to the water or wastewater systems shall remain as currently adopted in Chapters 13.08 and 13.12 of the Huron Municipal Code. Such connection service charges are not considered development impact fees and subject to Section 66000 of the California Government Code. 
(Ord. 325 § 1 (part), 1999)  
3.02.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings indicated in this section. 
"Build out of the City" means assuming a three percent growth rate for the twenty-two (22) years between 1998 and 2020, based on the City's general plan growth line, the probable addition to the City's population and location of that population in the year 2020. 
"Costs of public facilities" means any costs related to the acquisition, construction and/or financing of public facilities and/or equipment funded through the City's CIP and/or the subject of the development fee studies or public facility master plans, including but not limited to the costs associated with the preparation of those studies, the ordinance codified in this chapter and the fee resolution necessary to implement the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
"Essential infrastructure" means each of the following, including any related facilities: 
1.  General facilities necessary for the administration of the City which are not listed in any one of the other categories of essential infrastructure; 
2.  Law enforcement facilities and equipment; 
3.  Recreation facilities (which does not include dedication of parklands pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act; 
4.  Sewage treatment and disposal facilities; 
5.  Traffic control facilities; 
6.  Storm drainage facilities; 
7.  Water supply treatment and storage facilities. 
"General facilities" means the additional space at City Hall, City offices located elsewhere, City parking areas, and similar facilities, along with necessary equipment in or through which the City conducts general City operations, that will accommodate the growth in City government which is projected to come into the City between the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and build out of the City at a level which is comparable to the level currently provided to the existing residents of the City. If the developer decides and the City agrees to acquire equipment or install facilities that are part of the capital improvement program, the actual cost of the equipment or installation of facilities may be credited against the development fee for general facilities and other development fees contained in this chapter that would be collected as a result of the development. 
"Law enforcement facilities and equipment" means any capital improvements or capital equipment related to the City police department and the delivery of police services, based on studies adopted by the City or associated with a capital improvement program, or any of them, to provide police protection services to the new development which is projected to come into the City between the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and build out of the City at a level which is comparable to the level currently provided to the existing residents of the City. If the developer decides and the City agrees to acquire equipment or install facilities that are part of the capital improvement program, the actual cost of the equipment or installation of facilities may be credited against the development fee for law enforcement facilities and equipment and other development fees contained in this chapter that would be collected as a result of the development. 
"New development" means any residential, commercial or industrial development which occurs in the City after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and/or any amendment to the ordinance codified in this chapter, including but not limited to development on any so-called "in-fill" lots to the extent the resolution implementing the ordinance codified in this chapter determines that such fees are applicable to "in-fill" lots. 
"Recreation facilities" means any capital improvement or capital equipment related to the City park and recreational facilities, which will be required either to improve and/or expand existing facilities or to construct new facilities, based on studies adopted by the City or associated with a capital improvement program, or any of them, to provide park and recreational services to the new development which is projected to come into the City between the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and build out of the City at a level which is comparable to the level currently provided to the existing residents of the City. This fee does not include the estimated cost for the acquisition of the land for new parks. The requirement for dedication of land for parks is subject to the Subdivision Map Act (Section 66477) and Chapter 16.32 of this code, and requires new development to provide land (or a fee in lieu of land) at a level of four acres per one thousand (1,000) of population generated by new residential development as required in Section 16.32.020(B). If the developer decides and the City agrees to acquire equipment or install facilities that are part of the capital improvement program in a park, the actual cost of the equipment or installation of facilities may be credited against the development fee for recreation facilities and other development fees contained in this chapter that would be collected as a result of the development. 
"Sewage treatment and disposal facilities" means all of the sewage treatment and disposal facilities, including sewage treatment plants, basins for dewatering treated or partially treated sewage, sludge drying beds, sludge storage and transportation facilities, any land acquired by the City for the purpose of treating or disposing of water which is the byproduct of the treatment of sewage, and related facilities which are necessary for the purpose of treating domestic sewage as will be required by the City, based on studies adopted by the City or associated with a capital improvement program, or any of them, to provide sewage treatment services to the new development which is projected to come into the City between the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and build out of the City. If the developer decides and the City agrees to the installation of facility that is part of the capital improvement program, the actual cost of the installation of the facility may be credited against the development fee for sewage treatment and disposal facilities and other development fees contained in this chapter that would be collected as a result of the development. 
"Storm drainage facilities" means all of the stormwater collection, retention and disposal facilities, including stormwater mains, ditches, canals, pumps, pump stations, retention basin, detention basins and related facilities which are necessary for the purpose of collecting stormwater runoff and transporting it to the appropriate stormwater basin as will be required, based on studies adopted by the City or associated with a capital improvement program, or any of them, to provide stormwater collection and disposal services to the new development which is projected to come into the City between the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and build out of the City. The fee is not applied to heavy industrial types of uses because such uses are required to construct on-site drainage facilities and will not use facilities contained in the capital improvement program. The fee does not include any such facilities which the developer is required to provide himself that are not part of the capital improvement program that must be installed as part of the development improvements. If the developer decides and the City agrees to the installation of a facility that is part of the capital improvement program, the actual cost of the installation of the facility may be credited against the development fee for storm drainage facilities and other development fees contained in this chapter that would be collected as a result of the development. 
"Traffic control facilities" means the cost of acquiring, installing, wiring and regulating traffic signals, traffic signs and any other traffic control devices which will be required to regulate the flow of motor vehicle traffic due to new development generating additional motor vehicle trips on the City's existing network of arterial, collector and local streets, based on studies adopted by the City or associated with a capital improvement program. The fee does not include any such facilities which the developer is required to provide himself that are not part of the capital improvement program that must be installed as part of the development improvements. If the developer decides and the City agrees to the installation of a facility that is part of the capital improvement program, the actual cost of the installation of the facility may be credited against the development fee for traffic control facilities and other development fees contained in this chapter that would be collected as a result of the development. 
"Water supply treatment and storage facilities" means all of the domestic water production facilities, including water uptake, water pumps and pump stations, canal structures, major transmission lines from the point of uptake and any water treatment facilities or associated treatment equipment or monitoring devices or equipment, and related facilities which are necessary for the purpose of supplying domestic water to any water treatment or storage facility for the storage of domestic water for consumption or fire flow reserves, and related facilities for the production of domestic water as may be required, based on studies adopted by the City or associated with a capital improvement program, or any of them, to provide water delivery services to the new development which is projected to come into the City between the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and build out of the City. If the developer decides and the City agrees to the installation of a facility that is part of the capital improvement program, the actual cost of the installation of the facility may be credited against the development fee for water supply treatment and storage facilities and other development fees contained in this chapter that would be collected as a result of the development. 
(Ord. 325 § 1 (part), 1999)  
3.02.030 - Relationship between the need for the additional public facilities and the type of development. 
For all of the essential infrastructure the city council is committed to maintaining the same level of public facilities and services and the same facilities-to-population relationship which existed on the date of the most recent amendment of this chapter in order to ensure that, to the extent that growth of the City occurs in the future, there will be an adequate level of public facilities and services. The city council finds that a reasonable relationship exists between the need for additional public facilities, equipment and operations which the fee is designed to pay, and the type of development project for which the fee is imposed for the following reasons: 
A.  The city council has determined that new commercial and industrial developments result in a need for additional public services which, in turn, ultimately result in a need for additional government and public facilities for essential infrastructure and related facilities. Based on the level of public services and public facilities-to-population relationship for government and law enforcement services which existed on the date of the adoption and amendment of this chapter, the generation of traffic from consumers and/or employees based on the type of commercial or industrial use, the consumption of domestic water and production of wastewater based on average demand of similar or existing commercial or industrial uses, and the amount of stormwater runoff generated by the installation or construction of impermeable surfaces, the city council determines that commercial and industrial development should be assessed fees at rates to be established by resolution of the city council as the fair share of contribution of the costs of these required facilities and services. 
B.  The city council has determined that residential development, including new mobilehome park development, results in significant increases in City population and that such residential development adversely affects the public facilities-to-population relationship which existed on the date of the adoption and amendment of this chapter. The city council has further determined that because residential development results in significant increases in population, such development results in the need for essential infrastructure and related facilities including but not limited to general government facilities, law enforcement facilities, traffic systems including signalization, domestic water production and distribution, wastewater collection, treatment and disposal, and parks and recreation facilities based on the public facilities-to-population relationship which existed on such date, stormwater collection and disposal facilities based on the average amount of impermeable surface constructed for new residential development, residential development shall be assessed a fee at the rate established by resolution of the city council for the costs for these required public facilities and services. 
(Ord. 325 § 1 (part), 1999)  
3.02.040 - Adjustment of fee. 
The fee shall be adopted by resolution of the city council and shall be adjusted by resolution from time to time but not less than annually, subject to city council review and approval, after a noticed public hearing, to reflect changes in costs as determined by the city manager in a written report. The fee established by resolution of the city council shall be adjusted on an annual basis in an amount equal to change in the national average construction cost index as published by the Engineering News Record. Such adjustments are not deemed an increase in the amount of the fee and subject to the provisions of Section 66000 of the California Government Code. 
(Ord. 325 § 1 (part), 1999)  
3.02.050 - Relationship between the amount of the fee and the cost of facilities attributable to the development upon which the fee is imposed. 
The city council finds that there is a reasonable relationship between the amount of the fee set by resolution of the city council and the cost of the public facilities or portions thereof attributable to the new development on which the fee is imposed. The basis for such determination is set out in reports to the city council from the city manager, the city planner and the city engineer and such consultants as the city council determines are necessary, if any, to develop accurate costs and the fee to cover new public facilities and services. 
(Ord. 325 § 1 (part), 1999)  
3.02.060 - Relationship between the use of the fee and the type of development upon which the fee is imposed. 
The city council finds that there is a reasonable relationship between the use of the fee for specified categories of public facilities and the type of development project for which the fee is imposed for the following reasons: 
A.  The city council finds that the imposition of the fee on commercial and industrial development for parks and recreation facilities is not reasonable because the city council determines that there is no substantial demand placed on such facilities as a result of new commercial, industrial and public facility development. The city council finds further that the use of the fee generated from heavy industrial development for stormwater facilities is not reasonable because the City has required heavy industrial development to provide for its own on-site disposal of all stormwater generated on such property no substantial demand is placed on the City's stormwater facilities as a result of industrial development. Commercial, light industrial and public facility development, including schools may use the City's stormwater collection and disposal facilities and significantly impact the City's existing stormwater collection and disposal systems. Because commercial, industrial, public facility developments do increase demand on all other essential infrastructure and related facilities, the city council finds that the use of the fee generated from commercial and industrial development for such facilities is reasonable. 
B.  The city council finds that the use of the fee generated from new residential development for all essential infrastructure and related facilities, including but not limited to water supply treatment facilities, wastewater treatment and disposal, law enforcement services, parks and recreation facilities and stormwater collection and disposal, and general facility fees, is reasonable because growth in residential population places additional demands on all such facilities. 
C.  The city council further finds that funding of the costs of essential infrastructure, including capital equipment based on studies adopted by the City or associated with a capital improvement program accomplishes the goals and purposes set forth in subsections A and B of this section and that the use of revenues generated by the fee for projects and outlays set forth in studies adopted by the City or associated with a capital improvement program is warranted and justified. 
(Ord. 325 § 1 (part), 1999)  
3.02.070 - Payment of fee. 
A.  Any owner or developer applying for a building permit for commercial or industrial development shall be assessed and shall pay the fee in conjunction with payment for the building permit subject to the provisions of Government Code Section 66007. 
B.  Any owner or developer of a residential development shall pay the fee on the date of final inspection or the date the certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever occurs first. In the case of parcel maps or subdivisions, the fee shall be paid on a lump sum basis, as follows: 
1.  When the first dwelling in the development receives its final inspection or certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first, that portion of the fee shall be paid which represents payment for each of the following: general facilities; law enforcement facilities; public works facilities. 
2.  As a condition of filing the final subdivision map, that portion of the fee shall be paid which represents payment for each of the following: recreation facilities; sewage treatment facilities; streets and thoroughfares; stormwater collection and disposal facilities; traffic control facilities; and water supply treatment facilities. 
(Ord. 325 § 1 (part), 1999)  
3.02.080 - Exempted activities. 
Any owner or developer engaging in development activities which satisfy the following criteria shall not be required to pay the fee: 
A.  An alteration which does not increase the floor area of a structure; or 
B.  An addition to a single-family residential dwelling unit which does not constitute the addition of a dwelling unit as defined by the Uniform Building Code. 
(Ord. 325 § 1 (part), 1999)  
3.02.090 - Accounting for funds. 
A.  Pursuant to Government Code Section 66006, the city council directs that each of the fees collected hereunder shall be maintained in a fund separate from the City's general fund and separate from each other in the following special accounts: 
1.  General facilities necessary for the administration of the City; 
2.  Law enforcement facilities and equipment; 
3.  Recreational facilities; 
4.  Sewage treatment facilities; 
5.  Storm drainage facilities; 
6.  Traffic control facilities; 
7.  Water supply treatment and storage facilities. 
B.  The City shall use the funds so deposited into these special accounts (along with interest earnings thereon) for the costs of public facilities as specified herein and only for the category of improvements for which the funds were deposited in that particular account. 
C.  If the fee paid by an owner or developer for a particular development has been retained by the City for five or more years, and City has not committed that fee to costs for public facilities, then the city council shall make findings describing the continuing need to retain the fee each fiscal year thereafter. If the city council does not make such findings, then the City shall refund the collected fees as appropriate, along with the interest, if any, which those funds have generated since they were collected. 
(Ord. 325 § 1 (part), 1999)  
3.02.100 - Annual findings. 
A.  Each year, during the budget review process, the city council shall review the status of compliance with this chapter and the degree to which fees collected pursuant to this chapter are mitigating the impacts of new industrial, commercial and residential development projects and new development entitlements. 
B.  For each of the accounts established by this chapter, the City shall, within sixty (60) days after the close of each fiscal year, make available to the public all of the following information: 
1.  The beginning and ending balance for the fiscal year in that account; 
2.  The fee, interest and other income to that account for the fiscal year; 
3.  The amount of expenditure by line item category from that account during the fiscal year; 
4.  The amount of refunds made pursuant to Section 66001(e) of the Government Code out of that account during the fiscal year. 
C.  The city council shall review the information described in subsection B of this section at the next regularly scheduled public meeting of the council, not less than fifteen (15) days after the information required by that subsection is made available to the public. 
D.  Five years after the effective date of the ordinance which adopted this chapter, the city council shall consider a report by the city administrator reviewing the fee formulae established to implement the provisions of this chapter and their bases to determine whether any adjustments in the fee formulae are warranted. 
(Ord. 325 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Chapter 3.04 - TRANSFER OF ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION DUTIES TO COUNTY 
Sections: 
 
3.04.010 - State statute adopted. 
A.  The election is declared of the City of Huron to adopt the provisions of the statute of the State of California of 1895, Page 219 as amended, entitled, "Levy and Collection of Municipal Taxes" insofar as said statute relates to the assessment of property within the City of Huron and the collection of taxes thereof; provided, however, the duties of city treasurer shall be reserved unto the City of Huron and shall not be performed by the county treasurer. 
B.  A certified copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be filed with the auditor of the county of Fresno as provided by law. 
C.  All fees for the performance of the duties of assessor and tax collector by the county of Fresno shall be paid in accordance with the statute entitled "Levy and Collection of Municipal Taxes" under the laws of the State of California. 
(Ord. 8 §§ 1—3, 1951)  
Chapter 3.08 - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.08.010 - Title for citation. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City of Huron." It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. 
(Ord. 104 § 1, 1967)  
3.08.020 - Tax imposed. 
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements or other realty sold within the City of Huron shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents ($0.275) for each five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fractional part thereof. 
(Ord. 104 § 2, 1967)  
3.08.030 - Payment responsibility. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.08.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. 
(Ord. 104 § 3, 1967)  
3.08.040 - Exemptions. 
A.  Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. 
B.  1.  Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, the state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, is a party, shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title, as per Tax and Revenue Code Section 11922, as it presently exists, or as it is hereinafter amended. 
2.  Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to instruments taken in lieu of foreclosure (Revenue and Taxation Code § 11926), marital property (Revenue and Taxation Code § 11927), property which is the subject of a conveyance by a governmental entity and subsequent reconveyance to an exempt public agency (Revenue and Taxation Code § 11928), and certain conveyances of a governmental entity to a nonprofit corporation (Tax and Revenue Code § 11929), which code sections are herein incorporated by reference, as they presently exist or as they are hereinafter amended. 
(Ord. 301 § 2, 1995: Ord. 104 §§ 4, 5, 1967)  
3.08.050 - Tax not applicable when. 
A.  Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment: 
1.  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended; 
2.  Approved in an equity receivership proceedings in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (n) of Section 205 of Title II of the United States Code, as amended; 
3.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title II of the United States Code, as amended; or 
4.  Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected. 
Subdivisions (1) through (4), inclusive, of this subsection shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five (5) years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. 
B.  Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if: 
1.  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935; 
2.  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; 
3.  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. 
(Ord. 104 §§ 6, 7, 1967)  
3.08.060 - Transfer and termination of partnerships. 
A.  In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise; if: 
1.  Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and 
2.  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
B.  2.  If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
C.  Not more than one (1) tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subdivision (b), and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(Ord. 104 § 8, 1967)  
3.08.070 - Administration. 
The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. 104 § 9, 1967)  
3.08.080 - Refund claims. 
Any and all refunds claimed for taxes overpaid or paid more than once, or claimed to have been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator pursuant to this chapter, as well as any claim of interest or penalty thereon, such claim shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 2.28 of this code in all respects. 
(Ord. 321 § 1, 1996)  
Chapter 3.12 - TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 366, adopted July 3, 2013, repealed the former Ch. 3.12, §§ 3.12.010—3.12.130, and enacted a new Ch. 3.12 as set out herein. The former Ch. 3.12 pertained to sales and use tax and derived from Ord. 305, §§ 1—5, 7—10, 12—15, adopted 1995. 
 
3.12.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the Huron Public Safety Special Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance. The City of Huron hereinafter shall be called "City". This chapter shall be applicable to the incorporated territory of the City. 
(Ord. No. 366, § 1, 7-3-13)  
3.12.020 - Operative date. 
"Operative date" means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than one hundred ten (110) days after the adoption of this chapter, the date of such adoption being as set forth below. 
(Ord. No. 366, § 1, 7-3-13)  
3.12.030 - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To impose a special retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.91 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the City to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the enactment of the tax at an election called for that purpose. 
B.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
C.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes. 
D.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 366, § 1, 7-3-13)  
3.12.040 - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date, the City shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the City shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. 
(Ord. No. 366, § 1, 7-3-13)  
3.12.050 - Transactions tax rate. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a special tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the City at the rate of one (1) percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of this chapter. Such tax shall be in addition to any other transactions tax imposed by this Code or applicable State law. 
(Ord. No. 366, § 1, 7-3-13)  
3.12.060 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one (1) place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. No. 366, § 1, 7-3-13)  
3.12.070 - Use tax rate. 
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of one (1) percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. Such special tax shall be in addition to any other use tax imposed by this Code or applicable State law. 
(Ord. No. 366, § 1, 7-3-13)  
3.12.080 - Adoption of provisions of State law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 366, § 1, 7-3-13)  
3.12.090 - Limitations on adoption of State law and collection of use taxes. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code: 
A.  Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when: 
1.  The word "State" is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; 
2.  The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this City or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter. 
3.  In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to: 
a.  Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or; 
b.  Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code. 
4.  In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
B.  The word "City" shall be substituted for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. No. 366, § 1, 7-3-13)  
3.12.100 - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 366, § 1, 7-3-13)  
3.12.110 - Exemptions and exclusions. 
A.  There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Bums Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax. 
B.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from: 
1.  Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government. 
2.  Sales of property to be used outside the City which is shipped to a point outside the City, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this paragraph, delivery to a point outside the City shall be satisfied: 
a.  With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-City address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and 
b.  With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-City and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address. 
3.  The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
4.  A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
5.  For the purposes of subparagraphs (3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
C.  There are exempted from the use tax enacted by this ordinance, the storage, use or other consumption in this City of tangible personal property: 
1.  The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance. 
2.  Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. 
3.  If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
4.  If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
5.  For the purposes of subparagraphs (3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
6.  Except as provided in subparagraph (7), a retailer engaged in business in the City shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the City or participates within the City in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the City or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the City under the authority of the retailer. 
7.  "A retailer engaged in business in the City" shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the City. 
D.  Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. 
(Ord. No. 366, § 1, 7-3-13)  
3.12.120 - Amendments. 
A.  All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter unless any increase in the rate of this tax is first approved by two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the voters of the City of Huron voting on such question. 
B.  Pursuant to California Elections Code Section 9217 or any successor statute, the City Council of the City of Huron may amend or repeal this chapter and any of its exhibits, but not increase or extend the rate of tax imposed herein, without a vote of the people. 
(Ord. No. 366, § 1, 7-3-13)  
3.12.130 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State or the City, or against any officer of the State or the City, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. No. 366, § 1, 7-3-13)  
3.12.140 - Severability. 
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 366, § 1, 7-3-13)  
3.12.150 - Use of tax proceeds and expenditure plan. 
All proceeds of the tax levied and imposed hereunder shall be accounted for and paid into a Public Safety Fund or special account designated for use by the City of Huron only for the Public Safety Services and expenditures. All revenues net of expenses derived from the tax must be expended exclusively for the support of the Huron Police Department according to this Expenditure Plan. The revenues from the tax may be expended on the payment of salaries and benefits of sworn peace officers of the City of Huron and/or the payment of the costs of equipment and capital improvements required for the operation of the Huron Police Department. The funds are to be exclusively utilized for public safety, police protection services, within the City of Huron. No funds can be taken by the State or another government agency - all funds can only be spent within the City of Huron for the purposes of improving Public Safety. These purposes include: obtaining, furnishing, operating, and/or maintaining police protection equipment or apparatus, paying the salaries and benefits of police protection personnel, and such other police protection service expenses as are deemed necessary by the City Council for the benefit of the safety of residents of the City and consistent with this Expenditure Plan. No revenues collected pursuant to the tax levied may be spent on department administrators' salaries, or General Fund operating expenses in effect at the time this chapter becomes effective. 
(Ord. No. 366, § 1, 7-3-13)  
Chapter 3.16 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.16.010 - Title for citation. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Transient Room Tax Ordinance of the City of Huron." 
(Ord. 94 § 1, 1964)  
3.16.020 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter. 
"Hotel" means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobilehome or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof. 
"Legislative body" means the city council of the City of Huron. 
"Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portions thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
"Operator" means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
"Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
"Tax administrator" means the city clerk. 
"Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy in a hotel by reason of a lease, concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be considered. 
"Transient occupancy tax review committee" shall be the city council of the City of Huron. 
(Ord. 94 § 2, 1964)  
3.16.030 - Tax imposed. 
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel on and after September 6, 1995, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of ten (10) percent of the rent charged by the operator. Said tax constitutes debt owed by the transient to the City which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the City. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. Any unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to him. 
(Ord. 308 § 2, 1995; Ord. 94 § 3, 1964)  
3.16.040 - Collection of tax by operator—Rules for collection schedules. 
Every operator maintaining a place of business and renting rooms in this City, the occupancy of which is not exempted under the terms of this chapter, shall collect the tax from the occupant. The tax required to be collected by the operator constitutes a debt owing by the operator to the City. In all cases of transactions upon credit or deferred payment, the payment of tax to the operator may be deferred in accordance therewith, and the operator shall be liable therefor at the time and to the extent that such credits are paid or deferred payments are made in accordance with the rate of tax owing on the amount thereof. 
The tax administrator shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent herewith as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the enforcement hereof. He shall provide schedules for payment of the tax and such schedules shall eliminate fractions of one cent ($0.01). 
(Ord. 94 § 4, 1964)  
3.16.050 - Operator's duties. 
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. 94 § 5, 1964)  
3.16.060 - Exemptions. 
No tax imposed under this chapter shall be imposed upon: 
A.  Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the City to impose the tax herein provided; 
B.  Any officer or employee of the government of the United States of America, State of California, or any subdivision thereof when on official business; 
C.  Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty; 
D.  Any occupant for more than thirty (30) successive calendar days; 
E.  Any occupant whose rent is of a value less than two dollars ($2.00) a day; 
F.  Any person who rents a private home, vacation cabin or like facility from an owner who is not regularly engaged in the business of renting such facilities but does so only occasionally and incidentally to his own use thereof; 
G.  Any occupant whose rent is paid for a hospital room or to a medical clinic, convalescent home or home for aged people; 
No exemption shall be granted under subsection A, B or C of this section except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. 
(Ord. 94 § 6, 1964)  
3.16.070 - Registration of operator—Form and contents—Execution—Certification of authority. 
A.  Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this City shall register with the tax administrator on a form provided by him. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than July 15, 1964, or within fifteen (15) days after commencing business whichever is later, but such privilege of registration after the date of imposition of such tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof, regardless of registration. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places of business and such other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as the tax administrator may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in the case of a corporation, by an executive officer or some person specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the registration. The tax administrator shall, within ten (10) days after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each registrant to collect the tax from the occupant, together with a duplicate thereof for each additional place of business of such registrant. Such certificates shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the tax administrator upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon its sale or transfer. Each certificate and duplicate shall state the place of business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and come to the notice readily of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. 
B.  Said certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
1.  The name of the operator; 
2.  The address of the hotel; 
3.  The date upon which the certificate was issued; 
4.  This transient occupancy registration certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the transient room tax ordinance of the City of Huron by registration with the tax administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the room tax imposed by the City and remitting said tax to the tax administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, or to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of the City. This certificate does not constitute a permit. 
C.  If the tax administrator deems it necessary in order to facilitate initial registration hereunder of persons engaged in business on or prior to the date of imposition of tax as set forth in this chapter, he may prescribe provisions therefor other than those provided in this section. Such provisions shall be made to effect the purposes hereof. For such purposes, such provisions shall be in lieu of or in addition to those herein provided. Such registration and certificate thereof shall have the same effect as that provided herein. 
(Ord. 94 § 7, 1964)  
3.16.080 - Penalties and interest. 
A.  Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
B.  Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten (10) percent penalty first imposed. 
C.  Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud or intent to evade the provisions thereof, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section. 
D.  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half (½) of one (1) percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first become delinquent until paid. 
E.  Penalties Merged With Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall be merged with and become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. 
(Ord. 94 § 8, 1964)  
3.16.090 - Due date—Returns and payments. 
A.  The tax imposed by this chapter shall become due and payable from the occupant at the time of occupancy. All amounts of such taxes collectible or collected by any operator are due and payable to the tax administrator quarterly on the first day of the months of April, July, October and January next succeeding each respective quarterly period and are delinquent after the last day of such months. 
B.  On or before the last day of the month following each quarterly period of three (3) months, a return for the preceding quarterly period shall be filed with the tax administrator. The return shall be filed in such form as the tax administrator may prescribe, by every operator and by every person liable to payment of tax hereunder during such quarterly period who has not paid such tax, and who has not made return in regard to the related occupancy which is the subject of tax. 
C.  Returns shall show the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period and such other information as is required by the tax administrator. The tax administrator may require returns to show the total rentals upon which tax was collected or otherwise due, the gross receipts of a registered returnee for such period and the explanation in detail of any discrepancy between such amounts. 
D.  The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the amount of the tax due, to the tax administrator at his office. 
E.  For good cause the tax administrator may extend for not to exceed one (1) month the time for making any return or payment of tax. No further extension shall be granted, except by the transient occupancy review committee. Any person to whom an extension is granted who makes return and pays the tax within the period of such extension shall pay, in addition to the tax, interest on the amount thereof at the rate of one-half (½) of one (1) percent per month, or fraction thereof, on the unpaid balance for the period of such extension to the time of return and payment, which interest shall become a part of the tax. 
F.  The tax administrator, if he deems it necessary in order to insure payment or facilitate collection by the City of the amount of taxes in any individual case, may require returns and payment of the amount of taxes for other than quarterly periods. 
(Ord. 94 § 9, 1964)  
3.16.100 - Deficiency determinations. 
A.  If the tax administrator is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the City by any person, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of the facts contained in the return or returns or upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one (1) or more than one (1) period. 
B.  In making a determination the administrator may offset overpayments, if any, which may have been previously made for a period or periods together with interest on the overpayments, against any underpayment for a subsequent period or periods, or against penalties, and interest, on the underpayments. The interest on underpayments and overpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in Section 3.16.130. 
C.  The tax administrator shall give to the operator or occupant written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, the notice shall be enclosed in a sealed envelope postage prepaid and addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the administrator. In case of service by mail of any notice required by this chapter the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Post Office. 
D.  Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this chapter or authorized rules and regulations, or failure to make a timely return, every deficiency determination shall be made and notice thereof mailed within three (3) years after the last day of the month following the close of the quarterly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three (3) years after the return is filed, whichever period expires the later. 
E.  If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect said tax or to make, within the time provided in this chapter any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter or makes a fraudulent return or otherwise wilfully attempts to evade this chapter, tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties, provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice in the manner aforesaid of the amount so assessed. Such determination and notice shall be made and mailed within three (3) years after discovery by the tax administrator of any fraud, intent to evade or failure to file return. Any determination shall become final within thirty (30) days after giving notice thereof as herein provided. 
F.  If the tax administrator believes that the collection of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid to the City will be jeopardized by delay, or if any determination will be jeopardized by delay, he shall thereupon make a determination of the tax or amount of tax required to be collected, noting that fact upon the determination. The amount determined is immediately due and payable. If the amount specified in the determination is not paid within ten (10) days after service of notice thereof upon the person against whom the determination is made, the amount becomes final at the expiration of the ten (10) days, unless a petition for redetermination is filed within the ten (10) days and the delinquency penalty and the interest provided in Section 3.16.080 shall attach to the amount of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. 94 § 10, 1964)  
3.16.110 - Redeterminations. 
A.  Any person against whom a determination is made under Section 3.16.100 or any person directly interested may petition for a redetermination within fifteen (15) days after service upon the person of notice thereof. If a petition for redetermination is not filed within the thirty (30) day period, the determination becomes final at the expiration of the period. Provided, however, a petition for redetermination under Section 3.16.100(F) shall be filed within ten (10) days after notice. 
B.  If a petition for redetermination is filed within the allowable period, the tax administrator shall reconsider the determination, and, if the person has so requested in his petition, shall grant the person an oral hearing and shall give him ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of the hearing. The tax administrator may continue the hearing from time to time as may be necessary. 
C.  The tax administrator may decrease or increase the amount of the determination before it becomes final but the amount may be increased only if a claim for the increase is asserted by the tax administrator at or before the hearing. 
D.  The order or decision of the tax administrator upon a petition for redetermination becomes final fifteen (15) days after service upon the petitioner of notice thereof, unless appeal of such order or decision is filed with the transient occupancy tax review committee within fifteen (15) days after service of such notice. 
E.  No petition for redetermination or appeal therefrom shall be effective for any purpose unless at or before the filing thereof the amount found due in the original determination is paid or a bond or other security satisfactory to the tax administrator is filed with him guaranteeing payment of any amount finally determined to be due. 
(Ord. 94 § 11, 1964)  
3.16.120 - Security for collection of tax. 
A.  The tax administrator, whenever he deems it necessary to insure compliance with this chapter, may require any person subject thereto to deposit with him such security in the form of cash, bond or other security as the tax administrator may determine. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the tax administrator but shall not be greater than twice the person's estimated average liability for the period for which he files returns, determined in such manner as the tax administrator deems proper, or ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), whichever amount is the lesser. The amount of the security may be increased or decreased by the tax administrator subject to the limitations herein provided. 
B.  If any person is delinquent in the payment of the amount required to be paid by him or in the event a determination has been made against him which remains unpaid, the tax administrator may, not later than three (3) years after the payment became delinquent, give notice thereof by registered mail to all persons in the county having in their possession or under their control any credits or other personal property belonging to the delinquent, or owing any debts to the delinquent. After receiving the notice the persons so notified shall neither transfer nor make any other disposition of the credits, other personal property, or debts in their possession or under their control at the time they receive the notice until the tax administrator consents to a transfer or disposition or until twenty (20) days elapse after the receipt of the notice. All persons so notified shall within five (5) days after the receipt of the notice advise the tax administrator of all such credits, other personal property, or debts in their possession, under their control, or owing by them. 
C.  At any time within three (3) years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable or at any time within three (3) years after any determination becomes final, the tax administrator may bring an action in the courts of this State, or any other state, or of the United States in the name of the City to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest. 
D.  If any operator liable for any amount under this chapter sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the tax administrator showing that he has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold the tax from the purchase price as required, he becomes personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within thirty (30) days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, the tax administrator shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at his address as it appears on the records of the tax administrator of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. Failure of the administrator to mail the notice will release the purchaser from any further obligation to withhold the purchase price as above provided. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells out his business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs the later. 
(Ord. 94 § 12, 1964)  
3.16.130 - Refund claims. 
Any and all refunds claimed for taxes overpaid or paid more than once, or claimed to have been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator pursuant to this chapter, as well as any claim of interest or penalty thereon, such claim shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 2.28 of this code in all respects. 
(Ord. 321 § 2, 1996)  
3.16.140 - Administration. 
A.  The tax administrator shall deposit all moneys collected pursuant to this chapter to the credit of the general fund. 
B.  Records Required from Operators, Etc.—Form. Every operator renting guest rooms in this City shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the tax administrator may require. All records shall be retained by the operator for a period of three (3) years and six (6) months after they come into being. 
C.  Examination of Records—Investigations. The tax administrator or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records and equipment of any person liable for the tax and may investigate the character of the business of the person in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the person, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
D.  Authority to Require Reports—Contents. In administration of the tax the tax administrator may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in his or their possession or custody information relating to rentals of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed when the tax administrator requires and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the tax administrator may require. 
E.  Confidential Character of Information Obtained—Disclosure Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for the tax administrator or any person having an administrative duty under the provisions of this chapter to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain a transient occupancy registration certificate, or pay a transient occupancy tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof, set forth in any statement or application, or to permit any statement or application, or copy of either, or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person; provided, that nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent: 
1.  The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by another city official, employee or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this chapter; or collecting taxes imposed hereunder; 
2.  The disclosure of information to, or the examination of records by, federal, or state officials, or the tax officials of another city, or county, or city and county, if a reciprocal arrangement exists; or to a grand jury or court of law, upon subpoena; 
3.  The disclosure of information and results of examination of records of particular taxpayers, or relating to particular taxpayers, to a court of law in a proceeding brought to determine the existence or amount of any business tax liability of the particular taxpayers to the City; 
4.  The disclosure after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer himself, or to his successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to the items included in the measure of any paid tax, any unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties; further provided, however, that the city attorney approves each such disclosure and that the tax administrator may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this subsection when in his opinion the public interest would suffer thereby; 
5.  The disclosure of the names and addresses of persons to whom transient occupancy registration certificates have been issued, the names and addresses of officers of corporations and members of partnerships to whom such certificates have been issued, and the general type or nature of their business; 
6.  The disclosure to the legislative body by way of public meeting or otherwise of such information as may be necessary in order to permit it to be fully advised as to the facts when a taxpayer files a claim for refund of business taxes, or submits an offer of compromise with regard to a claim asserted against him by the City for business taxes, or when acting upon any other matter; 
7.  The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the City. 
F.  Disclosure of Business of Operators, Etc.—Limitation on Rule. Neither the tax administrator nor any person having an administrative duty under this chapter shall make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any operator or any person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or to permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person. Successors receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, and upon submitting written proof of their interest, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of any unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties. 
(Ord. 94 § 14, 1964)  
3.16.150 - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator may appeal to the transient occupancy tax review committee by filing a notice of appeal with the tax administrator within fifteen (15) days of the serving or mailing of the notice of the decision. The tax administrator shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal as prescribed by the transient occupancy tax review committee in its rules and regulations and shall give the appellant ten (10) days' written notice of the time and place of hearing. 
(Ord. 94 § 15, 1964)  
3.16.160 - Transient occupancy tax review committee—Appeal—Rules—Procedure. 
A.  A transient occupancy tax review committee is created which shall consist of members of the city council. A majority of the members of the committee shall constitute a quorum. The committee shall keep a record of its transactions. 
B.  The committee shall have power and it shall be its duty: 
1.  To hear and determine appeals of orders or decisions of the tax administrator made upon petitions for redetermination of tax. The committee may affirm, modify or reverse such orders or decisions or dismiss the appeals therefrom, as may be just, and shall prescribe such forms, rules and regulations relating to appeals as it may deem necessary. In the review of the tax administrator decision or order, the committee may take such evidence and make such investigation as it may deem necessary. It shall give notice of its determinations in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a tax administrator's decision and shall file a copy of each such determination with the tax administrator with certification thereon of the date of service thereof. Such determination shall become final ten (10) days thereafter and shall thereupon become due and payable, subject to interest and penalties, and enforceable by the tax administrator in like manner as an order or decision of the tax administrator; 
2.  To approve, modify or disapprove all forms, rules and regulations prescribed by the tax administrator in the administration and enforcement of this chapter and such forms, rules and regulations shall be subject to, and become effective only on, such approval; 
3.  To hear and determine in such manner as shall be just, any protest which may be made by any person who may be interested, to any form, rule or regulation approved or prescribed by the committee; 
4.  To grant for good cause, applications for extensions of time in excess of one month, for making any return or payment of tax, and to prescribe rules therefor; 
5.  To make such investigations as it deems advisable regarding the imposition and administration of the transient occupancy tax. 
(Ord. 94 § 16, 1964)  
3.16.170 - Violations. 
It is unlawful for any operator or other person so required to, to fail or refuse to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator or to render a false or fraudulent return. No person required to make, render, sign or verify any report shall make any false or fraudulent report, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of an amount due required by this chapter to be made. 
(Ord. 94 § 18, 1964)  
3.16.180 - Misdemeanor. 
Any person wilfully violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefor by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 94 § 19, 1964)  
Chapter 3.20 - UTILITY USERS TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.20.010 - Description and purpose. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Utility User Tax Chapter." The city council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes. 
A.  To adopt a utility user tax ordinance which complies with California State law; 
B.  To adopt a utility user tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the respective utilities in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing procedures followed by the utilities in administering and collecting the respective charges from the user; 
C.  To adopt a utility user tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible, be consistent and minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under provisions of this chapter; 
D.  To adopt a utility user tax ordinance to address the urgency of providing adequate police protection to ensure the health and well-being of the citizens of the City of Huron. 
(Ord. 272 § 1, 1991)  
3.20.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall be construed as defined in this section. 
"City" shall mean the City of Huron. 
"Month" shall mean a calendar month. 
"Person" shall mean any domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture, club, California business or common law trust, society or individuals. 
"Service supplier" shall mean any entity required to collect or self-impose and remit a tax as imposed by this chapter. 
"Service user" shall mean a person required to pay a tax imposed by this chapter. 
"Tax administrator" shall mean the city manager of the City of Huron. 
"Telephone communication services" shall mean any telephonic type and quality of communication including that which is interconnected to the public switched network, which allows people to talk to each other without the necessity of conversing in person. In determining whether a service constitutes a telephone communication service, all technology used to transmit voice communications from one person to another shall be included irrespective of whether, for example, such technology utilizes computer processing applications on the form, code or protocol of the content of the communication or where the origination and/or termination points of the transmission, conveyance or routing are not fixed. Such means of transmission shall include, without limitation for the purpose of transmitting messages or information (including but not limited to voice, telegraph, teletypewriter, data facsimile, video or test) by electronic, radio or similar means whether such transmission occurs by wire, cable, fiber-optic, light wave, laser, microwave, radio wave [including but not limited to, cellular service, personal communications service (PCAS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), and other type of personal wireless service regardless of radio spectrum used, switching facilities, satellite or any other similar facilities. 
"Telephone corporation," "electrical corporation," "gas corporation" shall have the same meanings as defined in Sections 234, 218 and 222, respectively, of the California Public Utilities Code except, "electrical corporation" and "gas corporation" shall also be construed to include any municipality or governmental agency engaged in the selling or supplying of electrical power or gas to a service user. 
(Ord. 272 § 2, 1991) 
(Ord. No. 357, § I, 9-2-09)  
3.20.030 - Exemptions. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person when imposition of such tax upon that person would be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or California. 
B.  The city council may, by order or resolution, establish one (1) or more classes of persons or one (1) or more classes of utility service otherwise subject to payment of a tax imposed by this chapter and provide that such classes of persons or service shall be exempt, in whole or in part from such tax. 
C.  The tax administrator shall prepare a list of the persons exempt from the provisions of this chapter by virtue of this section and furnish a copy thereof to each service supplier. 
(Ord. 272 § 3, 1991)  
3.20.040 - Telecommunication users tax. 
A.  There is imposed a tax on the amounts paid for any intrastate, interstate and international telephone communications services by every person in the City other than a telephone corporation using such services. 
B.  There is imposed a tax upon every person, other than a telephone corporation, using interstate, international, and/or intrastate telephone communication services in the City. The tax shall not be based on network usage-related charges for cellular telephone services and other similar mobile services, for which the service provider cannot, as a practical matter, determine the origination or termination of the telecommunication. The tax collector may adopt administrative rules for assuring a reasonable and consistent allocation of the monthly cellular billing between network usage-related charges and non-usage-related charges. "Charges" shall also include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the telecommunication services, including charges to a service user by a hotel or motel for telephone communication services when such charges are incidental to the right of occupancy in such motel or hotel. The motel or hotel shall be responsible for collection of the tax. Charges shall also include charges to a service user in the City by an alternative or nontraditional telephone service provider, a private communication service provider, or a competitive access provider, for providing: (a) telecommunication services used in the City, and/or (b) access to telephone toll services of an interexchange carrier. 
C.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, the tax imposed under this section shall not be imposed upon any of the following: 
1.  Service paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones with respect to local telephone services, or with respect to toll telephone services if the charges for such toll telephone service is less than twenty-five cents; except that where such coin-operated telephone service is furnished for a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under such guarantee plus any fixed monthly or periodic charge shall be subject to the tax. 
2.  Payment received from any person for services used in the collection of news for the public press, or a news ticker service furnishing a general news service similar to that of the public press, or radio broadcasting, or in the dissemination of news through the public press, or a news ticker service furnishing a general news service similar to that of the public press, or by means of radio broadcasting, if the charge for such service is billed in writing to such person. 
3.  Payment received for services furnished to an international organization, or to the American National Red Cross. 
4.  Payment received for any toll telephone call which originates within a combat zone from a member of the Armed Forces of the United States performing service in such combat zone, as determined under such section, provided a certificate setting forth such facts as the secretary may by regulations prescribe is furnished to the person receiving such payment. 
5.  The amount paid for any toll telephone service to the extent that the amount so paid is for use by a common carrier, telephone or telegraph company, or radio broadcasting station or network in the conduct of its business as such. 
6.  The amount paid by a nonprofit hospital for services furnished to such organization. For purposes of this subsection, the term "nonprofit hospital" means a hospital which is exempt from federal and state income tax under section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
7.  Any payment received for services or facilities furnished to the government of any state, or any political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia. 
8.  Any amount paid by a nonprofit educational organization for services or facilities furnished to such organization. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "nonprofit educational organization" means an educational organization which is exempt from income tax under section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code. The term also includes a school operated as an activity of an organization which is exempt from income tax under section 501(a) if such school normally maintains a regular faculty and curriculum and normally has a regularly enrolled body of pupils or students in attendance at the place where its educational activities are regularly carried on. 
9.  Private mobile radio service. For purposes of this chapter "private mobile radio service" is a radio communication service which is not a commercial mobile service. A "mobile service" means a radio communication service carried on between mobile stations or receivers and land stations, and by mobile stations communicating among themselves, and includes (A) both one-way and/or two-way radio communications services, (B) a mobile service which provides a regularly interacting group base, mobile, portable, and associated control and relay stations (whether licensed on an individual, cooperative, or multiple basis) for private one-way or two-way land mobile radio communications by eligible users over designated areas of operation, and (C) any service for which a license is required in a personal communications service established pursuant to the proceeding entitled "Amendment to the Commission's Rules to Establish New Personal Communications Services" (Gen Docket No. 90-314; ET Docket No. 92-100), or any successor proceeding. A "commercial mobile service is a "mobile service" that is provided for profit and makes interconnected service available (A) to the public or (B) to such classes of eligible users as to be effectively available to a substantial portion of the public. 
D.  The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from service user by the person providing the telecommunication services, or by the motel or hotel owner in the case of subsection (B) above. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted by U.S. mail, to the tax collector, and must be received by the tax collector on or before the last day of the following month; or, at the option of the person required to collect or remit the tax, such person shall remit an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the customer(s) of the service supplier, which must be received by the tax collector on or before the last day of the following month. 
E.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A), the tax imposed under this section shall not exceed the sum of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for any twelve (12) month period beginning July 1, and ending June 30 of the next succeeding year. 
F.  To prevent actual multi-jurisdictional taxation of telecommunication services subject to tax under this section, any service user, upon proof to the tax collector that the service user has previously paid the same tax in another state or city on such telecommunication service, shall be allowed a credit against the tax imposed to the extent of the amount of such tax legally imposed in such other state or city, provided, however, the amount of credit shall not exceed the tax owed to the City under this section. 
(Ord. 321 § 3, 1996; Ord. 272 § 4, 1991) 
(Ord. No. 357, § II, 9-2-09)  
3.20.050 - Electricity users tax. 
A.  There is imposed a tax upon every person in the City, other than an electrical corporation or a gas corporation, using electrical energy in the City. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate set from time to time by resolution of the city council and shall be billed to and paid by the person using the energy. The tax applicable to electrical energy provided by a nonutility supplier shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charge the service user would have incurred if the energy used had been provided by the electrical corporation franchised by the City. Nonutility suppliers shall install, maintain and use an appropriate utility-type metering system which will enable compliance with this section. "Charges," as used in this section, shall include charges made for: (1) metered energy; and (2) minimum charges for service, including customer charges, service charges, demand charges, standby charges and all other annual and monthly charges, fuel or other cost adjustments, authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. 
B.  As used in this section, the term "using electrical energy" shall not be construed to mean the storage of such energy by a person in a battery owned or possessed by him for use in an automobile or other machinery device apart from the premises upon which the energy was received; provided, however, that the term shall include the receiving of such energy for the purpose of using it in the charging of batteries; nor shall the term include the mere receiving of such energy by an electric corporation or governmental agency at a point within the City of Huron for resale; nor shall the term include the use of such energy in the production or distribution of water by a water utility or a governmental agency. 
C.  The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier or nonutility supplier. The tax imposed in this section on use supplied by self-generation or from a nonutility supplier not subject to the jurisdiction of this chapter, shall be collected and remitted to the tax administrator in the manner set forth in Section 3.20.070. The amount of tax collected by a service supplier or a nonutility supplier in one month shall be remitted by U.S. mail to the tax administrator, postmarked on or before the last day of the following month; or at the option of the person required to collect and remit the tax, an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month, shall be remitted by U.S. mail, to the tax administrator, postmarked on or before the last day of each month. 
D.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the tax imposed by this section shall not exceed a maximum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) annually. 
(Ord. 321 § 4, 1996; Ord. 272 § 5, 1991)  
3.20.060 - Gas users tax. 
A.  There is imposed a tax upon every person in the City, other than a gas corporation or an electrical corporation, using in the City gas which is delivered through mains or pipes. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate set from time to time by resolution of the city council and shall be billed to and paid by the person using the gas. The tax applicable to gas or gas transportation provided by a nonutility supplier shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would have incurred if the gas or gas transportation had been provided by the gas corporation franchised by the City. "Charges," as used in this section, shall include charges made for: (1) that billed for gas which is delivered through mains or pipes; (2) gas transportation charges; and (3) demand charges, service charges, customer charges, minimum charges, annual and monthly charges, and any other charge authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. 
B.  The tax otherwise imposed by this section is not applicable to: (1) charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered through mains and pipes; (2) charges made for gas used and consumed by a public utility or governmental agency in the conduct of its business; or (3) charges made by a gas public utility or gas used and consumed in the course of its public utility business; and (4) charges made for gas used in the propulsion of a motor vehicle, as authorized in the Vehicle Code of the State of California. 
C.  The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person selling or transporting the gas. A person selling only transportation services to a user for delivery of gas through mains or pipes shall collect the tax from the service user based on the transportation charges. The person selling or transporting the gas shall, on or before the twentieth of each calendar month, commencing on the twentieth day of the calendar month after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, make a return to the tax administrator stating the amount of taxes billed during the preceding calendar month. At the time such returns are filed, the person selling or transporting the gas shall remit tax payments to the tax administrator in accordance with schedules established or approved by the tax administrator. The tax imposed in this section on use supplied by self-production or a nonutility supplier not subject to the jurisdiction of this chapter, shall be collected and remitted to the tax administrator in the manner set forth in Section 3.20.070. 
D.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the tax imposed by this section shall not exceed a maximum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) annually. 
(Ord. 321 § 5, 1996; Ord. 272 § 6, 1991)  
3.20.070 - Service users receiving direct purchase of gas or electricity. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a service user receiving gas or electricity directly from a nonutility supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter, or otherwise not having the full tax due on the use of gas or electricity in the City directly billed and collected by the service supplier shall report said fact to the tax administrator within thirty (30) days of said use and shall directly remit to the City the amount of tax due. 
B.  The tax administrator may require from said service user the filed tax returns or other satisfactory evidence documenting the quantity of gas or electricity used. 
(Ord. 272 § 7, 1991)  
3.20.080 - Remittance of tax. 
Taxes collected from a service user which are not remitted to the tax administrator on or before the due dates provided in this chapter are delinquent. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return may be postmarked on the first regular working day following a Saturday/ Sunday, or legal holiday. 
(Ord. 272 § 8, 1991)  
3.20.090 - Actions to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the City. Any such tax collected from a service user which has wilfully been withheld from the tax administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the City by the person required to collect and remit. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount. 
(Ord. 272 § 9, 1991)  
3.20.100 - Duty to collect—Procedures. 
The duty to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be performed as follows: 
A.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 3.20.070, the tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as and along with the charges made in accordance with regular billing practice of the service supplier. Except in those cases where a service user pays the full amount of said charges but does not pay any portion of a tax imposed by this chapter, if the amount paid by a service user is less than the full amount of the charge and tax which has accrued for the billing period, a proportionate share of both the charge and the tax shall be deemed to have been paid. 
B.  The duty to collect the tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first regular billing period applicable to that person which starts on or after the operative date of this chapter. Where a person receives more than one (1) billing, one (1) or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing period. 
(Ord. 272 § 10, 1991)  
3.20.110 - Additional powers and duties of tax administrator. 
A.  The tax administrator shall have the power and duty and is directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The tax administrator shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. 
A copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file in the tax administrator's office. 
C.  The tax administrator may make administrative agreements to vary the strict requirements of this chapter so that collection of any tax imposed herein may be made in conformance with the billing procedures of a particular service supplier so long as said agreements result in collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter. A copy of each agreement shall be on file in the tax administrator's office. 
D.  The tax administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to exemption from the tax imposed by this chapter. The tax administrator shall provide the service supplier with the name of any person who the tax administrator determines is exempt from the tax imposed hereby, together with the address and account number to which service is supplied to any such exempt person. The tax administrator shall notify the service supplier of termination of any person's right to exemption hereunder, or the change of any address to which service is supplied to any exempt person. 
E.  The tax administrator shall provide notice to all service suppliers, at least ninety (90) days prior to any annexation or other change in the City's boundaries. Said notice shall set forth the revised boundaries by street and address, along with a copy of the final annexation order from LAFCO. 
(Ord. 272 § 11, 1991)  
3.20.120 - Assessment—Service user. 
A.  Whenever the tax administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by him from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or that a service user has refused to pay the amount of the tax to such person, such person may be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due under this chapter from certain named service users for specific billing periods. 
B.  The service supplier shall provide the City with amounts refused and/or unpaid along with the names and addresses of the service users neglecting to pay the tax imposed under provisions of this chapter. Whenever the service user has failed to pay the amount of tax for a period of two (2) or more billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due. 
C.  The tax administrator shall notify the service user that he has assumed the responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes. The notice shall be served on the service user by handing it to him personally or by deposit of the notice in the United States Mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user have changed his address, to his last known address. If a service user fails to pay the tax to the tax administrator within fifteen (15) days from the date of the service of the notice upon him, which shall be the date of mailing if service is not accomplished in person, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax set forth in the notice shall be imposed, but not less than five dollars ($5.00). The penalty shall become part of the tax herein required to be paid. 
(Ord. 272 § 12, 1991)  
3.20.130 - Records. 
It shall be the duty of every service supplier required to collect and remit to the City any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax such service supplier may have been required to collect and remit to the City, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. 272 § 13, 1991)  
3.20.140 - Refund claims. 
Any and all refunds claimed for taxes overpaid or paid more than once, or claimed to have been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator pursuant to this chapter, as well as any claim of interest or penalty thereon, such claim shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 2.28 of this code in all respects. 
(Ord. 321 § 6, 1996)  
3.20.150 - Termination or suspension of utility users tax. 
The service supplier shall, upon notification, terminate or suspend any utility users tax commencing with the first full billing period which occurs after the effective date of such action by the city council. 
(Ord. 272 § 16, 1991)  
3.20.160 - California Public Utilities Commission jurisdiction. 
Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to conflict with applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of any service supplier subject to the jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission. In the event of any conflict, the provisions of said rules, regulations and tariffs shall control. 
(Ord. 272 § 19, 1991)  
Chapter 3.24 - GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND 
Sections: 
 
3.24.010 - Created. 
To comply with the provisions of Article 5 of Chapter 1 of Division 1 of the Streets and Highways Code with particular reference to the amendment made thereto by Chapter 642, Statute of 1935, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the "Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund." 
(Ord. 12 § 1, 1951)  
3.24.020 - Moneys to be deposited. 
All moneys received by the City of the State of California under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein and/or the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways other than State highways shall be paid into the fund. 
(Ord. 12 § 2, 1951)  
3.24.030 - Expenditure of funds. 
All moneys in the fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by and subject to all the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division 1 of the Streets and Highways Code. 
(Ord. 12 § 3, 1951)  
Chapter 3.28 - LAW ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE FEES 
Sections: 
 
3.28.010 - Title for citation. 
This chapter of the Huron Municipal Code shall be known as the "Law Enforcement Disturbance Response Ordinance." 
(Ord. 262 § 1, 1990)  
3.28.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to deter the occurrence of loud, unruly and/or disorderly gatherings, parties and disturbances. This will enhance the general peace, safety and welfare of the citizens of Huron. 
(Ord. 262 § 2, 1990)  
3.28.030 - Definitions. 
Disturbance. As used in this chapter, a "disturbance" is any public or private party which unreasonably disturbs the peace and quiet of surrounding neighbors. 
Law Enforcement Response. As used in this chapter, a "law enforcement response" is the deployment of Huron police department personnel to the scene of a disturbance upon receipt of a complaint or request for service from a member of the public. 
Second Response. As used in this chapter, "second response" means the deployment of law enforcement personnel to the scene of a disturbance as the result of a complaint or request for service two (2) or more times in a twelve (12) hour period. 
Reasonable and Actual Costs. As used in this chapter, the phrase "reasonable and actual costs" are those costs, calculated at a rate to be set by resolution, resulting from the deployment of the law enforcement personnel, equipment and overhead and any actual damages incurred by the City while responding to or deployed at the scene of the disturbance. 
(Ord. 262 § 3, 1990)  
3.28.040 - Declaration. 
The city council declares that disturbances pose a threat to the health, welfare, safety and peace of the community. The council further declares that the deployment of police department personnel to these events depletes the limited law enforcement resources available to the citizens of this City. Such law enforcement responses decrease preventive police presence and delay responses to genuine emergencies. 
(Ord. 262 § 4, 1990)  
3.28.050 - Fees established. 
The fee schedule or rate shall be applied to all police personnel assigned to the second response. The fee rate shall begin at the time of assignment and shall end at the time the personnel are cleared from the scene and available for other calls. 
The total fee shall be charged against the person or persons in charge of the event, or if said person or persons are minors, to the parents or legal guardians thereof. 
(Ord. 262 § 5, 1990)  
3.28.060 - Fees due and payable. 
All fees are due and payable upon demand by the City of Huron and in no case later than thirty (30) days from the date the demand was mailed. 
(Ord. 262 § 7, 1990)  
3.28.070 - Notification. 
A.  First Response. Upon a first response to a disturbance as defined herein, the law enforcement office in charge of the call shall notify the person/persons in charge of the event in writing that a second response to the event will be subject to the fees imposed pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  Second Response. Upon a second response as defined herein, the office in charge shall identify the person/persons in charge that a response fee will be charged for that and any subsequent responses with the twelve (12) hour period. The office in charge shall also advise the person/persons in charge of the event of the fee schedule as adopted. 
C.  Demand for Payments. The police department shall cause a demand for payment to be delivered to the person(s) identified as responsible for the event either by U.S. Mail or personal service no later than thirty (30) days from the date of the event. 
(Ord. 262 § 8, 1990)  
3.28.080 - Enforcement. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit any police officer from enforcing the criminal provisions of Section 41 et seq. of the California Penal Code or any other criminal or infraction sanctions available under the law, in addition to imposing the fees under this chapter. 
(Ord. 262 § 9, 1990)  
3.28.090 - Reserved rights. 
The City of Huron reserves its rights and legal options to elect any other remedy available to it under the law to recover damages in addition to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 262 § 10, 1990)  
Chapter 3.44 - STREET SWEEPING FEES 
Sections: 
 
3.44.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this street sweeping fee herein established is to provide revenue which shall be used only for the total operation and maintenance of the street sweeping program in the City of Huron. 
(Ord. 211 § 2, 1985)  
3.44.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Area" shall mean the total square footage or acreage of a particular parcel of land. 
"City" shall mean the City of Huron. 
"Commercial utility unit" shall mean each commercial business which is for the purpose of retailing or wholesaling goods or services. 
"Director" shall mean the director of public works of the City of Huron or his/her authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
"Lineal foot" shall mean the total number of lineal feet adjacent to a public street or highway regardless of whether property has curbs and/or gutters. 
"Residential dwelling unit" shall mean each single-family residence, apartment or living quarter unit which is for the purpose of establishing a living quarter. 
(Ord. 221 § 1, 1986; Ord. 211 § 1, 1985)  
3.44.030 - Requirement of payment of street sweeping fees. 
For the privilege and benefit of having streets swept in Huron on a systematic basis which in turn beautifies our community and reduces the build-up of silt and mud which can be hazardous to pedestrians and vehicles, all parcels of land within the City of Huron shall be required to pay a street sweeping fee to the City of Huron. 
(Ord. 221 § 2, 1986: Ord. 211 § 3, 1985)  
3.44.040 - Street sweeping fee fund. 
All street sweeping fees collected for sale to the provisions of this chapter shall be placed into a special account which is created and established for such purposes and which shall be known as the "City of Huron street sweeping fee fund." Revenue, deposited into said fund shall be used for the operation, maintenance and acquisition of street sweeping equipment. 
(Ord. 211 § 4, 1985)  
3.44.050 - Fees. 
A schedule of fees shall be adopted by resolution of the city council of the City of Huron. Such fees may be amended from time to time based on the cost of providing such utility service. 
(Ord. 325 § 3, 1999)  
3.44.060 - Payment of fees. 
The street sweeping fees shall be collected by the finance director of the City of Huron as part of the City's utility billing program, generally by the finance department. 
(Ord. 211 § 6, 1985)  
3.44.070 - Failure to pay. 
Failure to pay street sweeping fees to the City of Huron shall result in the discontinuance of other City utilities. 
(Ord. 211 § 6, 1985)  
3.44.080 - Effective as to certain real property. 
This chapter shall be effective only as to real property located on paved streets and situated within the incorporated limits of the City of Huron and shall apply to all real property regardless of whether the real property has curbs and/or gutters or whether vacant or occupied. 
(Ord. 221 § 6, 1986: Ord. 211 § 8, 1985)  
Title 4 - APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 4.01 - BUSINESSES REQUIRED TO BE LICENSED 
Sections: 
 
4.01.010 - Businesses required to be licensed. 
A.  A person representing him or herself or exhibiting any sign or advertisement that he or she is engaged in a business within the City of which a license fee is levied by Title 5 of this Code shall be deemed to be actually engaging such business and shall be liable for the payment of such license fee and subject other penalties for failure to comply with the requirements of Title 5 of this Code. 
B.  No person shall do business within the city as the employee, agent or representative of another person unless either the principal or the employee, agent or representative has a current, valid business license for the business, if so required by Title 5 of this Code no matter where the principal officers of that business are situated. 
C.  A separate license shall be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on and for each separate type of business or business classification at the same location. Each license shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated by the license. 
(Ord. No. 377 , § 1, 2-20-2019)  
4.01.020 - Business license application requirements. 
A.  Each person desiring to apply for a license to operate, engage, conduct or carry on the business in the City shall make that application on such forms and in such manner as the city manger may prescribe. The application must be filed with the City, accompanied by the applicable license fee and contain the following information in addition to any other information reasonably required by the City. 
1.  Date of application. 
2.  Name, address and phone number of the business owner(s). In accordance with California Business and Professional Code § 16000.1(2), the address must be where the individual consents to receive service of process. This address is a public record. An acceptable address for this purpose shall include a post office box or private mailbox in lieu of a home address pursuant to California Business and Professional Code § 17538.5. This provision applies to an applicant using mailbox vendors. In order to take advantatge of this provision, the applicant shall comply with each of the following requirements: 
i.  File a U.S. Postal Service Form 1583 with the U.S. Postal Service, containing their current business street address or home address; and 
ii.  Sign an acknowledgement in accordance with the provision set forth in the California Business and Professional Code § 17538.5(f). 
iii.  Copies of documents in this section must be on file with the City. 
3.  The name and physical address of the business, including the APN number; the address where the business will be located or have its office within the City, and the address of the principal office of such business. 
4.  Brief description of the nature of the business, including its primary or predominant business activity. 
5.  The date that business operations will commence. 
6.  The average number of persons enployed. 
7.  Number of commercial vehicles. 
8.  Person who may be contacted in case of emergency and the phone number where that person may be reached. 
9.  Health Department Certificate Number. 
10.  Workers Compensation carrier and number. 
11.  State Board of Equalization Number. 
12.  The types of hazardous materials, if any, regularly maintained on the premises. 
13.  Whether any local, state of federal licenses, certificates, registrations or permits are required for the business and the identification of such licenses, certificates, registrations or permits. 
14.  A verification by signature of the applicant, or authorized agent submitting the application on behalf of the applicant of the following: 
i.  The information stated in the application is true, accurate and complete; and 
ii.  The business license is in compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local law, regulations and ordinances; and 
iii.  The applicant or authorized agent has read, understands and agrees to abide by this ordinance; and 
iv.  The authorized agent has the requisite power and authority to sign and submit the application on behalf of the applicant, if the applicant is an entity. 
15.  Any other information necessary to enable the city manager or designee to review the application to determine whether the application should be approved. 
B.  The City shall accept a California driver's license, California identification number, an individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN), or a municipal indentification number in lieu of a social security number. 
C.  Personal information collected for purposes of issuing a business license by the City shall be confidential, shall not be available to the public for inspection, and shall not be disclosed except as required to administer the licensing program or comply with a judicial warrant, subpeona, or court order. For purposes of this section, "personal iinformation means all of the following: 
1.  An applicant's residential address if the applicant provides a different address pursuant to section 4.01.02(A)(2). 
2.  A California driver's license, California identification number, and individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN), a municipal identification number or a social security number. 
3.  Income and tax information. 
(Ord. No. 377 , § 1, 2-20-2019)  
4.01.030 - Posting and display of license. 
Licensee shall post the license in the conspicuous place upon the business premises, available for inspection by the public and any employees and prospective employees of the business. When the licensee has no office, business premises or other established place of business within the City, a photocopy must be in the possession of the agent or representative of the business who is present in the City at all times during which the business is being transacted by the agent or representative in the City. If a licensed business is based in a motor vehicle, a photocopy of the license must be carried in the motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 377 , § 1, 2-20-2019)  
Title 5 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 5.04 - BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY 
Sections:  
Article I. - In General 
 
5.04.010 - Definitions. 
A.  Person Defined. As used in this chapter the word "person" includes an individual; a partnership, joint venture or other unincorporated association; a corporation; and an estate or trust, a syndicate and/or a club or society. 
B.  Finance Officer Defined. As used in this chapter, the "finance officer" shall mean the city clerk. 
(Ord. 116 §§ 1, 2, 1971)  
5.04.020 - Preparation of blank licenses—Quarters and year defined. 
The finance officer shall prepare and have printed blank licenses for all classes of businesses mentioned in this chapter for the terms of three months, or equal quarters, beginning and ending as follows: January 1st to March 31st, April 1st to June 30th, July 1st to September 30th, or longer periods as herein authorized or for a period of one year, provided such license fee is the same for each quarter of the yearly period. "Year" shall mean the fiscal year of the City of Huron. Printed blank licenses shall provide for the signature of the finance officer. 
(Ord. 116 § 3, 1971)  
5.04.030 - Records of licenses. 
The finance officer shall keep in his office a ledger or record in which he shall keep the account of all licenses sold or unsold by him. 
(Ord. 116 § 4, 1971)  
5.04.040 - Duty to obtain and pay fee. 
It is unlawful for any person to commence, carry on, engage in or continue in, in the City, any business, trade, occupation or employment upon which a license tax is imposed by the terms and provisions of this chapter and for which a license tax is required to be procured by the terms and provisions of this chapter, without first paying such license tax and procuring such license as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 116 § 5, 1971)  
5.04.050 - Authority under license. 
A license shall authorize the party obtaining the same to transact the business described in such license in the City. 
(Ord. 116 § 6, 1971)  
5.04.060 - Separate license required for each place of business. 
A separate license must be obtained on each branch, establishment or separate place of business. 
(Ord. 116 § 7, 1971)  
5.04.070 - Quarterly licenses. 
A license, when payable quarterly, must be taken out in the quarters commencing on the first day of January, April, July and October of each year. 
(Ord. 116 § 8, 1971)  
5.04.080 - Finance officer to ascertain persons liable to pay license. 
The finance officer shall make diligent inquiry as to all persons in the City liable to pay a license as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 116 § 9, 1971)  
5.04.090 - Statement required where amount of fee is based upon sales or receipts. 
In all cases where the amount of the license fee is based upon the amount of receipts, or sales affected, or business transacted, the finance officer must require such person to state under oath the average amount of business which he, or the firm of which he is a member, or of which he is an agent or attorney, or the association or corporation of which he is a president, secretary or managing agent or other officer, transacted in the quarter next preceding the commencement of the quarter for which the license is applicable. Such person, agent, president, secretary or other officer must procure a license from the finance officer for the term desired and for the class of business for which such person is liable in accordance with such statement. 
(Ord. 116 § 10, 1971)  
5.04.100 - Persons first starting in business. 
Persons first starting in business must pay a first license tax equal to the quarterly rate established for such business or occupation, except that all persons and firms commencing business and who are classified under Section 5.04.280 shall pay a first license tax of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. 116 § 11, 1971)  
5.04.110 - Failing or refusing to make statement. 
Any person failing, neglecting or refusing to make a statement, or wilfully making an incorrect statement, required by this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be required to pay for a license for the next quarter or term double the amount otherwise required. 
(Ord. 116 § 12, 1971)  
5.04.120 - License not to be issued until statement made. 
Whenever a statement is provided for in this chapter, no license shall be issued or shall be renewed until such statement is made, sworn to and presented to the finance officer as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 116 § 13, 1971)  
5.04.130 - Authority of finance officer to administer oaths. 
The finance officer is hereby authorized to administer all oaths required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 116 § 14, 1971)  
5.04.140 - Procedure where truth of statement doubted. 
Whenever the finance officer shall be of the opinion that the statement returned by the person applying for the license is not a true statement of the quarterly sales, he shall report to the city council that in his opinion the statement or the return is not true. Upon such report being received, or on its own motion, the city council shall cite the person applying for such license to appear and show cause why the license of such person should not be fixed at an amount greater than the statement or return would indicate the person is liable for. Such citation shall be served by the chief of police or by registered mail at least five days prior to the time of the hearing of the matter by the city council. If, upon the day set for the hearing of the citation the person rendering a statement complained of by the finance officer shall produce his books and verify the statement furnished the finance officer, the city council shall direct the finance officer to issue a license to such person in conformity to the statement furnished by the person; but, if such person shall refuse to verify the statement so furnished, or if it shall develop that the statement furnished is not a true statement, the city council shall fix upon an amount to be paid for the license by the person equal to twice the amount which the city council shall conclude the person would be liable for under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 116 § 15, 1971)  
5.04.150 - Deposit of moneys into city treasury for the benefit of the general fund. 
The finance officer shall periodically deposit into the city treasury for the benefit of the general fund all moneys collected for licenses under this chapter. 
(Ord. 116 § 16, 1971)  
5.04.160 - Quarterly statement required to be shown by finance officer. 
The finance officer shall have on file at the end of each quarter a second showing the names, occupations and residences of all persons within the City liable under this chapter to pay a license and showing what has been paid during the preceding quarter, the amount of their liability and the amount actually paid by them, and where the amount paid is considered insufficient, the finance officer shall estimate or determine what should have been paid. 
(Ord. 116 § 17, 1971)  
5.04.170 - License not assignable—Authority restricted to business and place named. 
No license issued shall be in any manner assignable or authorize any person other than therein mentioned or named to transact or carry on such business or authorize any other business than is therein mentioned or named to be continued or transacted there under, or at any place other than therein mentioned or named. 
(Ord. 116 § 18, 1971)  
5.04.180 - Expiration of license. 
Every person having a license under the provisions of this chapter shall conspicuously exhibit the same in his place of business, or carry same on his person when he has no fixed place of business, and produce the same when applying for a renewal or when requested to do so by the finance officer or chief of police. 
(Ord. 116 § 19, 1971)  
5.04.190 - Charitable organizations. 
The securing of a business license under this chapter shall not apply to any organization which is conducted, managed, and carried on wholly for a charitable or religious purpose, and from which profit is not derived either directly or indirectly by any person. 
(Ord. 116 § 20, 1971)  
5.04.200 - Exclusions. 
Except as may be otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the provisions hereof shall not apply to any of the following persons or firms: 
A.  Any public utility which pays to the City a tax under a franchise or similar agreement, or any publicly owned public utility; 
B.  Banks, including national banking associations, to the extent that a City may not levy a license tax upon them under the provisions set forth under Article XIII, Section 16 of the State Constitution; 
C.  Insurance companies to the extent that a City may not levy a license tax upon them under the provisions of the State Constitution; 
D.  Any person or firm who the City is not authorized to license under any law or constitution of the United States or the State of California; 
E.  Any business of furnishing card tables to the public for a fee or rental for the purpose of playing games or cards, and any business of operating taxi cabs, such businesses being regulated by separate ordinances. 
The finance officer may require the filing of a verified statement from any person or firm claiming to be excluded by the provisions of this section, which statement shall set forth all the facts upon which the exclusion is claimed. 
(Ord. 116 § 21, 1971)  
5.04.210 - Collection of fees by civil action. 
The license tax imposed by this chapter shall be deemed a debt due the City from and against any person who maintains in, carries on, engages in or conducts in the City any business, occupation, trade, profession or employment, upon which a license tax is herein imposed, or for the commencing, engaging in, carrying on or conducting of which a license is hereby required to be procured without first having paid such license tax and procured such license according to the terms and provisions of this chapter. Such persons shall be liable in a civil action in the name of the City as plaintiff in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of the license tax imposed by this chapter and for the cost of suit, and for an attorney's fee in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. 116 § 22, 1971)  
5.04.220 - Fees payable in lawful money of the United States. 
The license tax imposed by this chapter shall become due and payable in lawful money of the United States of America to the finance officer. 
(Ord. 116 § 23, 1971)  
5.04.230 - When fees due and payable. 
All license fees imposed by this chapter shall be payable in advance and shall be deemed to be delinquent if not so paid. Penalties for the nonpayment thereof shall be imposed as provided in Section 5.04.240. 
(Ord. 116 § 24, 1971)  
5.04.240 - Penalty for nonpayment of fees when due. 
Subject to other provisions of this chapter, yearly or quarterly licenses not paid within thirty (30) days from the due date as provided herein shall be subject to a twenty-five (25) percent penalty. Daily licenses shall be subject to a twenty-five (25) percent penalty if not paid prior to the beginning of any act or business activity required to be licensed under the provisions of this chapter. These provisions for delinquency and penalty shall not be construed in any way, as affecting the liability of the person in default for prosecution on account of failure to pay his license fee as is now prescribed or may hereinafter be prescribed by ordinance. 
(Ord. 116 § 25, 1971)  
5.04.250 - Enforcement duty of finance officer and city attorney. 
It shall be the duty of the finance officer to promptly notify the city council of matters requiring their action in the fixing of license fees to be fixed by them as provided in this chapter and to currently notify the council of delinquent fees that are due the City and it shall be the duty of the city attorney to promptly institute legal proceedings to effect the payment thereof upon instructions received thereon from the city council. All moneys collected by the city attorney by suit or otherwise under the terms and provisions of this chapter shall be paid into the treasury of the City on the first day of each month, and every month after the collection thereof. 
(Ord. 116 § 26, 1971)  
5.04.260 - Compliance with other ordinances before license is issued. 
No license shall be issued under the provisions of this chapter until the applicant has complied with all of the provisions of any other ordinance(s) of the City of Huron, applicable to the act or business activity he intends to engage in. 
(Ord. 116 § 27, 1971)  
5.04.265 - Refund claims. 
Any and all refunds claimed for fees for a business license overpaid or paid more than once, or claimed to have been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City, pursuant to this chapter, as well as any claim of interest or penalty thereon, such claim shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 2.28 of this code in all respects. 
(Ord. 321 § 7, 1996)  
Article II. - Schedule of Fees 
 
5.04.270 - Generally. 
The rates of the license tax for the business, trades, occupations and employments hereinafter named in this article are, and the same are fixed in and for the City, in accordance with this article, and the same shall be paid by any person engaged in or about to engage in, or carrying on, or about to carry on the same in the City. 
(Ord. 116 § 28, 1971)  
5.04.280 - Gross receipts license. 
For any business or occupation not specifically set forth under a flat rate license section of this chapter, a quarterly license fee based upon average monthly gross receipts at the following rates: 
Gross Sales Per Quarter 	License Fee 
$ 750 or under 	$ 24.00 
751 to 1,500 	28.00 
1,500 to 2,250 	32.00 
2,251 to 3,000 	36.00 
3,001 to 6,000 	40.00 
6,001 to 9,000 	44.00 
9,100 to 12,000 	56.00 
12,100 to 15,000 	60.00 
15,001 to 18,000 	64.00 
18,001 to 21,000 	68.00 
21,001 to 24,000 	72.00 
24,001 to 27,000 	83.20 
27,001 to 30,000 	88.00 
30,001 to 33,000 	92.00 
33,001 to 36,000 	93.60 
 
All sales in excess of thirty-six thousand dollars ($36,000.00) per quarter will be two dollars ($2.00) for each one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of the excess sales, plus the ninety-three dollars and sixty cents ($93.60) for the first thirty-six thousand dollars ($36,000.00). 
Gross Receipts Defined. The term "gross receipts," as used in this section, is defined as follows: 
The total amount of the sale price of all sales, the total amount charged or received for the performance of an act, service or employment of whatsoever nature it may be, whether such service act or employment is done as part of or in connection with the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or not, for which a charge is made, including all receipts, credit and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the costs of the property sold, the costs of the material used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, losses or any other expenses whatsoever; provided, that cash discount allowed or taken on sales shall not be included. Tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser and such part of the sales price of any property previously sold returned by the purchaser to the seller which is refunded by the seller by way of cash or credit allowances given or taken as part payment on any property so accepted for resale, shall be deducted. 
Refer to Section 5.04.100 of this chapter for rates on persons or firms first starting in business under this section. 
(Ord. 342 § 1, 2006: Ord. 145 § 1, 1976; Ord. 116 § 29, 1971)  
5.04.290 - Advertising and directories. 
For the business of soliciting, advertising, compiling and/or publishing, distribution, etc., of City, business or other types of directories or listings, the sum of nineteen dollars and twenty cents ($19.20) per quarter or fraction thereof. Chapter 5.24 of this code shall apply when applicable. 
(Ord. 342 § 2, 2006: Ord. 116 § 30, 1971)  
5.04.300 - Apartment, cabin, dwelling units. 
For the business of keeping or conducting apartment units, cabin units, dwelling units or similar type rental units; the following quarterly license shall apply in accordance with the number of units: 
Up to and including 10 	$24.00 
11 or more up to and including 20 	40.00 
21 or more up to and including 30 	56.00 
31 or more up to and including 40 	72.00 
41 or more up to and including 50 	88.00 
 
For the purpose of this chapter, "units" are defined as structures under one ownership, whether or not joined together or connected, intended or designated for or used as residences of families or households, living independently of one another. 
(Ord. 342 § 3, 2006: Ord. 145 § 2, 1976; Ord. 116 § 31, 1971)  
5.04.310 - Catering trucks. 
A.  Every person having a fixed place of business within the City who operates a mobile food preparation unit or food unit selling packaged or prepared foods, hot or cold, shall pay an annual fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00). 
Every person not having a fixed place of business within the City who operates a mobile food preparation unit or food unit selling packaged or prepared foods, hot or cold, shall be considered an itinerant vendor under the provisions of Section 5.04.650 of this chapter as amended. 
B.  In order to receive and maintain a City license, the applicant must possess a valid and current California health certificate issued by the Fresno County health department for the vehicle in use. The operators name and vehicle I.D. number is required to appear in the certificate. If, during the term of the City business license, the applicant shall fail to maintain a current and valid California health certification, the license shall be deemed to be immediately suspended, and if the applicant fails to obtain a valid certificate within thirty (30) days, the license shall be revoked. 
C.  The sale of prepared foods, by any vendor shall be prohibited in public rights-of-way and in any area within five hundred (500) feet for an established or existing commercial food service business. 
(Ord. 342 § 4, 2006: Ord. 228 § 1, 1987: Ord. 200 § 1, 1984: Ord. 116 § 32, 1971)  
5.04.320 - Auto races, motor events, horse races or similar type events. 
Every person or firm conducting, carrying on or managing auto races, motor events, horse races or similar types spectator events shall pay a license fee in the sum of nineteen dollars and twenty cents ($19.20) per event. 
(Ord. 342 § 5, 2006: Ord. 116 § 33, 1971)  
5.04.330 - Automatic laundries (laundromats). 
For the business of carrying on an automatic laundry (laundromat), one dollar and sixty cents ($1.60) per quarter for each washer and one dollar and sixty cents ($1.60) per quarter for each drier. 
(Ord. 342 § 6, 2006: Ord. 116 § 34, 1971)  
5.04.340 - Auctioneer. 
Every auctioneer shall pay a license of forty-eight dollars ($48.00) per quarter; such license to be issued for a period of not less than one quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 7, 2006: Ord. 116 § 35, 1971)  
5.04.350 - Barbershop. 
For the business of conducting or carrying on a barbershop, forty dollars ($40.00) per quarter for three chairs or less whether operated or not operated, and four dollars and eighty cents ($4.80) per chair per quarter for each additional chair whether operated or not operated. 
(Ord. 342 § 8, 2006: Ord. 145 § 3, 1976: Ord. 116 § 36, 1971)  
5.04.360 - Beauty parlor. 
For the business of conducting or carrying on a beauty parlor, forty dollars ($40.00) per quarter for three or less operators, and four dollars and eighty cents ($4.80) per operator in excess of three. 
(Ord. 342 § 9, 2006: Ord. 145 § 4, 1976: Ord. 116 § 37, 1971)  
5.04.370 - Billiard or pool hall. 
For the business of conducting or carrying on a billiard, bagatelle or pool hall, sixteen dollars ($16.00) per quarter for each table used in the business. 
(Ord. 342 § 10, 2006: Ord. 145 § 5, 1976: Ord. 116 § 38, 1971)  
5.04.380 - Billposting. 
Every person engaged in the business of billposting shall pay a license fee of nine dollars and sixty cents ($9.60) per quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 11, 2006: Ord. 116 § 39, 1971)  
5.04.390 - Blacksmith shop, welding shop, garage, general repair or maintenance service. 
For the business of keeping or conducting a blacksmith shop, welding shop, garage, repair shop, maintenance service, janitorial service, or any service or repair of similar character and nature, the license fee shall be fourteen dollars and forty cents ($14.40) quarterly, plus an additional quarterly fee for parts, accessories and/or materials sold. The additional fee shall be measured as set forth in the table in Section 5.04.280 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 342 § 12, 2006: Ord. 116 § 40, 1971)  
5.04.400 - Boarders. 
For the business of keeping boarders or furnishing meals to five or more persons for pay at places other than restaurants or lunch counters, forty dollars ($40.00) per quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 13, 2006: Ord. 145 § 6, 1976: Ord. 116 § 41, 1971)  
5.04.410 - Bowling or bocci alley or handball court. 
For the business of keeping or maintaining a handball court, a bocci or bowling alley, the sum of sixty-four dollars ($64.00) per quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 14, 2006: Ord. 145 § 7, 1976: Ord. 116 § 42, 1971)  
5.04.420 - Box nailers and pre-coolers. 
For the business of nailing boxes used in produce packing, eighty dollars ($80.00) per year, and for the business of pre-cooling and/or gassing refrigerated produce trucks or boxcars, eighty dollars ($80.00) per year. 
(Ord. 342 § 15, 2006: Ord. 116 § 43, 1971)  
5.04.430 - Boxing and wrestling matches or similar events. 
Every person or firm conducting, carrying on or managing sparring, boxing or wrestling exhibitions, events or matches or similar events shall pay a license fee of eighty dollars ($80.00) per event. 
(Ord. 342 § 16, 2006: Ord. 116 § 44, 1971)  
5.04.440 - Brokers. 
Every person engaged in the brokerage business, handling personal property, goods, wares or merchandise, whether on commission or otherwise, shall pay a license of fourteen dollars and forty cents ($14.40) per quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 17, 2006: Ord. 116 § 45, 1971)  
5.04.450 - Campground or trailer court. 
For the purpose of keeping or conducting a campground (other than a labor camp) or trailer court for the accommodation of motorists or other persons, fifty-six dollars ($56.00) per quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 18, 2006: Ord. 145 § 8, 1976; Ord. 116 § 46, 1971)  
5.04.460 - Cannery, packing house and manufacturing plant. 
For the business of keeping or conducting a cannery, packing house, processing plant, cotton gin, manufacturing plant or any industrial plant of similar nature, the sum of six hundred forty dollars ($640.00) per year, except for agricultural cooperatives which shall be one hundred sixty dollars ($160.00) per year. 
For the business of keeping or conducting a lettuce cooling operation, the sum of eight hundred dollars ($800.00) per tube per year. 
(Ord. 342 § 19, 2006: Ord. 145 § 9, 1976: Ord. 116 § 47, 1971)  
5.04.470 - Carnival. 
For the business of conducting or exhibiting any aggregation of shows where one fee or separate fees are charged for admission to such show, the sum of nine hundred sixty dollars ($960.00) per week. This provision shall not be considered to apply to any circus, performance, exhibition or sideshow provided for in later sections of this code, but is intended and does apply to what are commonly known as "carnival shows" and other similar aggregations of shows. No such aggregation of shows shall do business in any part of the City without permission first obtained from the city council. 
The amount chargeable under this section shall not be proratable. 
(Ord. 342 § 20, 2006: Ord. 145 § 10, 1976; Ord. 116 § 48, 1971)  
5.04.480 - Street musicians. 
For the business or occupation of a roving street musician (including mariachi bands), for each such individual or band, the sum of one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) per musician, per quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 21, 2006: Ord. 202 § 1, 1984: Ord. 176 § 1, 1981: Ord. 116 § 48(a), 1971)  
5.04.490 - Christmas trees, greens and holly berries. 
For the business of carrying on or managing the business of selling Christmas trees, greens, holly berries, decorations, Christmas cards or other similar items relating to the Christmas season, except where such business is conducted in conjunction with a regularly established place of business for which a license has been issued, the sum of nineteen dollars and twenty cents ($19.20) per quarter or portion thereof. 
(Ord. 342 § 22, 2006: Ord. 116 § 49, 1971)  
5.04.500 - Circus. 
For the business of conducting or exhibiting any circus, caravan, menageries or collection of animals or other acrobatic performances, the sum of one hundred ninety-two dollars ($192.00) per day. 
(Ord. 342 § 23, 2006: Ord. 116 § 50, 1971)  
5.04.510 - Coin-operated sound-motion picture machines. 
For the business of maintaining and operating sound-motion pictures or television machines, instruments or screens, which machines, instruments or screens are played or operated through the insertion of coins into such machines or slot connected therewith a viewing fee is charged, nineteen dollars and twenty cents ($19.20) per quarter for each of such machines, instruments or screens. 
(Ord. 342 § 24, 2006: Ord. 116 § 51, 1971)  
5.04.520 - Concrete pipe. 
Every person engaged in the business of manufacturing concrete pipe or other concrete products or vitrified clay products shall pay a license of thirty-eight dollars and forty cents ($38.40) per quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 25, 2006: Ord. 116 § 52, 1971)  
5.04.530 - Contractors. 
A.  Every person or firm who engages in the business of a contractor in the building trades shall pay a license of forty dollars ($40.00) per quarter. Any contractor who sells merchandise in connection with a contracting business shall pay an additional license for doing business as a merchant under Section 5.04.280 of this chapter in addition to the forty dollars ($40.00) quarterly license. Every person or firm engaged in the business of a contractor must produce evidence that he holds a valid State Contractor's License before a license will be issued under this section. Contractors applying for a first license shall pay forty dollars ($40.00). 
B.  "Contractors" shall include: 
1.  Boilers, hot water heating, steam-fitting; 
2.  Building, general; 
3.  Cabinet and millwork; 
4.  Cement and concrete; 
5.  Classified specialists; 
6.  Electric signs; 
7.  Electrical, general; 
8.  Elevator installation; 
9.  Excavating, grading, trenching, paving surfacing; 
10.  Flooring, wood; 
11.  Flooring, sanding and finishing; 
12.  Glazing; 
13.  House and building moving, wrecking; 
14.  Insulation; 
15.  Landscaping; 
16.  Lathing; 
17.  Masonry; 
18.  Ornamental metals; 
19.  Painting, decorating, paper hanging; 
20.  Plastering; 
21.  Plumbing; 
22.  Refrigeration; 
23.  Roofing; 
24.  Seer, sewage disposal, draining, cement pipe laying; 
25.  Sheet metal; 
26.  Steel, reinforcing; 
27.  Steel, structural; 
28.  Structural pest control; 
29.  Tile, ceramic and mosaic; 
30.  Warm-air heating, ventilating, air-conditioning; 
31.  Welding; 
32.  Well drilling. 
(Ord. 342 § 26, 2006: Ord. 145 § 11, 1976; Ord. 116 § 53, 1971)  
5.04.540 - Creamery. 
Every person who conducts a creamery, cream receiving station, skimming station, whole milk plant or dry milk factory or cheese factory in the City shall pay a license of seventy-six dollars and eighty cents ($76.80) per quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 27, 2006: Ord. 116 § 54, 1971)  
5.04.550 - Dances. 
Every person, firm or group carrying on, managing or conducting a public dance or similar event in the City shall pay a license fee of eighty dollars ($80.00) per quarter or event. 
(Ord. 342 § 28, 2006: Ord. 202 § 2, 1984: Ord. 145 § 12, 1976: Ord. 116 § 55, 1971)  
5.04.560 - Topless dancers or waitresses. 
Every person, firm or group carrying on, employing, managing or conducting, topless dancers or topless waitresses, the sum of one thousand six hundred dollars ($1,600.00) per quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 29, 2006: Ord. 176 § 2, 1981: Ord. 116 § 55(a), 1971)  
5.04.570 - Fixed base and crop dusting operations. 
Every person, firm or group carrying on a fixed base crop dusting operation, the sum of three hundred twenty dollars ($320.00) per quarter. 
Every person, firm or group carrying on a crop dusting operation (transient), the sum of thirty-two dollars ($32.00) per plane per day. 
(Ord. 342 § 30, 2006: Ord. 176 § 3, 1981: Ord. 116 § 54(a), 1971)  
5.04.580 - Dry cleaning and laundry (outside firms only). 
Every person or firm engaged in the business of soliciting and accepting orders, delivery and pickup of dry cleaning, dyeing, washing of clothes, rugs, linen or similar items for work or service to be done outside the City shall pay a license of twenty-four dollars ($24.00) per quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 31, 2006: Ord. 116 § 56, 1971)  
5.04.590 - Feat or performance. 
For the business of exhibiting or charging a fee for the use of any microscope, lung or muscle tester, phonographic diversions, ball, knife or ring throwing, galvanic batter or any other feat or performance or diversion of a similar character not in this chapter specified or named, the sum of nineteen dollars and twenty cents ($19.20) per day. 
(Ord. 342 § 32, 2006: Ord. 116 § 57, 1971)  
5.04.600 - Finance or lending agencies. 
Every person or firm engaged in the business of operating a finance or lending firm or agency, not excluded by Section 5.04.200 of this chapter, shall pay a license fee in the sum of forty-eight dollars ($48.00) per quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 33, 2006: Ord. 116 § 58, 1971)  
5.04.610 - Fortuneteller. 
Every astrologer, seer, fortuneteller, hypnotist, clairvoyant, spiritualist, spiritualist medium or phrenologist who demands or accepts a fee or gratuity of his or her services, engaged in or about to engage in business in the City, shall pay a license of the greater of either one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) per quarter or the amount which would be payable pursuant to Section 5.04.280 of this chapter if this section were not applicable. 
(Ord. 342 § 34, 2006: Ord. 315 § 4, 1996; Ord. 116 § 59, 1971)  
5.04.620 - Hauling. 
For the business of operating or running any truck, dray, job wagon or other vehicle, horse or motor-driven, used for commercial operation or for hire, excepting common carriers, other than for rock, gravel, sand, ready-mix, concrete or any other commodity of similar nature within the City, the sum of fourteen dollars and forty cents ($14.40) per quarter for each such vehicle. If the above-mentioned vehicles are used in connection with a regularly established business covering the above-mentioned materials, the license shall be seventy-six dollars and eighty cents ($76.80) per quarter for such business. 
(Ord. 342 § 35, 2006: Ord. 116 § 60, 1971)  
5.04.630 - Hotels. 
For the business of keeping or conducting a hotel of twenty (20) rooms or under, forty dollars ($40.00) per quarter; twenty-one (21) rooms to thirty (30) rooms, inclusive, fifty-two dollars ($52.00) per quarter; thirty-one (31) rooms to sixty (60) rooms, inclusive, seventy-two dollars ($72.00) per quarter; sixty-one (61) rooms to eighty (80) rooms, inclusive, eighty-eight dollars ($88.00) per quarter; and ten dollars ($10.00) per quarter for an additional ten rooms over eighty (80) rooms, but in no event shall such license tax exceed the sum of ninety-six dollars ($96.00) per quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 36, 2006: Ord. 145 § 13, 1976: Ord. 116 § 61, 1971)  
5.04.640 - Ice cream on streets. 
Every person engaged in the business of selling ice cream, snow cones, soda water, fruit juices, lemonade or any other soft or temperate drinks, or any confection, upon the streets of the City shall pay a license of forty dollars ($40.00) per quarter; provided, permission shall first be obtained from the city council. 
(Ord. 342 § 37, 2006: Ord. 116 § 62, 1971)  
5.04.650 - Itinerant vendor. 
Every person engaged in the business or occupation of itinerant vendor shall pay a license of two hundred forty dollars ($240.00) per day. 
The words "itinerant vendor" shall be construed to mean and include all persons, both principal and agent, who engage in a temporary and transient business in the City of Huron, selling articles or services of any class or character, with the intention of continuing the business in the City of less than ninety (90) days, and who for the purpose of carrying on business have no fixed place of business, or hire, lease or occupy any room, building or structure therein for the exhibition or sale of such articles, or from which room, building or structure the sales are to be made, or solicit business by means of samples or delivery from house to house. Any person or firm so engaged shall not be relieved from the provisions of this section by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer or by conducting the temporary or transient business in connection with, or as part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. 
All itinerant vendors shall obtain licenses and permits as are set forth in Chapter 5.24 of this code and for this purpose the chief of police is authorized to charge a fee of forty dollars ($40.00) to cover the cost and expense of obtaining a background check and such other items as the chief of police shall in his absolute discretion deem necessary in order to clear said itinerant vendor. 
(Ord. 342 § 38, 2006: Ord. 145 § 14, 1976: Ord. 116 § 63, 1971)  
5.04.660 - Regulation of vending vehicles. 
Street vendor vehicles shall not stop, stand, park, sell merchandise or sound bells or other sound devices on streets, alleys or public ways adjacent to school buildings or school grounds between the hours of eight a.m. and four p.m. on any school day; or on any streets, alleys or public ways adjacent to any church on Sunday prior to twelve noon, or at any time on streets adjacent to hospitals or hospital grounds. 
(Ord. 342 § 39, 2006: Ord. 116 § 64, 1971)  
5.04.670 - Junk dealer and secondhand store. 
For the business of junk dealer, fifty-seven dollars and sixty cents ($57.60) per quarter; for the business of conducting a secondhand store, thirty-eight dollars and forty cents ($38.40) per quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 40, 2006: Ord. 116 § 65, 1971)  
5.04.680 - Labor camps. 
For the business of keeping, maintaining or operating a labor camp, one hundred sixty dollars ($160.00) per quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 41, 2006: Ord. 116 § 66, 1971)  
5.04.690 - Mechanical games. 
For the business of maintaining and operating mechanical games, mechanical rides, mechanical devices or mechanical instruments of any kind, twenty-four dollars ($24.00) per quarter for each of such games or devices. Nothing herein shall be construed as permitting the licensing of any mechanical games or device whereby prizes of merchandise or money or anything of value are awarded, paid or given by reason of or connected with the operation or playing of such a game or device. 
(Ord. 342 § 42, 2006: Ord. 116 § 67, 1971)  
5.04.700 - Amusement rides. 
For the business of operating or conducting a merry-go-round, ferris wheel, sky flier, whip, loop-o-plane, aeroplane, or similar types of amusement rides, the sum of nineteen dollars and twenty cents ($19.20) per day, or fraction thereof, for each of such rides, provided that such business shall be carried on in the City at such places and under such rules and regulations as may be directed by the chief of police. No license shall be issued under this section if such amusement rides are in conjunction with or conducted as a part of what is commonly known as a "carnival" as set forth in Section 5.04.470 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 342 § 43, 2006: Ord. 116 § 68, 1971)  
5.04.710 - Minstrels. 
For each exhibition of minstrels, operatic or concert singers, the license shall be the same as required for theatrical performances. 
(Ord. 342 § 44, 2006: Ord. 116 § 69, 1971)  
5.04.720 - Motels. 
For the business of keeping or conducting a motel of twenty (20) rooms or under, twenty-eight dollars and eighty cents ($28.80) per quarter; twenty-one (21) rooms to thirty (30) rooms, inclusive, thirty-eight dollars and forty cents ($38.40) per quarter; thirty-one (31) rooms to sixty (60) rooms, inclusive, forty-eight dollars ($48.00) per quarter; sixty-one (61) rooms to eighty (80) rooms, inclusive, sixty-seven dollars and twenty cents ($67.20) per quarter, eighty-one (81) rooms to ninety (90) rooms, inclusive, eighty-six dollars and forty cents ($86.40) per quarter; and nine dollars and sixty cents ($9.60) per quarter for an additional ten rooms over ninety (90), but in no event shall such license tax exceed the sum of ninety-six dollars ($96.00) per quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 45, 2006: Ord. 116 § 70, 1971)  
5.04.730 - Newspaper. 
Every person engaged in the business of printing or publishing a newspaper in the City shall pay a license of fifty-seven dollars and sixty cents ($57.60) per quarter, if a daily newspaper, or nineteen dollars and twenty cents ($19.20) per quarter, if other than a daily newspaper. 
(Ord. 342 § 46, 2006: Ord. 116 § 71, 1971)  
5.04.740 - Nurseries. 
Every person who engaged in the business of selling or soliciting orders for nursery stock, trees, shrubs, vines or plants shall pay a license of nineteen dollars and twenty cents ($19.20). 
(Ord. 342 § 47, 2006: Ord. 116 § 72, 1971)  
5.04.750 - Parking lots. 
For the business of keeping or conducting a public parking lot where rental is charged, shall pay a license of nineteen dollars and twenty cents ($19.20) per quarter, for a lot containing twenty-four (24) spaces or less. For a lot containing twenty-four (24) spaces or more, nineteen dollars and twenty cents ($19.20) per quarter plus eighty cents ($0.80) per each space over twenty-four (24) per quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 48, 2006: Ord. 116 § 73, 1971)  
5.04.760 - Pawnshops. 
Every person engaged in the business of conducting or carrying on a pawnshop or acting as a pawnbroker shall pay a license fee of ninety-six dollars ($96.00) per quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 49, 2006: Ord. 116 § 74, 1971)  
5.04.770 - Phonographs. 
For the business of maintaining and operating phonographs or mechanical musical instruments through the insertion of coins into such machines or slots connected therewith, sixteen dollars ($16.00) per quarter for each of such phonographs or machines. 
(Ord. 342 § 50, 2006: Ord. 116 § 75, 1971)  
5.04.780 - Photographic studio. 
For every photographic studio or gallery, permanently located, nineteen dollars and twenty cents ($19.20) per quarter, where no merchandise is sold other than photographs and frames; where other photographic merchandise is sold, see Section 5. 04.280 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 342 § 51, 2006: Ord. 116 § 76, 1971)  
5.04.790 - Professions. 
Each person who at a fixed place of business in the City conducts the business or profession as hereinafter designated in one office, or suite of offices, whether a partner, employee or associate shall pay a license per quarter as hereinafter designated. 
Law 	$40.00 
Medicine or surgery 	40.00 
Dentistry 	40.00 
Osteopathy 	40.00 
Optometry 	40.00 
Chiropractor 	40.00 
Chiropodist 	40.00 
Veterinary medicine or surgery 	40.00 
Civil engineer 	40.00 
Public accountant 	40.00 
Any other profession not herein mentioned 	40.00 
 
(Ord. 342 § 52, 2006: Ord. 145 § 15, 1976; Ord. 116 § 77, 1971)  
5.04.800 - Public scales. 
For the business of operating a public scale or scales, thirty-two dollars ($32.00) per quarter for each scale. The fee shall be additional to any fee for any other business operated in conjunction therewith. 
(Ord. 342 § 53, 2006: Ord. 145 § 16, 1976: Ord. 116 § 78, 1971)  
5.04.810 - Radio broadcasting. 
Every person engaged in the business of radio broadcasting in the City shall pay a license of fifty-seven dollars and sixty cents ($57.60) per quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 54, 2006: Ord. 116 § 79, 1971)  
5.04.820 - Real estate. 
For the business of buying or selling real estate on commission, for one person engaged in buying or selling in the business, the sum of fourteen dollars and forty cents ($14.40) per quarter, and for each additional person the sum of nine dollars and sixty cents ($9.60) each per quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 55, 2006: Ord. 116 § 80, 1971)  
5.04.830 - Shoe shining. 
Every person engaged in the business of keeping or conducting a boot-blacking or shoe-shining parlor or stand not carried on in connection with a barbershop shall pay a license of four dollars and eighty cents ($4.80) per quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 56, 2006: Ord. 116 § 81, 1971)  
5.04.840 - Shooting gallery, skating rink, traveling rink or shooting gallery. 
For the business of conducting a shooting gallery or skating rink, the sum of thirty-eight dollars and forty cents ($38.40) per quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 57, 2006: Ord. 116 § 82, 1971)  
5.04.850 - Shuffle boards. 
For the business of maintaining and operating shuffle boards, eight dollars ($8.00) per quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 58, 2006: Ord. 116 § 83, 1971)  
5.04.860 - Sideshow. 
For each show for pay or any panorama, figures jugglers, necromancers, magicians, wire or rope dancing, sleight of hand performance or any other sideshow, the sum of nineteen dollars and twenty cents ($19.20) per day, and whenever a separate admission price is charged, each must be considered a separate show. 
(Ord. 342 § 59, 2006: Ord. 116 § 84, 1971)  
5.04.870 - Signs. 
Every person soliciting orders for or selling signs shall pay a license of nineteen dollars and twenty cents ($19.20) per quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 60, 2006: Ord. 116 § 85, 1971)  
5.04.880 - Supplying or distributing bakery goods or milk. 
For the business of supplying bakery goods or milk or distributing the same to the inhabitants of the City by vehicle, forty dollars ($40.00) per quarter, per vehicle. 
(Ord. 342 § 61, 2006: Ord. 116 § 86, 1971)  
5.04.890 - Tailor shops. 
For the business of conducting a tailor shop, nineteen dollars and twenty cents ($19.20) per quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 62, 2006: Ord. 116 § 87, 1971)  
5.04.900 - Theatres and shows. 
For the business of conducting or carrying on theatres, tent or other shows, if in a fixed place of business for less than one quarter, nine dollars and sixty cents ($9.60) per pay day; for one quarter every theatre, tent or other show having a seating capacity of seven hundred (700) persons or more, one hundred fifteen dollars and twenty cents ($115.20) per quarter; under seven hundred (700) persons, fifty-seven dollars and sixty cents ($57.60) per quarter; all others shall pay a license of forty-eight dollars ($48.00) per day or one hundred ninety-two dollars ($192.00) per week. 
(Ord. 342 § 63, 2006: Ord. 116 § 89, 1971)  
5.04.910 - Tombstones. 
Every person conducting or maintaining a marble or tombstone shop or soliciting orders for marble or tombstone work shall pay a license of twenty-eight dollars and eighty cents ($28.80) per quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 64, 2006: Ord. 116 § 90, 1971)  
5.04.920 - Trained animals. 
For the business of conducting or exhibiting any show where the exhibition consists solely of trained animals, the sum of nineteen dollars and twenty cents ($19.20) per day; provided, this provision shall not be considered to apply to any circus, or any performance, exhibition or sideshow provided for in Sections 5.04.500 and 5.04.860 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 342 § 65, 2006: Ord. 116 § 91, 1971)  
5.04.930 - Undertaker. 
For the business of carrying on an undertaking establishment in the City, the sum of forty-eight dollars ($48.00) per quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 66, 2006: Ord. 116 § 92, 1971)  
5.04.940 - Vending machines. 
For the business of maintaining and operating mechanical vending machines whereby merchandise is sold to the public from such machines by the insertion of coins therein, a license per quarter as follows: 
Not over one cent ($0.01), up to ten machines, five dollars and seventy-five cents ($5.75); each additional machine, forty cents ($0.40); 
Not over one cent ($0.01), up to ten machines, nineteen dollars and twenty cents ($19.20); each additional machine, one dollar and ninety-two cents ($1.92); 
Over ten cents ($0.10), up to ten machines, twenty-eight dollars and eighty cents ($28.80); each additional machine, two dollars and eighty-five cents ($2.85). 
(Ord. 342 § 67, 2006: Ord. 116 § 93, 1971)  
5.04.950 - Warehouse. 
Every person engaged in the business of conducting or operating any warehouse, tank, building, or device for the storage of grain, hay or other farm products, merchandise or goods of other persons, for profit, shall pay a license of forty dollars ($40.00) per quarter for each warehouse, tank, building or other device. 
(Ord. 342 § 68, 2006: Ord. 145 § 18, 1976: Ord. 116 § 94, 1971)  
5.04.960 - Washing cars. 
For the business of washing cars, either by hand, semi-automatically, not part of a business license under another section of this chapter, twenty-four dollars ($24.00) per quarter. 
(Ord. 342 § 69, 2006: Ord. 116 § 95, 1971)  
5.04.970 - Wholesale delivery by vehicle. 
Every person not having a fixed place of business within the City who delivers wholesale groceries, wares, machinery or merchandise of any kind by vehicle, motor-driven or otherwise, to retail stores in the City shall pay a license of twenty-eight dollars and eighty cents ($28.80). 
(Ord. 342 § 70, 2006: Ord. 116 § 96, 1971)  
Chapter 5.08 - CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISING SYSTEM 
Sections: 
 
5.08.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
"Cable television system," "CATV" and "CTV" shall mean a system employing antennae, microwave, wires, wave guides, coaxial cables or other conductors, equipment or facilities designed, constructed or used for the following purposes: 
1.  Collecting and amplifying local and distant broadcast television or radio signals and distributing and transmitting such signals; 
2.  Transmitting original cablecast programming not received through television broadcast signals; 
3.  Transmitting television pictures, film and videotape programs not received through broadcast television signals, whether or not encoded or processed to permit reception by only selected receivers; and 
4.  Transmitting and receiving all other signals, digital, voice and audiovisual. 
The services set forth in this subsection and permitted by the provisions of this chapter to be performed shall be those performed by the grantee for subscribers in the operation of a cable television system franchised by the City and not otherwise. 
"City manager" shall mean the city manager or his designee. 
"Franchise" shall mean and include any authorization granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter in terms of a franchise, privilege, permit, license or otherwise to construct, operate and maintain a cable television system within all or a specified area of the City. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean and include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the City in accordance with the business licensing provisions of the City. 
"Grantee" shall mean the person, firm or corporation granted a franchise by the council pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and the lawful successor, transferee or assignee of such person, firm or corporation. 
"Gross annual advertising receipts" shall mean any income, compensation or other consideration received by the grantee derived from any form of advertising. 
"Gross annual basic subscriber receipts" shall mean any and all compensation and other consideration received directly or indirectly by the grantee from subscribers in payment of the regularly furnished service of the cable television system in the transmission of broadcast television, radio signals and original cablecast programming of the grantee. 
"Gross annual lease receipts" shall mean any fees or income received by the grantee for the lease or rental, and compensation for any service in connection therewith, such as studio and equipment rental and production costs, of any channel permitted or designated by the Federal Communications Commission to be so leased or rented. 
"Gross annual nonbasic service receipts" shall mean any and all compensation and other consideration received directly or indirectly by the grantee from subscribers or users in payment for the receipt of signals other than broadcast television, radio or original cablecast programming of the grantee, whether for pay television, facsimile transmission, or return or response communication, and whether or not transmitted encoded or processed to permit reception by only selected subscribers. 
"Gross receipts," as used in the previous four subsections of this section, shall mean any and all compensation, in whatever form, grant, subsidy, exchange or otherwise, received directly or indirectly by a grantee, not including any taxes or services furnished by the grantee imposed directly on any subscriber or user by any city, county, state or other governmental unit and collected by the grantee for such entity. 
"Property of grantee" shall mean all property owned, installed, or used within the City by a grantee in the conduct of a cable television system business under the authority of a franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
"Street" shall mean the surface, the air space above the surface, and the area below the surface of any public street, other public right-of-way, or public place, including public easements. 
"Subscriber" or "user" shall mean any person or entity receiving for any purpose any service of the grantee's cable television system, including, but not limited to, the conventional cable television system service of the retransmission of television broadcasts, radio signals, the grantee's original cablecasting, and the local government, education and public access channels, and other services, such as the leasing of channels, data and facsimile transmissions, pay television, and police, fire and similar public service communications. 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
5.08.020 - Exclusive use of telephone facilities. 
When and in the event the grantee of any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter uses in his cable television system distribution channels furnished to the grantee by a telephone company pursuant to tariff or contract on file with a regulatory body having jurisdiction, and such grantee makes no use of the streets independent of such telephone company-furnished facilities, such grantee shall be required to comply with all of the provisions of this chapter as a licensee, and, in such event, whenever the term "grantee" is used in this chapter, it shall be deemed to mean and include "licensee." 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
5.08.030 - Supplemental rules, regulations and standards. 
A.  Standards of operation. 
1.  Prior to receiving any applications for franchises, the council may adopt rules, regulations and standards governing the operation of cable television systems in the City. Such rules, regulations and standards shall apply to and govern the operations of the grantee of any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and shall be expressly declared a part of any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  Rules, regulations and standards not adopted prior to receiving any application for a franchise shall be adopted by the council by resolution at the first regular meeting of the council next following such application. Such rules, regulations and standards shall become effective upon adoption and shall be applicable to any application for a franchise previously received. 
3.  The standards adopted shall govern the engineering, construction, installation, service and maintenance of all cable television systems in the City, including, but not limited to, standards governing carrier levels, signal-to-noise ratios, hum modulation, distortion levels, and channel interactions and inter-reactions. 
4.  Provided the same do not materially alter the content of the franchise without the consent of the grantee, the council may at any time adopt new rules, regulations or standards, or may amend, modify, delete or otherwise change its respective rules, regulations or standards previously adopted, in the following manner: The council shall pass its resolution of intention stating or describing the rules, regulations or standards to be adopted, amended, modified, deleted or otherwise changed and fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interests therein or objections thereto may appear before the council and be heard. Such resolution shall direct the city clerk to post the resolution at least once within ten days after the passage thereof as required by the Huron Code and to mail a copy of the resolution to any grantee or applicant for a franchise not more than thirty (30) days, nor less than fifteen (15) days, prior to the time fixed for the hearing thereon. 
At the time set for such hearing, or at any adjournment thereof, the council shall proceed to hear and pass upon such comments as may be presented. Thereafter, the council, by resolution, may adopt, amend, modify, delete or otherwise change its respective rules, regulations and standards. Such determination by the council shall be final and conclusive. 
Any rule or regulation or standard as adopted, amended, modified, deleted or otherwise changed by the council shall become effective upon the tenth day following the adoption of such resolution unless a longer period shall be otherwise provided in such resolution. 
5.  Neither the council nor the grantee shall, as to services, service facilities, rules, regulations or in any other respect, make or grant any preference or advantage to any person nor subject any person to prejudice or disadvantage. 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
5.08.040 - Franchises to operate. 
A nonexclusive franchise to install, construct, operate and maintain a cable television system on streets within all or a specific portion of the City may be granted by the council to any person, whether operating under an existing franchise or not, who or which offers to furnish and provide such system under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
No provision of this chapter may be deemed or construed so as to require the granting of a franchise when, in the opinion of the council, it is in the public interests to restrict the number of grantees to one or more. 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
5.08.050 - Franchises—Applications—Solicitation. 
The council may, by advertisement or any other means, solicit and call for applications for cable television system franchises, and the council may determine and fix any date upon or after which such applications shall be received by the City, the date before which the applications shall be received, or the date after which the applications shall not be received, and the council may make any other determinations and specify any other times, terms, conditions or limitations regarding the soliciting, calling for, making and receiving of such applications. 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
5.08.060 - Franchises—Applications—Form—Fees. 
Each application for a franchise to construct, operate or maintain a cable television system in the City shall be filed with the city clerk and shall contain, or be accompanied by, the following: 
A.  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
B.  A detailed statement of the corporate or other business entity organization of the applicant, including, but not limited to, the following, and to whatever extent required by the City: 
1.  The names and residence and business addresses of all officers, directors and associates of the applicant, 
2.  The names and residence and business addresses of all officers, persons and entities having, controlling, or being entitled to have or control five percent or more of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each such person or entity, 
3.  The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling the applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity, including, but not limited to, cable television systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent, and subsidiary, and the areas served thereby, 
4.  A detailed description of all previous experience of the applicant in providing cable television system service and in related or similar fields, 
5.  A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, prepared by a certified public accountant, for the fiscal year next preceding the date of the application, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the council, setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending institution or funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed system in the City, or a statement by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed system in the City, or a statement from a certified public accountant certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net and uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed system in the City, and 
6.  A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable television franchise awarded to the applicant or its parent or subsidiary; the status of such franchise with respect to the completion thereof; the total cost of the completion of such system; and the amount of the resources of the applicant and its parent or subsidiary committed to the completion thereof; 
C.  A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be served, 
2.  A statement or schedule setting forth all of the proposed classifications of rates and charges to subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of such classifications, including installation charges and service charges, 
3.  A detailed, informative and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant. In no event shall such operational and performance standards be less than those set forth in Title 47, Subpart K (Sections 76.601 et seq.), Rules and Regulations, Federal Communications Commission, adopted February 2, 1972, as amended, 
4.  A copy of the forms of any agreement undertaking, or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber, and 
5.  A detailed statement setting forth, in its entirety, any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal, informal, written, oral or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm or corporation which agreements and undertakings materially relate or pertain to, or depend upon, the application and the granting of the franchise; 
D.  A copy of any agreement covering the franchise area, if existing, between the applicant and any public utility subject to regulation by the Public Utilities Commission of the State providing for the use of any facilities of such public utility, including, but not limited to, poles, lines or conduits; 
E.  Any other details, statements, information or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the council or by any provision of any other laws of the City; and 
F.  An application fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), which fee shall be in the form of cash, certified or cashier's check or money order, to pay the costs of studying, investigating and otherwise processing such application and which fee shall be in consideration thereof and not returnable or refundable in whole or in part, except to the extent that such fee exceeds the actual costs incurred by the City in studying, investigating and otherwise processing the application; provided, however, any applicant who shall deliver to the city clerk a written withdrawal of, or cancellation of, any application provided for in this section not later than the seventh day next following the day such application is received by the city clerk shall be entitled to have returned and refunded the application fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), less any actual costs of expenses incurred by the City by reason of such application. 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
5.08.070 - Franchises—Applications—Reports and recommendations. 
Upon the receipt of an application for a franchise to construct, operate or maintain a cable television system in the City, the council shall refer such application to the city manager who shall prepare a report and make his recommendations regarding such application. Such report and recommendation shall be completed and filed with the council within sixty (60) days. 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
5.08.080 - Franchises—Applications—Determinations. 
A.  Criteria. In making any determination as to any application to construct, operate or maintain a cable television system in the City, the council may give due consideration to the quality of the service proposed, the rates to the subscribers, the income to the City, the experience, character, background and financial responsibility of any applicant and its management and owners, the technical and performance quality of equipment, the willingness and ability of the applicant to meet the construction and physical requirements and to abide by policy conditions, franchise limitations, and requirements, and any other considerations deemed pertinent by the council for safeguarding the interests of the City and the public. The council, in its discretion, shall determine the award of any franchise on the basis of such considerations and without competitive bidding. 
If the council shall determine to reject such application, such determination shall be final and conclusive, and such application shall be deemed rejected. 
B.  Further consideration—Hearings—Notices. If the council shall determine to further consider the application, the following shall be done: 
1.  The council shall decide and specify the terms and conditions of any franchise to be granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  The council shall pass a resolution of intention to consider the granting of such a franchise, giving notice of the receipt of the application, describing the character of the franchise desired, stating the name of the proposed grantee, the character of the franchise, the terms and conditions upon which such franchise is proposed to be granted, that copies of the proposed franchise may be obtained at the office of the city clerk, fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place when and where any persons having any interest therein or objection to the granting of such franchise may file written protests and appear before the council and be heard, and directing the city clerk to publish such resolution of intention at least once within ten (10) days after the passage thereof in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. 
C.  Further Consideration—Hearings. At the time set for the hearing, or at any adjournment thereof, the council shall make one of the following determinations: 
1.  That such franchise be denied; 
2.  That such franchise be granted upon the terms and conditions specified in the resolution of intention to grant such franchise; or 
3.  That such franchise be granted but upon terms and conditions different from those specified in the resolution of intention to grant such franchise. 
D.  Denial. If the council shall determine that the franchise be denied, such determination shall be expressed by resolution and shall be final and conclusive. 
E.  Granting. If the council shall determine that the franchise be granted upon the terms and conditions specified in the resolution of intention to consider granting the franchise, such determination shall be expressed by ordinance granting a franchise to the applicant. 
If the council shall determine upon granting a franchise upon terms and conditions different from those specified in the resolution of intention to consider granting the franchise, such determination shall be expressed by resolution adopted prior to granting a franchise by ordinance. 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
5.08.090 - Franchises—Written acceptance. 
A.  Filing. No franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall become effective for any purpose unless and until the written acceptance thereof shall have been filed with the city clerk. The written acceptance, which shall be in the form and substance approved by the city attorney, shall also be and operate as an acceptance of each and every term, condition and limitation set forth in this chapter or in such franchise or shall be otherwise specified as provided in this chapter. The written acceptance shall be filed by the grantee not later than 12:01 p.m. of the fortieth day next following the effective date of the ordinance granting such franchise. 
B.  Failure to File. In default of the filing of such written acceptance as required by the provisions of this section, the grantee shall be deemed to have rejected and repudiated the franchise. Thereafter, the acceptance of the grantee shall not be received nor filed by the city clerk. The grantee shall have no rights, remedies or redress in the premises unless and until the council, by resolution, shall determine that such acceptance be received or filed, and then upon such terms and conditions as the council may impose. 
C.  Rights of the City. In any case, and in any instance, all rights, remedies and redress in these premises which may or shall be available to the City shall at all times be available to the City, and shall be preserved and maintained and shall continuously exist in and to the City, and shall not be in any manner or means modified, abridged, altered, restricted or impaired by reason of any of these premises or otherwise. 
D.  Effect on Rights of the Grantee. Any franchise granted and accepted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be in lieu of any and all other rights, privileges, powers, immunities and authorities owned, possessed, controlled or exercisable by the grantee of or pertaining to the construction, operation or maintenance of any cable television system in the City. 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
5.08.100 - Franchises—Terms. 
Franchises granted by the council pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be for a term of fifteen (15) years following the date of the written acceptance of such franchise by the grantee. 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
5.08.110 - Franchises—Payments. 
A.  In consideration of the granting and exercise of a franchise to use the public streets for the operation of a cable television system, the grantee shall pay to the City, during the life of the franchise, the following amounts: 
1.  A percentage of the gross annual basic subscriber receipts of the grantee; 
2.  A percentage of the gross annual nonbasic service receipts of the grantee; 
3.  A percentage of the gross annual advertising receipts of the grantee; and 
4.  A percentage of the gross annual lease receipts of the grantee. 
Such percentage payments shall be made in the manner, amounts, and at the times directed in the franchise or in a resolution adopted by the council fixing the franchise fees and adopting rules for service. 
B.  The City shall have the right to inspect the revenue records of the grantee under the franchise and the right to audit and recompute any and all amounts payable pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The costs of such audits shall be borne by the grantee when the audits result in increasing, by more than two (2) percent, the annual payments of the grantee to the City. 
C.  No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the City may have for further or additional sums payable pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
5.08.120 - Franchises—Uses permitted grantees. 
Any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall authorize and permit the grantee to engage in the business of operating and providing a cable television system in the City and, for that purpose, to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along any street such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the cable television system; and, in addition, so to use, operate and provide similar facilities or properties rented or leased from other persons, firms, or corporations, including, but not limited to, any public utility or other grantee franchised or permitted to do business in the City. 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
5.08.130 - Franchises—Limitations. 
A.  Every franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be nonexclusive. 
B.  No privilege or exemption shall be granted or conferred by any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter except as specifically set forth in this chapter. 
C.  Any privilege claimed by the grantee in any street or other public property shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the street or other public property under any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be a privilege to be held in personal trust by the original grantee. Such franchise shall not in any event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, without the prior consent of the council expressed by resolution and then only under such conditions as may therein be prescribed. Any such transfer or assignment shall be made only by an instrument in writing, such as a bill of sale or similar document, a duly executed copy of which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk within thirty (30) days after any such transfer or assignment. Such consent of the council may not be unreasonably refused; provided, however, the proposed assignee shall show financial responsibility as determined by the council and shall agree to comply with all of the provisions of this chapter; and provided, further, no such consent shall be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage, or other hypothecation, in whole or in part, to secure an indebtedness, except that when such hypothecation shall exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the property used by the grantee in the conduct of the cable television system, the prior consent of the council shall be required for such a transfer. Such consent shall not be withheld unreasonably. 
In the event the grantee is a corporation, the prior approval of the council, expressed by ordinance, shall be required where there is an actual change in control or where the ownership of more than fifty (50) percent of the voting stock of the grantee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom already own fifty (50) percent or more of the voting stock, singly or collectively. Any such acquisition occurring without the prior approval of the council shall constitute a failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter within the meaning of Section 5.08.140 of this chapter. 
E.  Time shall be of the essence of any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The grantee shall not be relieved of his obligation to comply promptly with any of the provisions of this chapter or by any failure of the City to enforce prompt compliance. 
F.  Any right or power in, or duty impressed upon, any officer, employee, department or board of the City shall be subject to transfer by the City to any other officer, employee, department or board of the City. 
G.  The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the City for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this chapter, or of any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or because of the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
H.  The grantee shall be subject to all the requirements of City laws, rules, regulations and specifications heretofore or hereafter enacted or established. 
I.  Any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the grantee of any obligations involved in obtaining pole or conduit space from any department of the City, from any utility company, or from others maintaining utilities in streets. 
J.  Any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be in lieu of any and all other rights, privileges, powers, immunities and authorities owned, possessed, controlled or exercisable by the grantee, or any successor to any interest of the grantee, of or pertaining to the construction, operation or maintenance of any cable television system in the City, and the acceptance of any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall operate, as between the grantee and the City, as an abandonment of any and all such rights, privileges, powers, immunities and authorities within the City to the effect that, as between the grantee and the City, any and all construction, operation and maintenance by any grantee of any cable television system in the City shall be, and shall be deemed and construed in all instances and respects to be, under and pursuant to such franchise and not under or pursuant to any other right, privilege, power, immunity or authority whatsoever. 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
5.08.140 - Franchises—Termination. 
A.  Authority. The City may terminate any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter in the event of the wilful failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee to do or comply with any material requirement or limitation set forth in this chapter or any material rule or regulation of the council or the city manager validly adopted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Notices to Comply. The city manager may make a written demand that the grantee do or comply with any such requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule or regulation. If the failure, refusal, or neglect of the grantee continues for a period of thirty (30) days following such written demand, the city manager may place his request for the termination of the franchise upon the next regular council meeting agenda. The city manager shall cause to be served upon such grantee at least ten (10) days prior to the date of such council meeting a written notice of his intent to request such termination and the time and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be posted by the city clerk at least once ten (10) days before such meeting. 
C.  Notices to Comply—Hearings. The council shall consider the request of the city manager and shall hear any persons interested therein and shall determine, in its discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just cause. 
D.  Compliance—Time Limits. If such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just cause, the council shall direct the grantee to comply within such time and manner and upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If the council shall determine such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was without just cause, the council may, by resolution, declare that the franchise of such grantee shall be terminated and forfeited unless there shall be compliance by the grantee within such period as the council may fix. 
E.  Termination—Effect. The termination and forfeiture of any franchise shall in no way affect any of the rights of the City under the franchise or any provision of law. 
F.  Termination—Compensation. In the event of any holding over after the expiration or other termination of any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter without the prior consent of the City, expressed by resolution, the grantee shall pay to the City reasonable compensation and damages of not less than one hundred (100) percent of its gross revenue during such period. 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
5.08.150 - Rights reserved to the City. 
A.  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect in any way, to any extent, the right of the City to acquire the property of the grantee, either by purchase or through the exercise of the right of eminent domain, at a fair and just value, which shall not include any amount for the franchise itself or for any of the rights or privileges granted, and nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to contract away or to modify or abridge, either for a term or in perpetuity, the City's right of eminent domain. 
B.  There is reserved to the City every right and power which is required to be reserved or provided by the provisions of this chapter or by any law of the City, and the grantee, by its acceptance of the franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the City in its exercise of such rights or powers heretofore or hereafter enacted or established. 
C.  There is reserved to the City the power to amend any provisions of this chapter so as to require additional or greater standards of construction, operation, maintenance or otherwise of the part of the grantee, to reflect technical and economic changes occurring during the franchise term, and to enable the City and the grantee to take advantage of new developments in the cable television industry so as to more effectively, efficiently and economically serve the public. 
D.  Neither the granting of any franchise pursuant to the provisions of this chapter nor any provision of this chapter shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the City. 
E.  The council may do all things which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and may determine any question of fact which may arise during the existence of any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The city manager, with the approval of the city attorney, is authorized and empowered to adjust, settle or compromise any controversy or charge arising from the operations of any grantee pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, either on behalf of the City, the grantee, or any subscriber, in the best interests of the public. Either the grantee or any member of the public who may be dissatisfied with the decision of the city manager may appeal the matter to the council for hearing and determination. The council may accept, reject or modify the decision of the city manager, and the council may adjust, settle or compromise any controversy or cancel any charge arising from the operations of the grantee or from any provisions of this chapter. 
F.  The City shall have the right, free of charge, to make additional use, for any public or municipal purpose, whether governmental or proprietary, of any poles, conduits or other similar facilities erected, controlled or maintained exclusively by or for the grantee in any street provided such use by the City does not interfere with the use by the grantee. 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
5.08.160 - Permits and authorizations—Commencement of work. 
A.  Within thirty (30) days after the acceptance of any franchise, the grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all the necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including, but not limited to, any utility joint use attachment agreement, microwave carrier license, and any other permit, license or authorization to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of cable television systems or their associated microwave transmission facilities. 
In connection therewith, copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by the grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission, or any other Federal or State regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting the grantee's cable television operations, shall also be submitted simultaneously to the city manager. 
B.  The grantee shall commence the construction and installation of the cable television system within ninety (90) days after obtaining all the necessary permits, licenses and authorizations, including the right of access to poles and conduits. 
C.  Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the commencement of the construction and installation of the cable television system, the grantee shall proceed to render service to subscribers, and the completion of the installation and construction shall be pursued with reasonable diligence thereafter so that service to all the areas designated and scheduled on the map and plan of construction made part of the franchise shall be provided as set forth therein. 
D.  Failure on the part of the grantee to commence and pursue diligently each of the requirements of this section and to complete each of the matters set forth in this chapter shall be grounds for the termination of such franchise. The council, in its discretion, by resolution, may extend the time for the commencement and completion of the installation and construction for additional periods in the event the grantee, acting in good faith, experiences delays by reason of circumstances beyond its control. 
By the acceptance of the franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the grantee shall agree that failure to comply with any of the time requirements set forth in subsections A, B and C of this section shall result in damage to the City, and that it is and shall be impracticable to determine the actual amount of such damage in the event of delay, and the grantee therefor agrees that, in addition to any other damage suffered by the City, it will pay to the City the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each and every day's delay beyond the time prescribed, plus authorized extensions thereof, for the completion of any of the acts required to be done by the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
5.08.170 - Properties of grantees—Locations. 
A.  The grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities whenever possible and shall not construct or install any new, different, or additional poles, conduits or other facilities whether on public property or on privately owned property unless and until first securing the written approval of the city manager. 
Whenever the grantee shall not utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities, or whenever existing conduits and other facilities shall be located beneath the surface of the streets, or whenever the City shall undertake a program designed to cause all conduits and other facilities to be located beneath the surface of the streets in any area or throughout the City, in the exercise of its police power or pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, upon reasonable notice to the grantee, any such conduits or other facilities of the grantee shall be constructed, installed, placed or replaced beneath the surface of the streets. Any construction, installation, placement, replacement or changes which may be so required shall be made at the expense of the grantee, whose costs shall be determined as in the case of public utilities. 
B.  In those areas of the City where the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone, communication and electric services are underground or hereafter are placed underground, the grantee shall construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground; provided, however, upon obtaining the written approval of the city manager, amplifiers in the grantee's transmission and distribution lines may be placed in appropriate housings upon the surface of the ground. 
For the purpose of this subsection, "underground" shall include a partial underground system. 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
5.08.180 - Properties of grantees. 
A.  In the event the use of any part of the cable television system of the grantee is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of thirty (30) days without prior written notice to and approval by the City, or any part of such system has been installed in any street or other area without complying with the requirements of the provisions of this chapter, or any franchise shall be terminated, cancelled, or expire, the grantee shall, at the option of the City, and at the expense of the grantee and at no expense to the City, and upon the demand of the City, promptly remove from any street or other area all the property of the grantee, and the grantee shall promptly restore the street or other area from which such property was removed to such condition as the city manager shall approve. 
B.  The council may, upon a written application therefor by the grantee, approve the abandonment of any such property in place by the grantee and under such terms and conditions as the council may prescribe. Upon the abandonment of any such property in place, the grantee shall cause to be executed, acknowledged and delivered to the City such instruments as the city attorney shall prescribe and approve transferring and conveying the ownership of such property to the City. 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
5.08.190 - Changes required by public improvements. 
The grantee, at its expense, shall protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove any property of the grantee when, in the opinion of the city manager, the same is required by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway or street construction, the change or establishment of street grades, or the installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, transportation facilities, tracks or any other types of structures or improvements by governmental agencies, whether acting in a governmental or a proprietary capacity, or any other structure or public improvement, including, but not limited to, the movement of buildings, urban renewal and redevelopment, and any general program under which the City shall undertake to cause all such properties to be located beneath the surface of the ground. The grantee in all cases shall have the privilege, subject to the corresponding obligations, to abandon any property of the grantee in place as provided in this chapter. Nothing hereunder shall be deemed a taking of the property of the grantee, and the grantee shall be entitled to no surcharge by reason of anything hereunder. 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
5.08.200 - Failure to perform street work. 
Upon the failure, refusal or neglect of the grantee to cause any work or other act required by law or by the provisions of this chapter to be properly completed in, on, over or under any street within any time prescribed therefor, or upon notice given where no time is prescribed, the city manager may cause such work or other act to be completed in whole or in part and, upon so doing, shall submit to the grantee an itemized statement of the costs thereof. The grantee shall, within thirty (30) days after the receipt of such statement, pay to the City the entire amount thereof. 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
5.08.210 - Bonds. 
A.  Performance of Law and Franchise Provisions. Upon being granted a franchise pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and upon the filing of the acceptance required by the provisions of Section 5.08.090, the grantee shall file with the city clerk, and shall thereafter, annually, during the entire term of such franchise, maintain in full force and effect, a corporate surety bond or other adequate surety agreement in such amount and kind as shall have been approved by the council. 
The bond or agreement shall be so conditioned that in the event the grantee shall fail to comply with any one (1) or more of the provisions of this chapter or of such franchise, there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety any damages, losses, or costs suffered or incurred by the City as a result thereof, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of the removal or abandonment of any property or other costs which may be in default, including attorney's fees and the costs of any action or proceeding up to the full principal amount of such bond. Such condition shall be a continuing obligation for the duration of such franchise and thereafter until the grantee shall have satisfied in full any and all obligations to the City which shall arise out of or pertain to such franchise. Neither the provisions of this section, nor any bond accepted by the City pursuant to the provisions of this section, nor any damages recovered by the City thereunder shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the grantee or limit the liability of the grantee under any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or for damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise. 
B.  Performance of Agreements and Undertakings with Subscribers. Upon being granted a franchise, and upon the filing of the acceptance required by the provisions of Section 5.08.090, the grantee shall file, annually, with the city clerk, and shall thereafter, during the entire term of such franchise, maintain in full force and effect, a corporate surety bond or other adequate surety agreement in such amount as shall have been approved by the council. 
The bond or agreement shall be so conditioned that in the event the grantee shall fail to comply with any one (1) or more of the provisions of any agreement or undertaking made between the grantee and any subscriber, there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety any damages or costs suffered or incurred by any subscriber as a result thereof, including reasonable attorney's fees and the costs of any action or proceeding. Such condition shall be a continuing obligation for the duration of such franchise and thereafter until the grantee shall have satisfied in full any and all obligations to any subscriber which shall arise out of or pertain to any such agreement or undertaking. 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
5.08.220 - Hold harmless agreements. 
The grantee shall indemnify and hold harmless the City and its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees against and from any and all claims, demands, causes of actions, actions, suits, proceedings and damages, including, but not limited to, damages to City property, damages arising out of copyright infringements, and damages arising out of any failure by the grantee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors, or licensees of programs to be delivered by the grantee's cable television system, costs or liabilities, including costs or liabilities of the City with respect to its employees, of every kind and nature whatsoever, including, but not limited to, damages for injury or death or damages to persons or property, regardless of the merit of any of the same, and against all liability to others, and against any loss, cost and expense resulting or arising out of any of the same, including any attorney fees, accountant fees, expert witness or consultant fees, court costs, per diem expense, traveling and transportation expense, or other costs or expenses arising out of, or pertaining to, the exercise or the enjoyment of any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter by the grantee or the granting thereof by the City. 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
5.08.230 - Defense of litigation. 
The grantee shall, at the sole risk and expense of the grantee, upon the demand of the City made by and through the city attorney, appear in and defend any and all suits, actions or other legal proceedings, whether judicial, quasi-judicial, administrative, legislative or otherwise, brought or instituted or had by third persons or duly constituted authorities against or affecting the City and its officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees and arising out of or pertaining to the exercise or the enjoyment of such franchise or granting thereof to the City. 
The grantee shall pay and satisfy, and shall cause to be paid and satisfied, any judgment, decree, order, directive or demand rendered, made or issued against the grantee or the City and its officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees in any of these premises, and such indemnity shall exist and continue without reference to or limitation by the amount of any bond, policy of insurance, deposit, undertaking or other assurance required by the provisions of this chapter or otherwise; provided, however, neither the grantee nor the City shall make or enter into any compromise or settlement of any claim, demand, cause of action, action, suit or other proceeding without first obtaining the written consent of the other. 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
5.08.240 - Insurance. 
Upon being granted a franchise pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and upon the filing of the acceptance required by the provisions of Section 5.08.090, the grantee shall file with the city clerk and shall thereafter during the entire term of such franchise maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, a general comprehensive liability insurance policy in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), together with a bodily injury liability insurance policy in an amount not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for injuries, including accidental death, to any one person, and subject to the same limit for each person in an amount not less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) on account of any one (1) occurrence, and a property damage liability insurance policy in an amount not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) resulting from any one (1) occurrence. The policies required by the provisions of this section shall name the city as an additional insured in any of such policies. If such insurance is provided by a policy which also covers the grantee or any other entity or person, such policy shall contain the standard cross-liability endorsement. 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
5.08.250 - Operational standards. 
A.  Basic Services. The cable television system permitted to be installed and operated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall: 
1.  Be operationally capable of relaying to subscriber terminals those television and radio broadcast signals for the carriage of which the grantee is now or hereafter authorized by the Federal Communications Commission; 
2.  Be constructed with the potential of two (2) way digital signal transmission; 
3.  Distribute color television signals which it receives in color; 
4.  Provide at least one (1) channel, without charge, for the exclusive use of the City; 
5.  Provide at least one (1) channel each for those educational and public access uses now or hereafter required by the Federal Communications Commission for systems operating in the top one hundred (100) markets; and 
6.  Have a minimum capacity of twenty (20) channels, of which two (2) channels shall be served by microwave relay stations, or satellite. 
B.  Nonbasic Services. The cable television system permitted to be installed and operated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may also engage in the business of: 
1.  Transmitting original cablecast programming not received through television broadcast signals; 
2.  Transmitting television pictures, film and videotape programs not received through broadcast television signals, whether or not encoded or processed to permit reception by only selected receivers or subscribers; and 
3.  Transmitting and receiving all other digital, voice and audio-visual signals. 
C.  Subscriber Complaints. In addition to other service regulations adopted by the council, and excepting circumstances beyond the grantee's control, such as acts of God, riots and civil disturbances, and in providing the services set forth in subsections A and B of this section, the grantee shall: 
1.  Limit system failures to minimum time duration by locating and correcting malfunctioning promptly, but in no event longer than twenty-four (24) hours, after occurrence, irrespective of holidays or other nonbusiness hours; 
2.  Upon complaint by a subscriber, make a demonstration satisfactory to the city manager that a signal is being delivered which is of sufficient strength and quality to meet the standards set forth in the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission or in regulations hereafter adopted by the council; 
3.  Render efficient service, making repairs promptly and interrupting service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Planned interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice given to subscribers twenty-four (24) hours in advance and shall occur during the periods of minimum use of the system; 
4.  Maintain a toll free number or maintain an office in the City, which office shall be open during all the usual business hours, with its telephone listed in the directories of the telephone company serving the City, and be so operated that complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments may be received at any time, day or night, seven (7) days a week; and 
5.  Maintain a written record or log listing the dates of customer complaints, identifying the subscribers, and describing the nature of the complaint and when and what action was taken by the grantee in response thereto. Such record shall be kept at the grantee's local office for a period of five (5) years from the date when the system is first energized and shall be available for inspection during regular business hours, without further notice or demand, by the city manager. 
D.  Municipal Service. 
1.  With respect to the local government channel, the grantee shall, at the request of the city manager and upon City reimbursement of the grantee's actual cost, provide use of the grantee's studio, equipment and technical services for the production of live and videotape municipal programs, subject to the scheduling requirements of the grantee. 
2.  With respect to the basic television services, the grantee shall provide all subscriber services and a tie-in connection, without cost, when the system passes such facilities and as designated by the council, to: 
a.  Public schools and community colleges within the City; and 
b.  Buildings owned and controlled by the City and used for public purposes and not for residential use, fire and police stations excepted. 
E.  Compatibility and Connectibility. It is the desire of the City that all cable television systems franchised pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall, insofar as financially and technically possible, be compatible one with another and with systems adjacent to the City. 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
5.08.260 - Equal opportunity employment—Affirmative action. 
In carrying out the construction, maintenance and operation of the cable television system, the grantee shall not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, creed, color, sex or national origin. 
The grantee shall take affirmative action to ensure that applicants for employment are employed, and that employees are treated during employment, without regard to their race, creed, color, sex or national origin. Such action shall include, but not be limited to, the following: employment, upgrading, demotion or transfer, recruitment or recruitment advertising, layoff or termination, rates of pay or other forms of compensation, and selection for training, including apprenticeship. 
The grantee shall post in conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for employment, notices setting forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination provision. 
The grantee shall, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the grantee, state that all qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, creed, color, sex or national origin. 
The grantee shall incorporate the provisions of this section in all of its contracts for work relative to the construction, maintenance and operation of the cable television system, other than contracts for standard commercial supplies or raw materials, and shall require all of its contractors for such work to incorporate such requirements in all subcontracts for such work. 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
5.08.270 - Miscellaneous provisions. 
A.  A franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to provide service within the City shall authorize and permit the grantee to solicit, sell, distribute and make a charge to subscribers within the City for connections to the cable television system of the grantee and shall also authorize and permit the grantee to traverse any portion of the City in order to provide service outside the City. 
B.  A franchise, easement, license or other permit granted to anyone other than the grantee to traverse any portion of the City in order to provide service outside the City shall not authorize nor permit such person to solicit, sell, distribute or make any charge to subscribers within the City, nor to render any service or connect any subscriber within the City to the cable television service system of the grantee. 
C.  No franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall ever be given any value by any court or other authority, public or private, in any proceeding of any nature or character wherein or whereby the City shall be a party or affected therein or thereby. 
D.  The grantee shall be subject to all of the provisions of the other laws, rules, regulations and specifications of the City heretofore or hereafter adopted, including, but not limited to, those pertaining to works and activities in, on, over, under and about streets. Any privilege claimed under any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter in any street or other public property shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the street or other public property. The grantee shall also be subject to the provisions of the general laws of the State, or as hereafter amended, when applicable to the exercise of any privilege contained in any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, those pertaining to works and activities in and about State highways. 
E.  The grantee shall be prohibited from directly or indirectly doing any of the following: 
1.  Engaging in the business of selling at retail, leasing, renting, repairing or servicing television sets or radios; 
2.  Imposing a fee or charge for any service or repair to subscriber-owned receiving devices, except for the connection of its service or for the determination by the grantee of the quality of its signal to the recipients thereof; 
3.  Soliciting or referring, or causing or permitting the solicitation or referral, of any subscriber to persons engaged in any business prohibited by the provisions of this chapter to be engaged in by the grantee; and 
4.  Providing information concerning the viewing patterns of identifiable individual subscribers to any person, group or organization for any purpose. 
F.  If the Federal Communications Commission, or the Public Utilities Commission of the State, or any other federal or state body or agency shall now or hereafter exercise any paramount jurisdiction over the subject matter of any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, then, to the extent such jurisdiction shall preempt or preclude the exercise of like jurisdiction by the City, the jurisdiction of the City shall cease and no longer exist. 
The preemption or preclusion of the exercise by the City or any of its police power shall not diminish, impair, alter or affect any contractual benefit to the City or the grantee nor any contractual obligation of the grantee under any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
Any and all minimum standards governing the operation of the grantee and any and all minimum rates, ratios and charges set forth in this chapter or in any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, existing now and at any time in the future, including such time as any paramount jurisdiction shall preempt or preclude that of the City, and any and all rights, powers, privileges and authorities of the City to determine, establish or fix any of the same, are each and all declared by the City and by any grantee accepting any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to be contractual in nature and to be for the benefit of the City. 
G.  When not otherwise set forth in this chapter, all matters required by the provisions of this chapter to be filed with the City shall be filed with the city clerk. 
H.  No person, firm or corporation within the service area of the grantee, and where trunk lines are in place, shall be refused service; provided, however, the grantee shall not be required to provide service to any subscriber who does not pay the applicable connection fee or service charge. 
I.  Before providing cable television service to any subscriber, the grantee shall provide a written notice to the subscriber substantially as follows: "The subscriber is hereby notified that in providing cable television service the grantee is making use of public rights-of-way within the City of Coalinga and that the continued use of such rights-of-way is in no way guaranteed. In the event the continued use of such rights-of-way is denied to the grantee for any reason, the grantee will make every reasonable effort to provide service over alternate routes. By accepting cable television service, the subscriber agrees he will make no claim nor undertake any action against the City of Huron, or its officers or employees, if the service to be provided hereunder is interrupted or discontinued." 
J.  The form of the grantee's contract with the subscriber shall be subject to the approval of the City. 
K.  The grantee shall pay to the City a sum of money sufficient to reimburse the City for all publication expenses incurred by it in connection with the granting of a franchise pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Such payment shall be made within thirty (30) days after the City furnishes the grantee with a written statement of such expenses. 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
5.08.280 - Violations. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain within any public street in the City, within any other public property of the City, or within any privately owned area within the City which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the City any equipment or facility for distributing any television signal or radio signal through a cable television system unless a franchise authorizing such use of such street or property or area has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to make or use any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchised cable television system within the City for the purpose of enabling himself or others to receive or use any television signal, radio signal, picture, program or sound without payment to the owner of such system. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner, to wilfully tamper with, remove or injure any cable, wire or equipment used for the distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound. 
(Ord. 171 (part), 1980)  
Chapter 5.12 - CARD ROOMS 
Sections: 
 
5.12.010 - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator, or any person having charge, control or management of, any establishment, social club or place of business, open to the public or to which an admission fee is charged, to conduct, operate or participate in any card game, or to permit or suffer upon or in such premises the conduct or operation of any such card game or participation therein by others, unless such operator or other person having charge, control or management of said establishment, club or place of business, shall have first obtained a card room license from the City of Huron to conduct such card game. 
(Ord. 281 § 1, 1992)  
5.12.020 - Application for license. 
A.  An applicant for a card room license shall submit his application to the chief of police of the City of Huron which application shall be under oath, and shall include, among other things, the true names and addresses of all persons financially interested in the business. The term "persons financially interested" shall include all persons who share in the profits of the business, on the basis of gross or net revenue. The past criminal record, if any, of the applicant and of all persons financially interested in the business shall be shown on such application. The application shall also be accompanied by fingerprints and recent photograph, and an amount equal to the current fingerprint process fee required by the State of California and the City of Huron, of the applicant and of persons financially interested in the business. A license may be issued only to citizens or legal residents of the United States. 
B.  Chief of police shall deny any applicant for a card room license a license to operate such card room if: 
1.  Said applicant has previously been convicted of a felony; or 
2.  Said applicant has previously been convicted of any narcotics violation; or 
3.  Said applicant is not in the opinion of the chief of police a fit and proper person to operate a card room; 
4.  Said card room is to be located within any area of the City of Huron which is wholly residential; and in the opinion of the chief of police, the issuance of said card room permit would tend to cause a police problem or public nuisance; 
5.  Said card room is to be located within six hundred (600) feet of a public school, church, hospital or any other public facility where the presence of said card room might tend to promote a demoralizing effect, or cause a police problem, or create a public nuisance; 
6.  In an establishment serving alcoholic beverages, if the card room is not separated by a barrier wall at least four and one half (4½) feet high and not to exceed five (5) feet from the floor. One (1) opening in the barrier is allowed for adequate ingress and egress. 
C.  The action of the chief of police in denying such a license on the basis of subsection B(3), (4) or (5) of this section shall be subject to an appeal to the council. Notice of such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) days after the denial of said license. Upon the failure to file such notice within the ten (10) day period, the action of the chief of police in denying such license shall be final and conclusive. 
D.  Such card room license shall be prominently posted in the card room area. 
(Ord. 281 § 2, 1992)  
5.12.030 - Employee work permits. 
A.  Card room employees must obtain a work permit from the chief of police. "Card room employees," for the purpose of this chapter, are defined as dealers, overseers and others directly connected with the operation and supervision of the card tables and excluding waitresses, bartenders, culinary workers and others not connected with such operation and supervision. Applications for such work permits shall be submitted under oath and contain the past criminal record, if any, of the applicant and such information as may be deemed by the chief of police as necessary to determine whether the applicant is a proper person to be issued a card room work permit. The application shall also be accompanied by fingerprints and recent photograph of the applicant. A work permit shall be issued only to citizens or legal residents of the United States. The chief of police shall deny to such applicant a work permit if: 
1.  Said applicant has previously been convicted of a felony; or 
2.  Said applicant has previously been convicted of any narcotics violation, or violation of gambling laws or ordinances; or 
3.  Said applicant is not in the opinion of the chief of police a fit and proper person to engage in such work. 
Each application for a work permit shall be accompanied by a fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00), and an additional amount equal to the current fee required by the State of California and the City of Huron to process applicant's fingerprints. The fee shall not be returned in the event that said work permit is refused, revoked or suspended as hereinafter provided. The permit shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of issue. The date of expiration shall be prominently displayed on the face of the permit. The holder of such permit shall not be restricted as to place of employment. 
B.  The action of the chief of police in denying such a work permit on the basis of the applicant not being a fit and proper person shall be subject to an appeal to the council. Notice of such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) days after the denial of said work permit. Upon failure to file such notice within the ten (10) day period, the action of the chief of police in denying such work permit shall be final and conclusive. 
C.  Such card room work permit shall be prominently displayed in the card room when the holder of such permit is working. 
(Ord. 281 § 3, 1992)  
5.12.040 - Suspension and revocation. 
The chief of police shall have the right for cause to revoke or suspend any card room license or card room work permit issued hereunder and to take possession of such permits. Any of the grounds upon which the chief of police shall be required to refuse to issue an initial card room license or card room work permit shall also constitute grounds for revocation or suspension of such license or work permit. The action of the chief of police in this respect shall be subject to an appeal to the council. Notice of such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) days after the revocation or suspension. Upon failure to file such notice within the ten (10) day license or work permit shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 281 § 4, 1992)  
5.12.050 - License nontransferable. 
No person shall be granted a license to conduct more than one (1) cardroom. No card room license shall be assignable or transferable. 
(Ord. 281 § 5, 1992)  
5.12.060 - Time card rooms may remain open. 
All card rooms located on premises where alcoholic beverages are sold and which are not completely sealed off therefrom shall be closed at two a.m., and shall remain closed until six a.m. 
(Ord. 281 § 6, 1992)  
5.12.070 - Intoxication. 
A.  No person who is in a state of intoxication shall be permitted in any card room. 
B.  No dealer or person in charge of the premises shall allow any intoxicated person in the card room. 
(Ord. 281 § 7, 1992)  
5.12.080 - Minors. 
No person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be permitted in or about any card room. 
(Ord. 281 § 8, 1992)  
5.12.090 - License fee for card rooms. 
Every person conducting, carrying on or managing a card room, or permitting the conducting or operation of any card game on premises open to the public, or to which an admission fee is charged, as described in Section 5.12.010, whether the said room is used, maintained or operated in connection with any other business or not, there shall be collected the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) annually, payable in advance, plus an additional license fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) annually, payable in advance for each table in said card room or rooms. These amounts shall not be subject to pro-ration. 
(Ord. 281 § 9, 1992)  
5.12.100 - Number of card rooms may be limited. 
The city council may, by resolution, in the best interest of the public welfare, limit the number of licenses issued under Section 5.12.090. No more than one (1) card room shall be licensed for each business establishment. No more than two (2) card tables shall be allowed in any card room. 
Each establishment having a card room open to the public shall prominently post signs, in English and Spanish language, stating the fees charged for playing cards in such card room. 
(Ord. 281 § 10, 1992)  
5.12.110 - State law violations. 
The council of the City of Huron declares that it is not the intention of this chapter to permit the licensing of any card room for the playing of any game prohibited by the laws of the State, including but not limited to, those games enumerated in Section 330 of the Penal Code of the State of California, which section includes banking and percentage games. 
(Ord. 281 § 11, 1992)  
5.12.120 - Additional requirements. 
When applying for a card room license, applicant shall provide proof of a current fire inspection for the premises; if alterations are to be made to the premises, all building permits and inspections shall be carried out as specified by the Uniform Building Code; all city fees, including but not limited to, sewer, water, garbage, business license, utility tax accounts, and booking fees must be kept current; all provisions covered in the general application for the card room as specified by the Department of Justice, Bureau of Investigation, Gaming Registration Program, shall be included in this chapter; and a complete copy of the applicant's application for initial registration submitted to the department of justice will be submitted to the chief of police at the time of applying for a city permit. 
(Ord. 281 § 13, 1992)  
5.12.130 - Violations—Penalty. 
Any violation of this chapter shall be an infraction and punishable by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a first offense, one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a second offense, and one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for a third offense. 
(Ord. 281 § 12, 1992)  
Chapter 5.16 - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS 
Sections: 
 
5.16.010 - Permit required. 
Except as herein provided, no person, by house-to-house canvass, or in residences, apartment houses or hotels, or business buildings, or in any public building or place or on the public streets of the City either personally, or by telephone, or in any other manner, shall solicit memberships, advertising, money, property or anything of value or financial assistance of any kind, or sell any article, or service, or tickets of admission to any performance, athletic event, card party, benefit, lecture, picnic, dance, ball or other place of amusement, or entertainment whatsoever, on representation that such solicitation is for a charitable, patriotic or philanthropic purpose, or for the benefit of any person unless such person shall first have obtained a permit therefrom from the city council. 
(Ord. 73 § 1, 1958)  
5.16.020 - Permit application. 
Any person desiring a permit to so solicit funds shall make written application to the city council at least thirty-one (31) days prior to the commencement of the proposed solicitation. At the next council meeting after the filing of any such application the council may consider any such application or it may defer any action thereon pending such investigation and recommendation as the council may require and after such investigation and recommendation has been made, the council may grant or deny such application. For good cause, the council may allow the filing of the application less than thirty-one (31) days prior to the effective date of the permit applied for. 
(Ord. 73 § 2, 1958)  
5.16.030 - Contents of application. 
Each application made for such a permit shall state the name of the person or organization by whom such solicitation is to be made, and the names of the persons who will solicit or direct the solicitation of such funds. The purpose for which such solicitation is made, the use to be made of the funds derived therefrom and such other information as the council may from time to time desire shall be stated in such application. Every application shall state the dates between which such solicitation will be made. 
The applicant shall furnish a statement of the estimated cost of the solicitation, including a percentage statement as to the cost with relation to the amount to be collected. 
Each agent, solicitor or promoter shall be fingerprinted by the police department, and the signature of each such person shall accompany the application, except that these requirements may be waived by the police department in the case of permanent residents of the City of Huron. 
(Ord. 73 § 3, 1958)  
5.16.040 - Financial statement. 
The council may in its discretion require the applicant or person by or for whom such solicitation is to be made to render such financial statement as it may deem necessary to show that said funds will be devoted to the purpose for which such solicitation is to be made. 
(Ord. 73 § 4, 1958)  
5.16.050 - Waiver allowed when. 
The city council may, in its discretion waive any or all of the requirements of Sections 5.16.020 through 5.16.040, when the applicant is known to be a bona fide charitable organization of recognized integrity and standing reputation as such. 
(Ord. 73 § 5, 1958)  
5.16.060 - Issuance denial. 
The city council may deny the issuance of any permit if satisfied that such purpose or object of such solicitation is not worthy or not compatible with the public interest or is satisfied that such solicitation will result in a multiplicity of solicitations for the same or similar causes or purpose, or that the applicant and/or other person to be engaged in such solicitations are not of good character, or if the total costs and expenses of such solicitation are disproportionate to the sum proposed to be collected thereby. 
(Ord. 73 § 6, 1958)  
5.16.070 - Time limit. 
No permit shall be issued for a longer period than one (1) year and only for such a period reasonably required to complete such solicitation. Said permit may include the applicant together with its agents and representatives named in said application. 
(Ord. 73 § 7, 1958)  
5.16.080 - Permit contents and display. 
Persons to whom a permit is issued, shall be supplied for each individual solicitor, a card identifying the solicitor, indicating the date for which solicitation has been authorized and containing a statement that the solicitation is being made pursuant to a valid permit authorized by the city council under the provisions of this chapter, which card shall be displayed to any person upon request. 
(Ord. 73 § 8, 1958)  
5.16.090 - Exemptions. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to solicitations made upon premises owned or occupied by the organization upon whose behalf such solicitation is made; nor to solicitation for the relief of specific individuals specified by name at the time of the solicitation, where the solicitor represents in each case that the entire amount collected without any deduction whatever shall be turned over to the named beneficiary, nor shall it be applicable to any corporation or any unincorporated association soliciting contributions solely from persons who are members thereof at the time of such solicitation. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to churches, fraternal organizations, clubs or societies which have been in existence in, and which have regularly maintained headquarters or a place of worship in the City of Huron for a period of at least five (5) years next preceding the date on which such activity shall be begun. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following nationally known organizations, their good character and reputation already being commonly known: The American Red Cross, Boy Scouts of America, Girl Scouts of America, Salvation Army, and the National Foundation of Infantile Paralysis. The city council by resolution may from time to time add to this list of organizations. 
(Ord. 73 § 8, 1958)  
5.16.100 - Permit revocation and suspension. 
The city council may, upon written complaint filed with it, or upon its own motion, if it be found that any person soliciting under a license issued under the provisions of this chapter of any representative of such solicitor, is misrepresenting in regard thereto, or is using such permit as an endorsement of such solicitation, suspend or revoke such permit. 
(Ord. 73 § 10, 1958)  
5.16.110 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation, who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be imprisoned in the City jail not to exceed six months or shall suffer both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 73 § 11, 1958)  
Chapter 5.17 - BINGO GAMES 
Sections: 
 
5.17.010 - Definitions. 
In this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise: 
"Bingo" means a game of chance operated for a fee in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card that conform to numbers or symbols selected at random. 
"Eligible organization" means an organization referred to in Penal Code § 326.5, including but not limited to any corporation incorporated in this state, or in any other state, as a non-profit corporation, and includes a mobile home park association, senior citizen organization or charitable organizations affiliated with any school district or any public entity. 
( Ord. No. 370 , § 2, 6-15-2016)  
5.17.020 - Law governing. 
An eligible organization may conduct bingo games in compliance with this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 370 , § 2, 6-15-2016)  
5.17.030 - License required. 
Before conducting a bingo game an eligible organization shall obtain a license from the city manager. Applications shall: (1) be made on a form prescribed by the city manager and shall include proof that the organization is an eligible organization as defined in this chapter; (2) date or periodic description of days when games will held; (3) times of the day when games will be held; (4) place where games will held; (5) number and value of prizes to be offered; and (6) other information prescribed on the form provided by the city manager. 
( Ord. No. 370 , § 2, 6-15-2016)  
5.17.040 - Fee. 
The city council may, by resolution, prescribe a license fee in an amount that covers the cost of issuing the permit and administering of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 370 , § 2, 6-15-2016)  
5.17.050 - Investigation. 
Upon receiving an application, the city manager shall make an investigation of the applicant or of the individual named in the application in order to determine whether the license may be issued. 
( Ord. No. 370 , § 2, 6-15-2016)  
5.17.060 - Issuance or denial. 
Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the city manager shall either issue the license or deny it in writing stating the reasons for the denial. 
( Ord. No. 370 , § 2, 6-15-2016)  
5.17.070 - Suspension or revocation. 
The city manager may suspend or revoke a license for violation of this chapter for a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact made either in the application for the license, or in the promotion, supervision, operation, conduct or staffing of a bingo game. 
( Ord. No. 370 , § 2, 6-15-2016)  
5.17.080 - Notice of intent and show cause hearing. 
If the city manager determines that a bingo license should be suspended or revoked, he or she shall serve on the licensee notice of his or her intent, with the city manager's reasons. The notice shall provide for a suspension or revocation of the license seven days after service of the notice, unless the licensee arranges to appear at a hearing before the city manager and show cause why such action should not be taken. 
( Ord. No. 370 , § 2, 6-15-2016)  
5.17.090 - Summary, suspension or revocation. 
The city manager may immediately suspend or revoke a bingo license upon the licensee's (1) refusal to permit the entry of a peace officer to investigate the conduct of the bingo game; or (2) refusal to permit the city manager to review or audit the organization's records relating to the conduct of bingo games under the license and relating to the special account required by Penal Code §326.5(j). Within forty-eight (48) hours of the taking of such action, the city manager shall serve on the licensee a written statement of the reasons for the action and shall set a show cause hearing on reinstatement of the license within five days of the request to do so by the licensee. 
( Ord. No. 370 , § 2, 6-15-2016)  
5.17.100 - Decision. 
The city manager shall issue his/her written decision within seven days after the conclusion of a show cause hearing. 
( Ord. No. 370 , § 2, 6-15-2016)  
5.17.110 - Appeal. 
The city manager's action taken under any provision of this chapter may be appealed to the city council by any person. 
( Ord. No. 370 , § 2, 6-15-2016)  
5.17.120 - Decision on appeal. 
In order to grant or reinstate a license upon appeal, the city council shall find that the applicant meets the qualifications prescribed in Penal Code § 326.5, has not committed an act constituting grounds for revocation or suspension and is not otherwise in violation of applicable statutes or this ordinance. The city council may impose reasonable conditions on the issuance of a C license that is granted pursuant to an appeal. 
( Ord. No. 370 , § 2, 6-15-2016)  
5.17.130 - License not transferrable. 
A license authorizing a specific charitable organization, or other eligible organization to conduct a bingo game on behalf of the charitable organization or other eligible organization may be used for that purpose at any location within the city, including but not limited to city-owned property leased or occupied by the charitable organization or other eligible organization with the consent of the city. The license is not transferrable. The license is a temporary permit to act within this chapter and other applicable laws and regulations and is valid for the calendar year in which it is issued. 
( Ord. No. 370 , § 2, 6-15-2016)  
5.17.140 - License to be displayed. 
The licensee shall display the license at the authorized location(s) during the game(s). 
( Ord. No. 370 , § 2, 6-15-2016)  
5.17.150 - Location of games. 
The bingo games must be held on property owned or leased by the eligible organization and used by it as an office or for the performance of the purpose for which the organization exists, or on city-owned property pursuant to a lease or consent by the city for the eligible organization to occupy city property. 
( Ord. No. 370 , § 2, 6-15-2016)  
5.17.160 - Participants. 
A.  Public. A bingo game must be open to the public and not limited to members of the eligible organization. 
B.  Minors. It is unlawful for a minor to participate in a bingo game. 
C.  Physical Presence. It is unlawful for a person to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the game. 
( Ord. No. 370 , § 2, 6-15-2016)  
5.17.170 - Operation of game. 
A.  Only the eligible organization or a member of the eligible organization may operate the bingo game or participate in the promotion supervision or other phase of the game. No member may receive a profit, wage or a salary from the bingo game. 
B.  No individual, corporation, partnership or legal entity other than the eligible organization may have any financial interest in the conduct of bingo games, 
( Ord. No. 370 , § 2, 6-15-2016)  
5.17.180 - Accounting. 
The money derived from bingo shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with another fund or account. 
( Ord. No. 370 , § 2, 6-15-2016)  
5.17.190 - Penalties. 
It is a misdemeanor for a person to receive a profit, wage or salary for the operation of a bingo game. Any violation of this chapter except violations designated as misdemeanors are infractions. The first violation is punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). The second violation in a one-year period is punishable by a fine not to exceed four hundred dollars ($400.00). The third and subsequent violations in the same year are punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The city may bring an injunction to enjoin violation of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 370 , § 2, 6-15-2016)  
Chapter 5.20 - HOTELS AND LODGING HOUSES 
Sections: 
 
5.20.010 - Register to be maintained. 
Every person, firm or corporation within the City of Huron, who keeps, maintains or controls a hotel or lodging house, shall provide, keep and maintain a public register, and shall require every person who rents or occupies a room in such hotel or lodging house to write in said register his name, place of residence, license number of automobile, if any, and the state in which such vehicle is registered. The registration as aforesaid shall be made upon a page of such register properly dated with reference to the day of the year, month and week, and at the time the person rents or arranges to occupy a room. 
(Ord. 44 § 1, 1954)  
5.20.020 - Register subject to inspection. 
Such hotel or lodging house register so kept shall be open to the public at any and all reasonable hours, and the pages thereof shall, upon demand, be open for inspection or investigation by any member of the police department, or other peace officer of the City of Huron, immediately upon demand having been made by such peace officer. 
(Ord. 44 § 2, 1954)  
5.20.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment for a period of not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 44 § 3, 1954)  
Chapter 5.24 - ITINERANT PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 
Sections: 
 
5.24.010 - License required. 
No person except a person having a fixed and permanent place of business in the City, and duly licensed to engage in such business at such fixed and permanent place of business under the provisions of this chapter shall: 
A.  Engage in the business of hawking, peddling or vending goods, wares, merchandise, periodicals, reading matter, encyclopedias, pictures, foodstuffs, (except bakery goods, ice cream, etc., milk and tamales and enchiladas as provided for in Sections 5.04.640 and 5.04.880), services, (except laundry and dry cleaning as provided for in Section 5.04.580), advertising or any other article or thing of any kind or nature whatsoever, from door to door, house to house, or building to building, or from or upon the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the City, or from any hotel, motel, rooming house or trailer house, or other enclosure or place, on foot or from or in any vehicle of any nature whatsoever, either by sample or by taking or soliciting orders for immediate delivery or for delivery in the future; or 
B.  Engage in the business of photography, portraiture, photochromography, operating a photograph studio, taking pictures or any other branch of the photographic art whatsoever, or the rendering or performing of any other skill, profession or service, whether from door to door, house to house or building to building, or from or upon the streets, alleys or other public places of the City, or from any motel, hotel, rooming house, trailer house, enclosure or other place on foot, or from any type of vehicle whatsoever; or 
C.  Engage in the business of soliciting orders for photographs, peddling tickets, certificates or other documents intended to apply in whole or in part payment for photographs, frames or other photographic merchandise, or other materials or in any other manner whatsoever engage in the business of or soliciting orders for any branch of the photographic art in any respect, including copying, retouching, enlarging or coloring of photographs or photograph negatives and prints, or for the rendering or performing of any other skill, profession or service; without first having applied for a license to engage in such businesses in conformity with the requirements of this chapter and without first there having been issued the license. No person shall be relieved from the provisions hereof by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer having a fixed place of business in the City, or by conducting a temporary, transient or itinerant business in connection with or as part of or in the name of any such local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer having a fixed place of business within the city. 
(Ord. 116 Art. 3 § 101, 1971)  
5.24.020 - Application for license—Application fee—Information to be shown. 
All applicants for licenses during the provisions of the preceding section must pay to the finance officer an application fee of five dollars ($5.00) and must make application therefore to the finance officer of the City upon forms provided by the city, which forms shall require the following information from the applicant: 
A.  Full name, age, permanent business address, local business address and residence address of the applicant, if an individual, or its authorized representative, if other than an individual applicant; the nature of the applicant, whether individual, partnership, firm, corporation or otherwise; and the full names, ages, residences and occupations of each person who shall actually vend, solicit or otherwise engage in any act whatsoever within the City required to be licensed on behalf of or for the applicant, whether as principal, agent, servant, employee, associate, partner, representative or otherwise. 
B.  A specific description of the article or service proposed to be sold, vended or performed, whether for immediate or future delivery or performance and the proposed method of delivery and performance, including information as to whether such sales will be made by quantity, weight, quality, package or otherwise, and whether delivery or performance will be made personally or by mail or in what other manner. 
(Ord. 116 Art. 3 § 102, 1971)  
5.24.030 - Documents to accompany application. 
In the event any form, contract, order blank, warranty, agreement or other written or printed document is to be signed by the purchaser or person receiving the property or service or is involved in any manner otherwise in the business of the applicant for a license as an itinerant peddler, solicitor, vendor or photographer, the application form must be accompanied by a copy of such form, contract, order blank, warranty, agreement or other written or printed document. 
(Ord. 116 Art. 3 § 103, 1971)  
5.24.040 - Photograph required of applicant. 
Each application for a license as required by Section 5.24.020 must be accompanied by two prints of a recent photograph of each individual person who shall actually engage in vending, selling, soliciting, peddling or doing any other act required to be licensed, whether as principal, agent, servant, employee, associate, partner, representative or otherwise, which photographs shall not exceed one (1) inch square in size and shall be full front views of the face and head only of such persons. 
(Ord. 116 Art. 3 § 104, 1971)  
5.24.050 - Cash deposit or bond required. 
In each case where it appears that the applicant will or may demand, accept or receive payments or deposits of money or property in advance of final delivery or performance of services, the application shall be accompanied by a cash deposit of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by a bond to the City in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) issued by a surety company authorized to do business within the State. Such bond shall be conditioned for making final delivery of goods, wares or merchandise or for final performance of services to be performed in accordance with the order, agreement or contract entered into, and failing therein the advance payment or deposit on such order shall be refunded or returned. Such cash deposit or bond, as the case may be, shall remain in full force and effect and be retained for a period of ninety (90) days after the expiration of any such license or the termination of any action upon such bond or deposit of which the finance officer shall have been notified, unless sooner released by the finance officer. 
(Ord. 116 Art. 3 § 105, 1971)  
5.24.060 - License fee required. 
Each application for a license shall be accompanied by the required license fee. 
(Ord. 116 Art. 3 § 106, 1971)  
5.24.070 - Fingerprints required. 
At the time of making the application for a license, each individual person, whether as principal, agent, servant or employee, who shall actually engage in selling, soliciting, vending or doing any other act covered under the provisions of the above-mentioned section, shall present himself at the office of the chief of police of the City for the purpose of being fingerprinted and supplying routine information required on the fingerprinting forms provided without expense by the City, including the physical characteristics of each person, identifying marks or scars, name, age, address and signature. Such fingerprint records are to be taken in triplicate and each individual so presenting himself is advised that the City reserves the right to retain one (1) of such fingerprint records in its files for permanent safekeeping, and to send one (1) such fingerprint record to the Federal Bureau of Investigation of the Department of Justice at Washington, D.C. and to the Criminal Investigation Department of the California Department of Justice at Sacramento, California, for the purpose of filing. No fingerprint records will be returned in the event the license applied for is not issued or is subsequently suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. 116 Art. 3 § 107, 1971)  
5.24.080 - Exemptions from payment of fee—Compliance with other provisions of chapter. 
The following individual applicants shall be exempted from the payment of the license fees, but must comply otherwise fully with the applicable requirements hereof as to applications, fingerprinting, bonds and pictures: 
A.  Every individual person exempted as an honorable discharged, or honorable relieved soldier, sailor or marine under the provisions of Section 16001 of the Business and Professions Code of the State. Such exemptions shall apply only to an individual applicant engaged in peddling, vending or soliciting for and by himself alone and shall not apply to any individual applicant, otherwise entitled to such exemption, who employs agents, servants or employees in such activities, nor apply to any other type of applicant, of which a person, otherwise entitled to such an exemption, is an officer, member, agent or employee. All claims for such exemptions shall be referred to the veterans' service officer of the county for investigation and recommendation; 
B.  Every individual person selling and vending farm fruits and vegetables and meat grown and produced by his own labor on real property belonging to or possessed by him; 
C.  Every applicant claiming to be entitled to exemption from the payment of any license provided for in this chapter upon the ground that such license casts a burden upon his right to engage in commerce with foreign nations or among the several states, or conflicts with the United States Constitution or the regulations of the United States Congress respecting interstate commerce or any other matter, shall file a verified statement with the finance officer of the City disclosing the interstate or other character of his business entitled to such exemption. Such statement shall state the name and address of the company or firm or group for which the orders are to be solicited or secured or the sale made, the name of the nearest local or state manager, if any, and his address, the kind of goods, wares or merchandise to be delivered, the place from which the same are to be shipped or delivered, the method of solicitation or taking orders, the location of any warehouse, factory or plant in the state, the method of delivery, the name and address of the applicant and any other facts bearing on the issues of exemption. All claims for such exemptions shall be referred to the city attorney for investigation and recommendation. 
(Ord. 116 Art. 3 § 108, 1971)  
5.24.090 - Issuance of license and identification cards—Investigation by police department. 
The character and fitness of every applicant shall first be investigated by the police department before any license or identification card shall be issued. After conducting such investigation, if the police department finds that the character, reputation or fitness of any such applicant is good, the department shall notify the finance officer, who shall issue the license and identification card in accordance with this section. If, after conducting such an investigation, the police department finds that the character, reputation or fitness of any such applicant is bad, then the police department shall recommend the denial of such license and identification card, which recommendation shall be transmitted to the finance officer. The finance officer shall thereupon notify the applicant of such fact. 
Upon the receipt of the application accompanied by the required documents, the approval of the police department and appropriate fees, if any, the finance officer shall issue a business license to the applicant and individual identification cards to all persons who shall actually solicit for or on behalf of the applicant, whether as principal or otherwise. Such identification card shall have affixed to it one (1) of the pictures filed by the applicant, and shall contain reference to the issuance of the license, a description of the individual to whom issued, date of expiration, and the signature of the individual to whom issued. In case the applicant claims an exemption from the payment of license fees under the provisions of Section 5.24.080, the finance director officer shall issue such license only after he has reviewed the reports and recommendations of the County veterans' service officer, the agricultural commissioner of the County or the city attorney, as the case may be, and is satisfied therefrom that the applicant is entitled to the exemption. 
(Ord. 116 Art. 3 § 109, 1971)  
5.24.100 - License and identification card to be carried on person. 
Each applicant for a license required by Section 5.24.010, or if other than an individual, its representative, must at all times retain in his possession the business license issued by the finance officer and each person issued an identification card under Section 5.24.090, must retain the same in his personal possession at all times while engaged in the business so licensed within the City and must produce and show the same on the demand of any person solicited or of any police officer or official of the City. No licensee or person issued an identification card shall alter, remove or obliterate any entry made upon such license or card, or deface such license or card in any way. Each license and card shall be personal and not assignable or transferable, nor shall any license or card be used by any person other than the licensee or the person for whom issued. 
(Ord. 116 Art. 3 § 110, 1971)  
5.24.110 - Conditions and regulations applicable to licenses. 
The following conditions and regulations shall also apply to the exercises of the privileges granted by licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter in addition to those set forth in other parts of this chapter or in the general ordinances of the City: 
A.  Shouting, Calling Wares, Etc. No person acting under authority of any license issued under this chapter shall shout or call his wares in a loud, boisterous or unseemly manner, or to the disturbance of citizens or dwellers in the City. 
B.  Identification by Comparing Signature With That on License. Every licensee or holder of an identification card upon the request of any police officer or other officer of the City shall sign his name for comparison with the signature upon the license or card or the signature upon the license application. 
C.  Orders to be Written in Duplicate, Etc. Any person acting under authority of any license issued under this chapter who solicits orders for future delivery shall write each order at least in duplicate, plainly stating the quantity of each article or commodity ordered, the price to be paid therefore, the total amount ordered and the amount to be paid on or after delivery, and the address of the seller. One (1) copy of such order shall be given to the customer. Any contract calling for future delivery of merchandise or for future performance of services may be cancelled by the customer by giving written notice of cancellation to the seller within seventy-two (72) hours after the customer signs the contract. 
D.  Loitering on Streets, Etc., or Private Property. No licensee or his agent, servant or employee shall stop or remain in any one place upon the streets, alleys or public places in the city longer than necessary to make a sale to a customer wishing to buy, except by prior permission of the finance officer, nor shall any licensee or his agent, servant or employee stop or remain upon any private property within the City without the consent of the owner thereof or some person having authority to grant such permission. 
(Ord. 116 Art. 3 § 111, 1971)  
5.24.120 - Revocation and suspension. 
In the event that the chief of police of the City has reasonable cause to believe and does believe that any licensee or other person employed by or representing such licensee is violating any of the provisions of this chapter or any other law or ordinance relating to the business of the licensee, he shall have power to and shall be authorized to suspend such license and all identification cards so issued. If no written appeal is filed with the city clerk protesting such suspension with two (2) days of the date of such suspension, such suspension shall be deemed permanent and all such licenses or identification cards issued thereunder shall be deemed revoked. 
(Ord. 116 Art. 3 § 112, 1971)  
5.24.130 - Appeals to city council. 
In the event that any applicant desires to appeal from any order, denial of exemption, order of suspension, or any other ruling of the finance officer, the chief of police or any other officer of the City, made under the provisions of this chapter dealing with itinerant peddlers, solicitors, vendors, photographers and others, such applicant or any other person aggrieved thereby shall file written notice of such appeal with the city clerk and such matters shall be heard at the next regular meeting of the city council, at which time the city council shall hear and receive evidence, written and oral upon all matters involved. The decision of the city council shall be final as to all parties concerned. 
(Ord. 116 Art. 3 § 113, 1971)  
5.24.140 - Ringing doorbells where "No peddlers" signs posted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person described in Section 5.24.010 to perform or attempt to perform the acts described in such section by ringing the doorbell or knocking at the door or otherwise calling attention to his presence of or at any residence whereon a sign bearing the words "No Peddlers," or words of similar import is painted or affixed so as to be exposed to public view, and no such person, described in Section 5.24.010 shall perform or attempt to perform any of the acts described in such section in any building, structure or place of business whereon or wherein a sign bearing the words "No Peddlers" or words of similar import, is painted or affixed so as to be exposed to public view. 
(Ord. 116 Art. 3 § 114, 1971)  
Chapter 5.28 - PUBLIC DANCES 
Sections: 
 
5.28.010 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, have the meaning ascribed to them herein, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
"Alcoholic beverage" means and includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquor or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which contains one-half (½) percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances. 
"Health officer" shall include any official of Fresno County performing services for the City of Huron pursuant to the contract between the City of Huron and the County of Fresno. 
"License collector" shall be the city clerk. 
"Live music" is music other than that furnished by mechanical means, such as by juke boxes. 
"Public cafe dance" means any dance incidentally conducted upon the premises of a bona fide hotel, restaurant, cafe, cafeteria, tavern or similar public place. 
"Public dance" means any dance to which the public may gain admission or is entitled to attend. 
(Ord. 278 § 2 (part), 1992)  
5.28.020 - License required. 
Any person conducting a public dance or public cafe dance permitting such dance to be conducted on premises under his control without first having obtained a license as approved by the chief of police, therefore from the City pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
No license shall be issued to any person/business whose sewer, water, garbage, business license, utility tax accounts, and booking fees with the City is past due. 
(Ord. 278 § 2 (part), 1992)  
5.28.030 - License fee. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the license fee for a dance shall be the amount of one hundred and twenty-five dollars ($125.00) per dance payable upon issuance of such license. The license fee shall be payable to the license collector no later than four (4) business days prior to the scheduled start of the dance. 
B.  Any fee paid pursuant to this section may be refunded, provided that the license holder provides that chief of police with notification of the cancellation of the "public dance" or "public cafe dance" for which said license was issued at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the start of the dance. 
C.  Outdoor Dance. A security deposit of five hundred dollars ($500.00) is required to cover City out-of-pocket expenses related to damage, cleanup, and/or booking fees; refundable if no expense is incurred. 
(Ord. 278 § 2 (part), 1992)  
5.28.040 - Additional requirements. 
A.  The license holder shall also pay any booking fees incurred by the City arising out of any arrest effectuated by the City on the premises where the dance occurs during and immediately after said dance. 
B.  No license shall be issued unless the applicant provides City with current certification of annual inspection of the local fire department. 
(Ord. 278 § 2 (part), 1992)  
5.28.050 - License expiration. 
All licenses hereunder shall be issued to expire immediately following the close of the dance for which such license has been issued. 
(Ord. 278 § 2 (part), 1992)  
5.28.060 - Renewals. 
The license collector shall issue licenses for the dates specifically designated by the applicant on the application and there shall be no renewals of said license as issued for the specific date. No license is deemed renewable unless otherwise provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. 278 § 2 (part), 1992)  
5.28.070 - Transfer of license. 
Each license issued hereunder shall be issued to a specific person and for a specific location and shall in no event be transferable from one person to another or from one entity to another. 
(Ord. 278 § 2 (part), 1992)  
5.28.080 - Alcoholic beverages. 
Any public dance or public cafe dance held or conducted by any license issued therefore at a specific place where any alcohol beverage is sold or dispensed upon any part of the premises shall only be issued upon satisfaction of the following conditions by the applicant: 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age shall be admitted onto the premises for which such license had been issued while the public dance or public cafe dance is in progress with the specific exceptions of the employees of the business of said premises where the license has been issued. 
B.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall be admitted onto the premises for which a license has been issued without the applicant requiring each person to produce a picture identification card or California Driver's License insuring that said person entering the public dance or public cafe dance is twenty-one (21) years of age or older. 
(Ord. 278 § 2 (part), 1992)  
5.28.090 - Time for holding dance. 
Unless otherwise provided herein or as specifically allowed by the city council, no dance may be conducted between the hours of one a.m. and six p.m. of any day. Dances may be conducted on Friday and Saturday only, requests for exceptions will be addressed to the city council. 
(Ord. 278 § 2 (part), 1992)  
5.28.100 - Minors. 
A.  No person shall allow or permit any minor under the age of twenty-one (21) years to attend a public cafe dance. Unless the licensee has provided a beer gardens i.e., a designated cordoned-area in which alcoholic beverages are being sold, served and consumed pursuant to Section 5.28.130, then no person shall allow or permit any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to attend. It shall be a misdemeanor to violate this section. 
B.  No person shall allow or permit any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to attend a public cafe dance. It shall be a misdemeanor to violate this section. 
C.  No person shall allow or permit any minor under the age of twenty-one (21) years to enter any beer gardens or other designated cordoned-off area as established pursuant to Section 5.28.130. Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor. 
D.  Minors are permitted to attend a public dance wherein no alcoholic beverages are sold, served or consumed. 
E.  Minors are permitted to attend those public dances where alcoholic beverages are sold, provided that a beer garden or other designated cordoned-off area is established pursuant to Section 5.28.130, and provided further that the licensee by affidavit to the license collector that said licensee or its organization is a religious, charitable, benevolent, social or fraternal or the wholly nonprofit organization and that the character of the organization/licensee is wholly nonprofit in purpose and that no person other than licensee is to receive any pecuniary profit or benefit therefrom. 
(Ord. 320 §1, 1996; Ord. 278 § 2 (part), 1992)  
5.28.110 - Security. 
Every person who conducts a public dance or public cafe dance shall, at his expense, appoint and/or contract with some responsible persons and/or agencies as approved by the chief of police who shall act as a security service at such dance. Said service and persons shall be present at all times when said dance is being conducted and it shall be his/its duty to see that the provision of this chapter relating to the conduct of persons attending said dance are in force; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed as relieving the licensee from any of his duties or obligations hereunder. The specific number of security guards to perform the function of security under this section shall be set by the chief of police at the time the applicant receives his license for each specific dance. 
(Ord. 278 § 2 (part), 1992)  
5.28.120 - Conduct. 
No person conducting a public dance or public cafe dance shall allow or permit any indecent, vulgar or suggestive dancing or conduct upon the premises where such dance is being conducted or permit any person to maintain a public nuisance remain at such dance. Violation of this section shall be misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 278 § 2 (part), 1992)  
5.28.130 - Alcoholic beverage public dance. 
At a public dance wherein alcoholic beverages are being sold or provided and wherein people under the age of twenty-one (21) are in attendance, it will be at the discretion of the chief of police to require a beer gardens, i.e., a designated, cordoned-off area in which alcoholic beverages are being sold or served and consumed. 
(Ord. 278 § 2 (part), 1992)  
5.28.140 - Revocation. 
Any license hereunder may be revoked by the city council either upon its own initiative or upon complaint being made to it by affidavit setting forth the grounds upon which the license is sought to be revoked and the facts constituting the cause for complaint. Upon said revocation, said licensee shall be given at least five (5) days written notice where it/he appears at a hearing from the testimony and evidence introduced therein that the conducting of any dance under such license has or in the future is likely to be a menace to the public health, safety or morals or constitute a public nuisance, or when it appears that such license was obtained by misrepresentation of any material facts, or that the licensee has violated any of the provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. 278 § 2 (part), 1992)  
Chapter 5.34 - FIREWORKS 
Sections: 
 
5.34.010 - Sale and discharge of safe and sane fireworks—Permitted when. 
A.  Safe and sane fireworks, as defined by Section 12529 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California, may be sold within the City from nine a.m. to nine p.m. daily beginning on the twenty-eighth day of June and ending on the fourth day of July. 
B.  Safe and sane fireworks, as defined by Section 12529 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California, may be sold within the City from nine a.m. to ten p.m. on the fourth day of July. 
C.  Safe and sane fireworks, as defined by Section 12529 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California, may be discharged within the City during the period beginning at nine a.m. on the twenty-eighth day of June and ending at eleven fifty-nine p.m. on the fourth day of July each year pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter and not otherwise. 
(Ord. 329 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.34.020 - Permit required to sell fireworks. 
Except as provided herein, no persons shall offer for sale, or sell at retail, any fireworks of any kind without having first applied for and received a permit. 
(Ord. 329 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.34.030 - Application for permit—Contents. 
All applications for a permit to sell fireworks shall: 
A.  Be made in writing accompanied by a permit fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00); 
B.  Be made between the first business day and the last business day of June of each year; 
C.  Set forth the proposed location of the fireworks stand; 
D.  Be accompanied by an assurance that if the permit is issued to applicant, applicant shall, at the time of receipt of permit, deliver to the city clerk a five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) combined single limits insurance certificate designating the City of Huron as an additional insured, and a copy of the required license from the state fire marshall; 
E.  Include a statement that the applicant agrees to comply strictly with the terms of any retail permit granted it and furnish any additional information upon request of the City. 
(Ord. 329 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.34.040 - Permit fee. 
The permit fee for selling fireworks within the City shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per year per stand, which fee must be paid at the time the application for a stand is filed. 
(Ord. 329 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.34.050 - Qualifications for issuance of permit. 
The following qualifications must be met by each applicant for a permit: 
A.  No organization, person, firm, or corporation may receive more than one permit for fireworks sales during any one calendar year. One permit may be issued to two or more qualifying applicants as a joint venture. The maximum number of permits which may be issued during any one calendar year shall not exceed three permits. 
B.  During the first week after July 4th, the city clerk shall draw the appropriate number of names of organizations, persons, firms, or corporations who are to be the permittees for the following year. The applicants will draw for three one-year slots 
(Ord. 329 § 1 (part), 1999).  
5.34.060 - Notice to applicant of granted or rejected permit. 
Applicants for a permit shall be notified by the city clerk by July 15th of the granting or rejection of such application for a permit. 
(Ord. 329 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.34.070 - Temporary sales tax permit required. 
Organizations selling fireworks are required to obtain a temporary sales tax permit from the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. 329 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.34.080 - Display of state license, city permit, and sales tax permit required. 
State license and city permit to sell fireworks, and temporary sales tax permit shall be displayed in a prominent place in the fireworks stand. 
(Ord. 329 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.34.090 - Operation of stand. 
A.  No entity other than the permittee organization, person, firm, or corporation shall operate the stand for which the permit is issued. 
B.  No person other than the person or individuals who are members of the permittee organization, firm, or organization, or the wives or husbands or adult children (over eighteen (18) years of age) of such persons, shall sell or otherwise participate in the sale of fireworks at such stand. 
(Ord. 329 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.34.100 - Temporary fireworks stands permitted only—Building dimensions. 
All retail sales of safe and sane fireworks shall be permitted only from within a temporary fireworks stand, and sales from any other building or structure is prohibited. Temporary stands shall be subject to the following provisions: 
A.  No fireworks stand shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of any building and not within one hundred (100) feet of any gasoline pump; 
B.  Fireworks stands need not comply with the provisions of the building code; provided, however, that all stands shall be erected under the supervision of the city building inspector, who shall require that stands be constructed in a manner that will reasonably insure the safety of attendants and customers; 
C.  No stand shall have a floor area in excess of four hundred (400) square feet. The width of each stand shall be a minimum of ten feet and the length shall be a maximum of forty (40) feet; 
D.  Each stand must have at least two exits; 
E.  Each stand shall be provided with a two and one-half gallon water pressure type fire extinguisher and a 2Al0BC rated dry chemical fire extinguisher in good working order and easily accessible for use in case of fire. 
(Ord. 329 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.34.110 - General requirements for the sale of fireworks. 
A.  All weeds and combustible material shall be cleared from the location of the stand, including a distance of a least fifty (50) feet surrounding the stand; 
B.  "No Smoking" signs shall be prominently displayed on the front, back, and sides of the fireworks stand; 
C.  Each stand must have an adult in attendance and in charge while fireworks are stored therein. Sleeping or remaining in stand after close of business each day is forbidden; 
D.  The sale of fireworks shall not begin before twelve noon on the twenty-eighth of June and shall not continue after nine p.m. on the fourth day of July; 
E.  Hours of operation shall be limited to nine a.m. to nine p.m. daily; 
F.  All unsold stock and accompanying litter shall be removed from the location by five p.m. on the fifth day of July; 
G.  The fireworks stand shall be removed from the temporary location by eight p.m. on the sixth day of July, and all accompanying litter shall be cleared from said location by said time and date; 
H.  Prior to the issuance of a permit, each applicant shall file with the city clerk a cash deposit, certificate of deposit, or a surety bond made payable to the City in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Such deposit, certificate, or bond shall be refundable upon compliance with the provisions and requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to the removal of the stand and the cleaning of the site. In the event the permittee does not so comply or remove the stand or clean the site in the manner required by the city building inspector, the City may do so, or cause the same to be done by other persons, and the reasonable cost thereof shall be a charge against the permittee and his deposit of surety bond. 
(Ord. 329 § 1 (part), (1999)  
5.34.120 - Discharge of fireworks prohibited—Where. 
A.  No person shall light or cause to be lighted any fireworks or other combustible material within any stand or within two hundred (200) feet thereof. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to ignite, explode, project, or otherwise fire or use, or permit the ignition, explosion, or projection of any fireworks upon, over, or onto the property of another, or to ignite, explode, project, or otherwise fire or make use of any fireworks within ten feet of any residence, dwelling, or other structure. 
(Ord. 329 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.34.130 - Storage. 
Safe and sane fireworks may be stored within the City, pursuant to the following provisions: 
A.  Buildings or parts of buildings used for the storage of safe and sane fireworks shall be classified as Group B, Division 2 occupancies, as provided in the Uniform Building Code, 1979 Edition, and shall meet the requirements for such occupancies. However, under no condition shall any building or parts of buildings be used that are not provided with an automatic sprinkler system; 
B.  Buildings or parts of buildings used for storage shall meet the zoning requirements of the City and a permit to store shall be issued by the City; 
C.  Signs with the wording "Fireworks—No Smoking," in letters a minimum of four inches high, shall be conspicuously located throughout the building; 
D.  Fire extinguishers, of the water pressure type, shall be located so there is not more than fifty (50) feet of travel to any fireworks storage; 
E.  Stacks of merchandise shall be limited in size to twelve thousand (12,000) cubic feet, and each stack shall be separated from other stacks by eight-foot-wide aisles. 
(Ord. 329 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.34.140 - Noncompliance with chapter—Immediate closure of fireworks stand. 
If, in the judgment of the fire chief, the construction of the stand or the conduct of the operations therein do not conform to the provisions of this chapter, said officer may order the stand immediately closed. 
(Ord. 329 § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.34.150 - Violation—Penalties. 
Persons violating this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction, shall be punished accordingly, as set forth in Section 1.16.010 of this code. 
(Ord. 329 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Chapter 5.36 - VIDEO SURVEILLANCE SYSTEMS 
Sections: 
 
5.36.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "City of Huron Video Surveillance Act of 2008." 
(Ord. 351 § 1 (part), 2008)  
5.36.020 - Definitions. 
The definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of the following words and phrases used in this chapter: 
"Bank" shall mean an establishment whose primary function is related to the custody, loan, exchange, issuance of money, extension of credit, or transmission of funds. 
"Carry-out food and drink" shall mean an establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and beverages in disposable containers in a ready-to-consume state for consumption either within the building or for carry-out with consumption off the premises, whose cash register is visible to the public view. 
"Check cashing business" means a business required to obtain a license issued by the State of California, Department of Justice pursuant to California Civil Code Sections 1789.30 through 1789.38, or any applicable successor statutes, to operate a check cashing business. 
"Convenience store" means any business which sells at retail both gasoline and more than twenty (20) consumer products. 
"Firearm dealer" means an establishment required to obtain a license issued by the State of California, Department of Justice pursuant to California Penal Code Section 12071, or any applicable successor statute, to sell firearms. 
"Media" means material on which audio, video, and electronic data can be recorded for the purpose of making a permanent record to aid in a criminal investigation; that can be enlarged through projection or other means, in a format able to be utilized by the Fresno County district attorney. 
"Off-sale liquor business" means any establishment required to obtain a license type 20 or 21 issued by the State of California, Department of Alcohol Beverage Control, which authorizes the sale or consumption of beer, wine, or distilled spirits off the premises where sold. 
"Secondhand dealer" means a business required to obtain a license issued by the State of California, Department of Justice pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 21641, or any applicable successor statute. The term "secondhand dealer" shall also include pawnbroker subject to Financial Code Sections 21000 through 21002 and a coin dealer defined in Business and Professions Code Section 21626(b), or any applicable successor statutes. 
"Shopping center" means a building or series of buildings containing a mix of four or more commercial establishments in a single development or on a single parcel. 
"Video surveillance system" means a continuous digital surveillance system including cameras, cabling, monitors, and digital video recorders (DVR) that records in color with cameras and lens of a type, minimum resolution, number and location approved by the chief of police or his or her designee. This system must be capable of producing a retrievable and identifiable images and video recordings on approved media that can be enlarged through projection or other means, and can be made a permanent record for use in a criminal investigation. 
(Ord. 351 § 1 (part), 2008)  
5.36.030 - Video surveillance systems required for certain business establishments. 
Every bank, carry-out food and drink establishment, check cashing business, convenience store, firearm dealer, off-sale liquor business, and secondhand dealer is hereby required to install a video surveillance system. Such establishments which installed surveillance systems prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter must ensure they are in full compliance with this chapter. Video surveillance systems shall be maintained in proper working order at all times and shall be in operation twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven days a week, and shall meet the minimum technological standards established in this chapter. 
(Ord. 351 § 1 (part), 2008)  
5.36.040 - Access to media. 
If a crime occurs, an employee believes a crime has occurred, the business shall contact the police department immediately and the business shall provide immediate access to the media containing the recorded event to the police department. The establishment shall retain the continuous digital images recorded by this system for no less than thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. 351 § 1 (part), 2008)  
5.36.050 - Minimum technological standards. 
The video surveillance system must be capable of delineating on playback of the system the activity and physical features of persons or areas within the premises and must be able to record such images on an approved form of media. Additional minimum technological standards required for video surveillance systems shall be established by the resolution of the city council, which may be updated periodically. The police department shall review the video surveillance system standards bi-annually to ensure that they are consistent with current technology, and shall recommend appropriate updates to the council. If the video surveillance system is web-enabled or has wireless capability, the police department shall be provided the ability to access the live system upon initiation by the establishment during incidents requiring a police response or intervention. 
(Ord. 351 § 1 (part), 2008)  
5.36.060 - Minimum coverage standards, site assessment, signage. 
The video surveillance system shall have, at a minimum, separate cameras dedicated to each register/check-out stand, entrance/exit, loading dock, and parking lot or area designated for customer and/or employee parking use. The placement of cameras included in video surveillance systems required under this chapter must be approved by the police department. The chief of police or his or her designee will conduct an assessment of each site required to install a video surveillance system prior to installation, and upon approval will issue an approval notice which will be placed in plain view inside the premises. This approval notice will also inform customers and employees of the existence of the video surveillance system. A separate notice of the video surveillance system, in a form acceptable to the chief of police, shall be placed in the parking area. 
(Ord. 351 § 1 (part), 2008)  
5.36.070 - Inspections. 
The video surveillance system shall be subject to regular inspection by the chief of police or his or her designee, who is authorized to inspect at reasonable times any video surveillance system to determine if the system conforms with this chapter and regulations adopted by council resolution. If the video surveillance system does not so conform, establishment must take immediate steps to bring the system back into conformance. 
(Ord. 351 § 1 (part), 2008)  
5.36.080 - Shopping centers. 
All shopping centers within the City that include an establishment subject to the provisions of this chapter shall install a video surveillance system. The minimum coverage shall be cameras that are dedicated to the entrances and exits to the parking lot, loading dock areas, areas designated for customer and/or employee parking use, and entrances and exits to the establishments subject to the provisions of this chapter. Shopping centers shall also be subject to the minimum technological standards established by city council resolution. 
(Ord. 351 § 1 (part), 2008)  
5.36.090 - Enforcement—Civil penalties. 
A.  Establishments subject to the mandatory requirements of this chapter shall have one year from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to comply with the regulations set forth in this chapter. 
B.  The violation of any provision of this chapter by any owner or principal operator of establishments subject to this chapter shall result in a notice of violation from the chief of police or his or her designee. The chief of police is authorized to investigate all alleged violations. Violators shall have thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice to provide proof of compliance to the City of Huron police department. If the violation continues after the thirty (30) day period, the chief of police or designee shall issue a citation against the violator and the violator shall pay a civil penalty not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). The city attorney is authorized to bring a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction to recover such civil penalties. 
C.  In addition to the foregoing, the violation of any provision of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be public nuisance and contrary to the public interest and shall, at the discretion of the City, create a cause of action for injunctive relief. 
D.  For purposes of this chapter, each day that a violation continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. 351 § 1 (part), 2008)  
5.36.100 - Financial assistance. 
It is the intent of the city council to annually consider during each fiscal year budget process the appropriation of City or redevelopment agency funds for the purpose of ensuring compliance through the award of low interest loans or grants to those establishments either required to comply with this chapter or who wish to voluntarily comply. The rules and regulations for such program shall be adopted by a resolution of the city council or redevelopment agency board. 
(Ord. 351 § 1 (part), 2008)  
5.36.110 - Development agreements. 
It is the intent of the city council that any party entering into a development agreement with the City or the redevelopment agency that includes a business subject to the provisions of this chapter that the video surveillance system be approved according to the provisions of this chapter before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. 351 § 1 (part), 2008)  
5.36.120 - Use permits. 
In the event that existing or future businesses covered under this chapter apply for and receive a use permit, it is intended that the use permit shall contain specific land use conditions, including but not limited to, surveillance, lighting and security, tailored to the operation of business. In the event that a use permit has been issued for such a business and the use permit conditions differ from the regulations established under Chapter 5.36 or are in addition thereto, then the more restrictive provisions shall apply. 
(Ord. 351 § 1 (part), 2008)  
5.36.130 - Exemptions. 
A business which is required to install a video surveillance system may, on an annual basis, apply to the chief of police or his or her designee for exemption from the provisions of this chapter. The chief of police or his or her designee may exempt a business for a period of twelve (12) months if he or she finds that the business has or will undertake alternate security procedures which are substantially equal to or more effective in preventing criminal activity and in assisting in the apprehension of the perpetrators of crime or for the protection of employees, or he or she may authorize alternate procedures on an experimental basis. Such an exemption shall carry a maximum duration of twelve (12) months, and a business must reapply for an exemption at the end of the exemption period or bring the system into conformance with this chapter. The chief of police or his or her designee may also authorize temporary extensions of time for installation when a business demonstrates that it is temporarily unable to comply for good cause shown. 
(Ord. 351 § 1 (part), 2008)  
5.36.140 - Appeal process. 
A.  Any establishment found to be in violation of this chapter by the chief of police or his or her designee shall have the right to a hearing before the city manager or his or her designee. 
B.  The chief of police or his or her designee shall give the applicant written notice of the violation. The notice shall set forth the grounds for the violation, and shall inform the owner or principal business operator of the establishment that he or she has ten days from the date of mailing of the notice to file a written request for a hearing. 
C.  Within ten days of the written notice of violation by the chief of police or his or her designee, the owner or principal business operator may appeal by requesting a hearing before the city manager. Such a request must be made in writing and must set forth the specific grounds for the appeal. If the applicant files a timely request for a hearing, the city manager or his or her designee shall set a time and place for the hearing within ten days thereafter. All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues, to be represented by counsel, and to confront and cross-examine any witness against them. The decision of the city manager or his or her designee to deny the application shall be in writing and shall be rendered within one week of the hearing. 
(Ord. 351 § 1 (part), 2008)  
5.36.150 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed the ordinance codified in this chapter, and each and every section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase not declared invalid or unconstitutional without regard to whether any portion of this chapter would be subsequently declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 351 § 1 (part), 2008)  
Title 6 - ANIMALS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 6.04 - DOGS* 
Sections: 
 
6.04.010 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
"Animal" means any animal that may be wild or legally kept as a domestic pet including cats, dogs, birds, reptiles, horses, ponies, mules, burros, sheep, goats, swine, bird, fish, poultry, fowl or any domestic bovine animal or any other wild or domestic animal. 
"Animal control officer" means any City of Huron police officer or other person appointed or designated an animal control officer by the city council, chief of police, or any officer or employee of another local government agency acting pursuant to a contract or under the authority of the City of Huron. 
"Animal shelter" means a facility designated by the police department for the impoundment of animals and authorized by the city manager or city council. 
"Animal under restraint" means any animal under the control of its owner or person having charge, care, custody or control, except that a dog shall not be considered under control of the owner unless on a leash or lead, confined within a vehicle, or confined within the real property limits of the owner either behind a secure fence structure or securely restrained by a leash or lead. 
"At large" means any animal that is off the premises of its owner, custodian or caretaker and which is not under physical restraint by a leash, lead, halter, rope, etc., of a size and material appropriate to the size and temperament of the animal and which is held by a person capable of restraining such animal, or is not otherwise physically restrained by some other device or instrumentality, except that such device or instrumentality shall not include voice control, eye control, or signal control of the animal by any person, device or instrumentality. 
"Bite" means an actual puncture, tear or abrasion of the skin inflicted by the teeth of an animal. 
"Cattery" is an establishment for boarding, breeding, buying, grooming or selling of cats for profit or any building, structure, enclosure or premises whereupon, or within which ten or more cats, four months of age or older, are kept or maintained in a manner consistent with the zoning ordinance. 
"Dog" means any member of the canine family, and shall also include both male and female gender, whether neutered or spayed. 
"Dog license" means any license required by this chapter that is issued monthly, annually, bi-annually or tri-annually for each individual dog. 
"Domesticated animal" means any animal accustomed to living in or about the habitation of man, including but not limited to, cats, dogs, fowls, horses, swine and goats. 
"Fowl" means any chicken, duck, turkey, goose or other domestic fowl. 
"Grooming salon" means a licensed commercial establishment or any building, structure, enclosure or premises having three or more dogs or cats for the purpose of: (1) bathing, brushing, clipping, manicuring or other related services and where there is no; (2) overnight boarding; or (3) breeding. 
"Guide dog" means any dog trained and used for the purpose of guiding a blind person. 
"Harbor" means and includes any act of sheltering or providing a home for an animal, or two or more acts of feeding an animal. 
"Impounded" means having been received into the custody of any animal control center, animal control officer, animal control vehicle or peace officer duly authorized by the City of Huron to receive such animal. 
"Inhumane treatment" means physically and/or emotional mistreatment of an animal including but not limited to: (1) burdening the animal with heavy chains or leashes, padlocks or weights around any part of the body of the animal; (2) exposure to extreme temperature (whether in an unattended vehicle or without adequate ventilation); or (3) inadequate food, water or shelter. 
"Kennel" means a licensed commercial establishment or any building, structure, enclosure or premises having three or more dogs or cats for the purpose of boarding, breeding, buying, selling, training and letting for hire for a fee. 
"Leash" is any chain, rope, leather strap or material not to exceed six feet in length being held in the hand of a person that is capable of controlling and actually controlling the animal to which it is attached. 
"Owner" means any person, firm or corporation owning, having an interstate in or having control or custody or possession of any animal. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, association, club or organization. 
"Person responsible for an animal" means and includes: (1) any person harboring an animal on a constant or continuous basis for one week or more; (2) any agent of the owner charged with the care of the animal; (3) any person residing with the owner and present at a time when the owner is absent and the animal commits a violation of this chapter; and (4) any person voluntarily acknowledging responsibility for the animal. 
"Pet shop" means any establishment containing cages or exhibition pens, not part of a kennel or cattery, wherein dogs, cats, birds or other pets for sale are kept or displayed. 
"Potentially fierce, dangerous or vicious dog" means any of the following: 
1.  Any dog which, when unprovoked, on two separate occasions within the prior twenty-four (24) month period, engages in any behavior that requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury when the person and the dog are off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog. 
2.  Any dog which, when unprovoked, bites a person causing a less severe injury than as defined in Section 31604 of the California Food and Agriculture Code. 
3.  Any dog which, when unprovoked, on two separate occasions within the prior twenty-four (24) month period, has killed, seriously bitten, inflicted injury, or otherwise caused injury attacking a domestic animal off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog. 
"Public entity" means any federal, state, or public subdivision, municipal corporation or agency thereof. 
"Quarantine" means the isolation of an animal in a substantial enclosure so that the animal is not subject to contact with other animals or unauthorized persons. 
"Service dog" means any dog trained and used for purposes of fulfilling the particular requirements of a physically disabled person including but not limited to minimal protection work, rescue work, pulling a wheelchair or fetching dropped items. 
"Severe injury" means any physical injury to a human being that results in muscle tears or disfiguring lacerations or requires multiple sutures or corrective or cosmetic surgery. 
"Signal dog" means any dog trained and used for the purpose of alerting a deaf person or a person whose hearing is impaired, to intruders or sounds. 
"Stray" means any animal not under the control of its owner or keeper of a species which is by and large not domesticated, regardless of whether, in a specific case, a particular animal of the species is or is not domesticated. Such animals include, among others: 
1.  Alligators and crocodiles; 
2.  Bears (urisdeae); 
3.  All cats except the commonly accepted domesticated cats, and including cheetah, cougars, leopards, lions, lynx, panthers, mountain lions, tigers, wildcats, etc.; 
4.  All dogs except domesticated dogs, including wolf, fox, coyote, dingo, etc.; 
5.  Porcupine (erethizontidae); 
6.  All raccoons including eastern raccoon, desert raccoon, ring-tailed cat, etc.; 
"Unaltered and unspayed" means a condition that exists in an animal which permits the producing of offspring. A dog or cat that has not been spayed or neutered. 
"Unlicensed dog" means any dog for which no valid license is currently in force and to which the dog license tag provided for in this chapter is not properly attached. 
"Vaccination" means inoculation against rabies of any dog or cat, four months of age or older, with any vaccine prescribed for the purpose of the California Department of Health Services. 
"Vicious animal" or "dangerous animal" or "fierce animal" means: 
1.  Any dog seized under Section 599aa of the California Penal Code and upon the sustaining of a conviction of the owner or keeper under subdivision (a) of Section 597.5 of the California Penal Code. 
2.  Any dog which, when unprovoked, in an aggressive manner, inflicts severe injury on or kills a human being. 
3.  Any dog previously determined to be and currently listed as a potentially vicious, dangerous or fierce dog which, after its owner or keeper has been notified of this determination, continues the behavior described in this chapter or is maintained in violation of Section 31641, 31642 or 31643 of the California Food and Agriculture Code. 
"Wild animal" means any wild, exotic, dangerous or venomous animal, including, but not limited to, mammals, fowl, fish or reptiles. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.020 - Peace officers and animal control officers. 
A.  Duties. It shall be the duty of the peace officers to cooperate with and assist the animal control officer in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, and such peace officers and animal control officer shall be empowered by: 
1.  Impoundment. Receive, take up and impound: 
a.  Any animal found running at large on any highway, street, sidewalk lane, alley or other public place or upon any private property in violation of this chapter or of any law of the State of California; 
b.  Any animal which, without provocation or direction, is molesting any person; 
c.  Any animal which, without provocation or direction, is molesting or harassing animals, birds, or pets upon the premises of any person; 
d.  Any animal which the officer has reasonable grounds to believe that very prompt action is required to protect the health or safety of the animals and others. 
2.  Animal Care. Regularly and adequately feed, water and otherwise care of all dogs, cats, and other animals impounded under the provisions of this chapter, or to provide for such feeding watering and care. The animal control officer may also take charge of any animal, including dog or cat, that reason of lameness, sickness, feebleness, or neglect, is unfit for the labor it is performing, or that in any other manner is being cruelly or inhumanely treated, and provide care and treatment for the animal until, it is deemed to be in a suitable condition to be returned to the owner. The cost of caring for and treating any animal seized under this chapter shall constitute a lien on the animal and the animal shall not be returned to its owner until the charges are paid. 
3.  Investigations. Investigate the condition and behavior of any animal which he or she has reason to believe is vicious, dangerous or fierce. 
4.  Animal Destruction. Humanely destroy or give emergency care to sick or injured animals including dogs and cats. 
B.  Interference. Any person who knowingly and intentionally interferes with an animal control officer while said officer is performing his duties as an animal control officer shall be guilty of Section 148 of the California Penal Code. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.030 - Duty to care for animals. 
Every owner, driver, or keeper of any animal who permits the animal to be in any building enclosure, lane, street, square, or lot within the City, without proper care and attention is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.040 - Dog licenses required. 
A.  First Offense. Any persons, other than a person referred to in subsection B of this section, who harbors an unlicensed dog shall be guilty of an infraction punishable as provided by statute of Section 1.16.010 Huron Municipal Code. 
B.  Subsequent Offense. Any person having been convicted under the immediately preceding subsection who, within five years after said conviction again harbors an unlicensed dog shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided by law. 
C.  Exemptions. The preceding subsections of this section shall not apply to: 
1.  Dogs whose owners have been present in the City of Huron for thirty (30) days or less, but only so long as said dogs remain in the care and custody of a responsible person; 
2.  Dogs which are held for sale as the inventory of or patients in a properly licensed kennel, pet store, dog dealer, or veterinary hospital or clinic; 
3.  Guide dogs properly trained to assist blind persons if such dogs are actually being used by blind persons to assist them in moving from place to place; 
4.  Signal dogs properly trained to assist deaf persons to aid them in responding to sounds; 
5.  Service dogs trained to assist in fulfilling the particular requirements of a physically disabled person including but not limited to minimal protection work, rescue work, pulling a wheelchair or fetching dropped items; 
6.  Dogs especially trained to assist officials or government agencies in performance of their duties and which are owned by such agencies. 
Nothing in this subsection shall be considered so as to exempt any dog from having a current rabies vaccination. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.050 - Procedures for issuance of dog license. 
The City shall issue a license for a dog located in the City upon satisfaction of the following conditions: 
A.  Application. The owner of the dog to be licensed completes an application prepared by the City. 
B.  Fee. The owner of the dog to be licensed pays the fee required for a license which fee shall be set by resolution of the city council. No fee shall be required for: 
1.  Guide, Signal or Service Dogs. Guide dogs, signal dogs or service dogs if such dogs are in the possession and under the control of, in the case of a guide dog, a blind person, or in the case of signal dog, a deaf or hearing-impaired person, or service dogs for the physically disabled. 
2.  Public Facility Dogs. Any dog owned by a public entity. 
C.  Rabies Vaccination. Satisfactory proof is provided that the dog has been effectively vaccinated for rabies. 
1.  Vaccination Records. Each veterinarian after vaccinating any dog shall sign a certificate of vaccination in duplicate in the form required by the police chief. The veterinarian shall keep one copy and shall give one copy to the owner of the vaccinated dog and the owner shall retain such copy in his possession. 
2.  Vaccination Exception. In the event that a dog has a short-term illness, is pregnant or suffers from a long-term debilitating illness which in the opinion of a veterinarian contraindicates vaccination for rabies, such dog shall not be required to undergo vaccination during the period of such illness or pregnancy where a request for vaccination deferral has been approved by the animal control officer and the police chief. Such request shall specify the duration of the requested deferral, and shall be signed by a veterinarian. The animal control officer shall issue a license for such dog upon approval of the request for vaccination deferral and payment for the application license fee determined by resolution of the city council. The owner or person having custody of such dog shall confine and shall keep such dog confined, for the duration of the deferral. Within fourteen (14) days after the expiration of the deferral, the owner or person having custody of such dog shall present the animal control officer or the police chief's designee a certificate or vaccination in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
3.  Certificate and Tag. Upon issuing a license, the City shall give to the owner of the licensed dog a certificate and tag evidencing issuance of the license and showing for reference the number of the license. A license shall be valid for the period determined by the City of Huron police department and indicated on the license certificate. The police department may upon request of the owner or custodian of such dog back date such license so that its expiration date occurs concurrently with or prior to the expiration date of the vaccination; provided however, that where such backdating is performed, there shall be no reduction or discount of the license fee applicable to the license applied for, and such license shall be renewed within thirty (30) days after its expiration. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.060 - License renewal and late fees. 
All licenses shall be renewed within thirty (30) days after the license period terminates. If an application for a license renewal is made for more than thirty (30) days after such license is required, the applicant shall pay the applicable late fee established by the city council by resolution. Late fees shall also be charged under any of the following conditions: 
A.  When a dog license is not obtained within thirty (30) days after a dog over the age of four months is transferred, sold or brought into the City. 
B.  When a dog license is not obtained within thirty (30) days of a dog reaching the age of four months. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.070 - Wearing dog license tag required. 
Every owner or keeper of a licensed dog shall at all times cause the dog to wear the license tag or a collar or other means of attaching the tag to the dog. Violation of this section is an infraction. The animal control officer may presume that a dog not wearing a license tag is unlicensed. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.080 - Lost and destroyed tags to be replaced immediately. 
If the dog license tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate tag shall be obtained from the police department within seven days, upon paying a fee in the amount specified by resolution of the city council and either surrendering the receipt for the lost tag or certifying under penalty of perjury that a tag was obtained and that the receipt cannot be found. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.090 - Stolen, counterfeit or unauthorized tags and licenses. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make use of a stolen, counterfeit or unauthorized license tag, certificate or any other document or thing for the purpose of evading the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.100 - Presentation of valid rabies certificate, rabies tag and license tag. 
Upon request of the animal control officer, police officer or other authorized city representative, any owner or keeper of a dog for which a license is required under the provision of this chapter shall present a currently valid certificate of rabies vaccination, rabies tag or license tag. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.110 - Ownership transfer. 
Upon transfer of ownership of any dog validly licensed under this chapter, the new owner shall fill out an application as required in this chapter and submit it to the police department accompanied by a license transfer fee as set by the city council by resolution. The transfer, sale or destruction and the new location of a dog with a "fierce, dangerous or vicious designation" or "potentially vicious dangerous or fierce designation" shall be reported in writing pursuant to Food and Agriculture Code Section 31643. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.120 - Strays. 
No person, except a society incorporated within the State of California for the primary purpose of preventing cruelty to animals, shall harbor any lost or strayed dog, cat or other animal. Whenever any such animal shall be found which appears to be lost, stray, or feral, the person finding it shall immediately notify an animal control officer so that the animal may be impounded. Retaining a stray animal after notifying an animal control officer shall not constitute a violation of this section. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.130 - Abandonment prohibited. 
No owner of any live animal shall abandon it upon any public or private or premises. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.140 - Restraints and animals on private premises prohibited. 
The owner of or person responsible for a dog shall restrain said dog either by suitable leash, rope, impenetrable wall, fence, or other barrier, or by constant supervision, such that the animal is prevented from leaving the owner's or responsible person's property or supervision. No owner or keeper of an animal, whether licensed or unlicensed, even though not at large, shall allow or permit such animal to be in or upon any private place or premises other than those of the owner or keeper, except with consent of the person in charge of the private place or premises. The owner of an animal not restrained as provided in this section shall be strictly liable for any damage caused by such animal. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.150 - Females in heat. 
Any owner of or person for any female dog or cat in heat shall, in addition to restraining such animal shall cause such dog or cat to be constantly contained in a building so as to prevent it from attracting by scent or coming into contact with other dogs or cats unless the owner of such dog or cat thereafter finds responsible owners for any resulting litter. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.160 - Prohibited places. 
No owner or person responsible for a dog shall take or permit such dog, whether loose or on a leash or in arms, in or about: (1) any establishment or place of business where food or food products are sold or displayed, including but not limited to restaurants, grocery stores, meat markets, and fruit or vegetable stores; (2) any place of worship during public services; or (3) in any public school building while school is in session, except for purposes of instruction when authorized by a teacher at said school directly involved in such instruction. This section shall not apply to dogs specifically trained for and actually assisting a deaf, blind or disabled person. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.170 - Dead animals. 
It shall be the duty of every owner of any animal found dead within the City to immediately notify the Huron police department of the location of such animals, so that the same may be removed as speedily as possible. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to permit any dead animal to remain upon the premises of such person, or for the owner of any dead animal knowingly to permit the same to remain upon any public street or other public property or upon any premises within the City, for more than three hours without notifying the police department of the location of the same. If the owner of such dead animal does not remove it himself or cause it to be removed and thereupon assess the costs of such against the owner, and may avail itself of all remedies in law and equity to enforce such removal and recover the costs thereof. Any person violating the provisions of this section either by failing to do those acts required herein or by doing any act prohibited herein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.180 - Prohibition of sales or giving away of dogs and cats on public property. 
No person in the City shall offer for sale or sell or give away or transfer for adoption any cat, kitten, dog, puppy or any other animal on any public street, public sidewalk or public park. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.190 - Interference and mistreatment of police dogs. 
No person shall willfully or maliciously torture, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable, or kill any dog used by any government policy agency or private patrol service in the performance of the functions and duties of such department, or interfere with or meddle with any such dog while being used by said department or any member thereof in the performance of any functions or duties of said department or such officer or member. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.200 - Entry on private property. 
Unless otherwise prohibited by law, all persons whose duties is to enforce the provisions of this chapter are hereby empowered to enter upon private property, where such dog, cat or other animal is kept in violation of any provisions of this chapter. Notwithstanding any provisions in this chapter relating to entry upon private property for any purpose under this chapter, no such entry may be conducted: (1) without the expressed or implied consent of the property owner or the person having lawful possession thereof; or (2) unless an inspection warrant has been issued and the entry is conducted in accordance with California Code of Civil Procedure, Sections 1822.50 through 1822.56, inclusive; or (3) except as may otherwise be expressly or impliedly permitted by law. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.210 - Dogs, cats and other animals running at large. 
In the interest of public safety, it shall be lawful for any person to take up, in a humane manner, any dog, cat or other animal running at large in violation of this chapter and promptly deliver it to the animal control officer. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.220 - Control of unspayed and unaltered cats. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, harbors or keeps any unspayed or unaltered cat four months of age or older within the City to allow or permit such unspayed or unaltered cat to be or remain outdoors. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.230 - Public nuisances. 
A.  Declaration. The following animals are hereby declared to be nuisances: 
1.  An animal causing significant damage to the property of a person other than its owner; 
2.  A fierce, dangerous or vicious animal which, in the opinion of the enforcing animal control officer, cannot be restrained so as to remove all substantial risk of personal injury or substantial property damage; 
3.  An animal which causes unreasonable fouling of the air by odors; 
4.  An animal which causes seriously unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings; 
5.  A dog, cat, or animal of similar or greater size which defecates on any public sidewalk, park or building or an any private property without the consent of the owner of such private property, unless the owner of or person responsible for such animal shall immediately and properly dispose of the defecation; 
6.  An animal or combination of animals which bark, whine, howl, cry or makes other loud and disturbing noises in an excessive, continuous, or untimely fashion as to disturb the peace and quite of the neighbors surrounding or in the vicinity of such premises, or whose barking, whining, howling, crying or other sound or cry interferes with any person or of ordinary sensitivity in a reasonable comfortable enjoyment of life and property; 
7.  An animal which molests passersby or chases passing vehicles; 
8.  An animal which habitually or frequently attacks persons or other domestic animals; 
9.  A wild animal as defined in this chapter, if said while animal is kept or harbored in an area of the City zoned for residential use; 
10.  An animal which is determined by the City of Huron police department or County health department to be a public nuisance by virtue of being offensive or dangerous to the public health, welfare or safety; 
11.  Public nuisances defined in California Penal Code Section 370; 
12.  The possession or maintenance of any dog, cat or other animal or the allowing of any dog, cat or other animal to be in violation of this chapter, in addition to a violation of this chapter, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, independent of any criminal prosecution nor the results thereof, by any means reasonably necessary to accomplish said abatement including but not limited to the destruction of the dog, cat or other animal involved, or by the imposition of specific reasonable conditions and restrictions for the maintenance of such dog or cat. Failure to comply with such conditions and restrictions for the maintenance of such dog or cat. Failure to comply with such conditions and restrictions is a misdemeanor. 
The owner or keeper of such dogs or cat shall reimburse the City of Huron for all incurred in enforcing compliance with the provisions of this section. The City of Huron, by and through the police department may also commence appropriate proceedings in a court of completed jurisdiction as are appropriate under the laws and regulations of the State of California for abatement and redress of public nuisances. 
B.  Abatement. In the case of a fierce, dangerous or vicious animal described in subsection (A)(2) of this section, an animal control officer may follow the procedures outlined in Section 6.04.240(C)(6). In all other cases described in subsection A of this section, the animal is subject to immediate impoundment, and to license revocation or suspension. 
C.  Violation. The owner of or person responsible for an animal committing any of the acts named in subsection A of this section is guilty of an infraction unless otherwise stated in this chapter. 
D.  Strict Liability. The owner of or person responsible for an animal declared a nuisance shall be strictly liable for any personal injury or damage caused by such animal. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.240 - Animal impoundment. 
A.  Impoundable Animals. The following animals may be impounded: 
1.  Any animal being kept, maintained, or harbored contrary to the provisions of this chapter; 
2.  Sick or injured animals found in a public place and whose owner cannot be located; 
3.  Any apparently stray or abandoned animal; 
4.  Animals which are not vaccinated for rabies in accordance with the requirements of this chapter; 
5.  Any animal being cruelly or inhumanely treated as defined in this chapter; 
6.  Any animal at the owner's expense while the owner or keeper is improving the enclosure so that the animal can be kept confined to its property. 
B.  Records to be Kept. The City of Huron police department shall keep accurate records which shall include: 
1.  A complete description of the animal, including any tag numbers; 
2.  The date the animal was taken up, medically treated, euthanized or impounded; 
3.  The location and circumstances that the animal was taken up, medically treated, euthanized or impounded; 
4.  The names of the personnel who took up, medically treated, euthanized or impounded the animal; 
5.  A description of the personnel who took up, medically treated, euthanized or impounded the animal; 
6.  The manner and date of final disposition of the animal, including the name of the person who euthanized the animal or the name and address of the adopting party; 
7.  The name and address of the redeemer or purchaser; 
8.  The name and address of any person relinquishing an animal to the impound facility; 
9.  All fees received; 
10.  All expenses accrued during impoundment. 
In accordance with state law, these records shall be maintained for three years after the date the animal's impoundment ends. 
C.  Disposition of Animals. 
1.  Transfer to Facility. All impounded animals shall be promptly transferred to the City's animal shelter. 
2.  Minimum Stay. Animals shall be impounded for a minimum of six days (not including the day of impoundment), before further disposition, except as otherwise provided herein. Reasonable effort shall be made to notify the owner or any animal wearing a license or other identification during that time. Any animal relinquished by the purported owner shall be held for two full business days, not including the day of impoundment. The animal shall be available for owner redemption for the first day, not including the day of impoundment, and shall be available for owner redemption or adoption as provided in this section for the second day. Any rabbit, guinea pig, hamster, pot-bellied pig, bird, lizard, snake, turtle, or tortoise legally allowed as personal property impounded in a public or private shelter shall be held for the same period of time as provided for in this subsection. 
3.  Further Disposition. All dogs, cats or other animals except for those required to be quarantined or confined, which have been held longer than the minimum impound period, and all dogs, cats or other animals voluntarily relinquished to the animal shelter may be destroyed or sold as the City of Huron police chief may direct. Upon destruction of an animal, the owner or person responsible for the animal shall pay the animal destruction fee set by resolution of the city council. 
4.  Sale and Adoption. Any healthy dog, cat or other animal not redeemed by the owner or keeper after three days (not including the day of impoundment), may be sold at auction or to any responsible person desiring to purchase such animal for a price to be determined by an animal control officer but not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) per animal, plus license fees, veterinary charges, spay or neuter charges and rabies vaccination charges, if required. No person shall be permitted to adopt or purchase any dog or cat which has not been spayed or neutered, from any public pound, any animal shelter, society or organization. 
5.  Veterinary Services. Any licensed animal impounded and having or suspected of having a serious physical injury or contagious disease requiring veterinary attention, may in the discretion of the City of Huron police chief, be released to the care of a veterinarian with the consent of the owner or keeper. Upon release from veterinary treatment, such animal shall return to impoundment, unless redeemed or purchased. If the animal requires veterinary care and the City is not assured, within fourteen (14) days of the seizure of the animal, that the owner will provide the necessary care, the animal shall not be returned to its owner and shall be deemed to have been abandoned and may be disposed of by the City in accordance with this chapter. The owner shall be responsible for the costs of treatment by a veterinarian regardless of whether it is redeemed by him or not. 
6.  Emergency Animal Destruction. When, in the judgment of the City of Huron animal control officer, police officer, police chief or police chief designee, it is determined that an animal should be destroyed where the animal is too severely injured to move, it incurably crippled or is suffering from any incurable, dangerous or contagious disease; or is an unlicensed vicious, dangerous or fierce animal; or for any other humane reason, or to protect the public from imminent danger to persons or property, such animal may be destroyed without regard to any time limitations otherwise established herein, and without court order. A veterinarian also may immediately humanely destroy an impounded animal afflicted with a serious contagious disease unless the owner or his or her agent immediately authorizes treatment of the animal by a veterinarian at the expense of the owner or agent. 
D.  Redemption. The owner of any impounded animal or his or her authorized representative may deem such animal before disposition provided he pays: 
1.  The pick-up fee to the City of Huron; 
2.  The daily boarding fee charged by the facility having charge of the animal; 
3.  Redemption fee to the City of Huron; 
4.  Any veterinary costs incurred during the impound period, including a reasonable fee for any required rabies vaccination; 
5.  Cost of rabies vaccination, if required; 
6.  License fee, if a license is required; 
7.  Actual cost of any extraordinary measures required in or for the handling and maintenance of the animal while impounded. A person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be personally liable to the City for all costs of impoundment from the time of seizure to the time or proper disposition. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.250 - Rabies suppression, control and quarantine. 
A.  Reporting Bites. Any person having knowledge of any individual or animal having been bitten by an animal of a species subject to rabies shall report the occurrence of the bite immediately to the police department or an animal control officer. 
B.  Vaccination Required. The owner of or person responsible for a dog or cat four months old or older shall have said animal vaccinated against rabies within thirty (30) days after it reaches said age or is acquired by its owner or moved into the City of Huron. Any person harboring any such animal shall be responsible for said vaccination. A vaccinated animal must be revaccinated against rabies at least every twenty-four (24) months. This section shall not apply to veterinarian, grooming salons or kennel operators temporarily maintaining on their premises animals owned by others, or to an animal in the City of Huron for a period of thirty (30) days or less, provided such animal is restrained and supervised as required by this chapter. 
C.  Rabies Certificate. When vaccinating any animal for rabies, the veterinarian shall complete a certificate of rabies vaccination (in duplicate) which includes, but is not limited to the following information: 
1.  Owner's name and address; 
2.  Description of animal (breed, sex, markings, age, name); 
3.  Date of vaccination; 
4.  Type of rabies vaccine administered; 
5.  Manufacturer's serial number of vaccine. 
A copy of the certificate shall be distributed to the veterinarian and the original retained by the owner. The veterinarian and owner shall retain copies of the certificate for the interval between vaccinations specified in this section. 
D.  Reporting and Confinement. An animal that has rabies or shows signs of having rabies, and every animal bitten by another animal showing symptoms of rabies or that has been exposed to rabies shall be reported by the owner to the police department or animal control officer and shall immediately be confined in a secure place by the owner. 
E.  Rabies Control. If it shall appear to the animal control officer that any animal has rabies, the animal control officer may destroy such animal forthwith, or may hold such animal for further examination or observation for such time as the animal control officer may determine to be appropriate. 
F.  Quarantine. Any animal of a species susceptible to rabies that bites a person or animal or is suspected of having rabies may be seized and quarantined for observation for a period of not less than ten days by an animal control officer. The owner of the animal shall bear the cost of confinement. An animal shelter authorized by the City shall be the normal place of quarantine, but other arrangements including confinement by the owner, may be made by the City of Huron police department if the animal had a current rabies vaccination at the time the bite was inflicted or if there are other special circumstances justifying an exception. A person who has custody of an animal under quarantine shall immediately notify the City of Huron police department if the animal shows any signs of sickness or abnormal behavior, or if the animal escapes confinement. It shall be unlawful for any person who has custody of a quarantined animal to fail or refuse to allow an animal control officer to make an inspection or examination during the period of quarantine. If the animal dies within ten days from the date of the bite, the person having custody shall immediately notify the police department or City designated laboratory to be examined for rabies. Of, at the end of the ten-day period, the animal control officer examines the animal and finds no signs of rabies, the animal may be released to the owner or in the case of a stray, it shall be disposed of as provided in this chapter. Animals quarantined pursuant to this section shall remain under quarantine until notice is given the animal control officer that such quarantine is terminated. 
G.  Animals Dying While Under Isolation. The intact body or portion thereof, as specified by the Fresno County health department laboratory or other laboratory designated by the City, shall be submitted in the manner prescribed by the laboratory for examination for rabies. 
H.  Rabies Epidemic. Whenever the police chief shall determine that an epidemic of rabies exists or is threatened, the police chief shall have the authority to take such measures as may be reasonably necessary to prevent the spread of the disease, including but not limited to the declaration of quarantine against any or all animals in any area of the City of Huron as the police chief may determine and define, for a period of not more than one hundred twenty (120) days. An additional or extended quarantine period may also be declared if such additional or extended quarantine period shall be deemed necessary by the police chief for the protection and preservation of the public health, peace and safety. Any quarantine declared pursuant to this subsection, other than as restricted herein, shall be upon such conditions as the police chief may determine and declare. 
I.  Quarantine Signs. The animal control officer may, in his discretion, post or cause to be posted an appropriate sign on any premises where an animal is quarantined pursuant to this chapter, for the purpose of warning the public of the fact of such quarantine. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a sign on any premises where an animal is quarantined pursuant to this chapter, for the purpose of warning the public of the fact of such quarantine. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a sign posted pursuant to this subsection without the permission of the animal control officer or police department. 
J.  Unvaccinated Bitten or Exposed Animals. If an animal is not vaccinated against rabies but of a species subject to rabies is known to have been bitten or exposed by a known rabid animal, then said bitten or exposed animal shall be immediately destroyed. 
K.  Skunks. In order to protect the public health from the hazard of rabies which has been found to exist in skunks, a quarantine is hereby imposed to continue unless released by the police chief, whereby it is prohibited to trap or capture skunks from or into the City of Huron except pursuant to a permit issued by the California Department of Health Services pursuant to Title 17, California Administrative Code, Section 2606.8. 
L.  Vaccinated Bitten or Exposed Animals. If the bitten or exposed animal has been vaccinated, the animal shall be revaccinated within twenty-four (24) hours and quarantined for a period of thirty (30) days following revaccination; or if the animal is not revaccinated within twenty-four (24) hours, the animal shall be isolated and quarantined under veterinary supervision for six months, the animal shall be destroyed if the owner does not comply with this subsection. 
M.  Removal of Animal. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or release any quarantined or confined animal from quarantine or confinement without written permission of the City of Huron police department. 
N.  Violation. Violation of any subsection of this section is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.260 - Attacking dogs. 
A.  Prohibited. No owner of or person responsible for a dog shall permit such dog to attack, chase, or harass any person, or any domestic animal having a commercial value, such that injury occurs or, in the case of a person, substantial fear of a significant injury is caused. 
B.  Physicians to Report Animal Bite Cases. All cases of animal bites treated by any physician shall be reported by the physician to the animal control officer or police department. The report shall contain the name and address of the person bitten, the time and place where such person was bitten; and the name and address of the owner of the biting animal, if known; and any other pertinent information requested by the animal control officer or police officer. 
C.  Violation. The violation of subsection A of this section shall be a misdemeanor according to the State of California statutes, and the owner of and/or person responsible for such a dog shall be strictly liable for any injury or damage caused by such dog. 
D.  Mitigation. The following shall be considered in mitigating the penalties or damages or in dismissing the charge: 
1.  The dog was properly confined on the premises. 
2.  The dog was deliberately or maliciously provoked. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.270 - Vicious, dangerous or fierce animals. 
A.  Definition. The definition of a vicious, dangerous or fierce animal is contained in Section 6.04.010 of this chapter. No animal shall be declared vicious, dangerous or fierce if: 
1.  It is owned by a public entity or a governmental or law enforcement unit used primarily to guard public or private property. 
2.  No animal may be declared fierce, dangerous or vicious if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal or has in the past, been observed or reported to have teased, tormented, abused, or assaulted the animal, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
B.  Confinement on Premises. No person owing or harboring or having the care of a fierce, dangerous or vicious animal shall suffer or permit such animal to go unconfined on the premises of such person. A fierce, dangerous or vicious animal is "unconfined" as the term is used in this section if such animal is not securely confined indoors, or confined in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure upon the premises of the registered owner or caretaker of the animal. Such pen or structure must have secure sides and a secure top. If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides must be imbedded in the ground no less than two feet. An animal that is securely and humanely locked in a motor vehicle belonging to the owner or caretaker shall be considered confined for purposes of this section. 
C.  Control Off Premises. No person owning or harboring or having the care of a fierce, dangerous or vicious animal shall suffer or permit such animal to go beyond the premises of such person unless such animal is securely leased with a leash not exceeding three feet in length, and muzzled, except that a dangerous dog shall not be required to be muzzled when either shown in a sanctioned American Kennel Club show or upon prior written approval of the City of Huron chief of police. 
D.  Public Notification. The owner or caretaker of any vicious, dangerous or fierce animal shall display on his/her premises a warning sign that there is a vicious, dangerous or fierce animal on the property. This sign shall be capable of being read from the public street or highway. The sign must have letters at least two inches in width and two inches in height and reading "Beware of Vicious Dog," or "Beware of Dangerous Dog," or "Beware of Fierce Dog" or as otherwise determined by the City. 
E.  Registering Vicious, Dangerous or Fierce Animals. Any owner or caretaker of a vicious, dangerous, or fierce animal shall register with the City of Huron police department the following minimal information: name, address, telephone number (including work phone numbers), of all responsible parties, relating to the animal, to be updated at the renewal of each license. This will also include breed, sex, color, weight, age of animal, tattoo number or embedded chip number, license number, and rabies information. 
F.  Four-Digit Tattoo or Microchip Identification Technology. The owner, keeper or caretaker shall, at his/her own expense, have a unique identifying, four-digit number tattooed on the inner thigh or a microchip embedded between the shoulders of the vicious, dangerous, fierce animal. This number is to be assigned by the City of Huron police department or any person designated by the City of Huron police department. The tattoo or embedded chip may be applied by a licensed veterinarian or person trained as tattooist and authorized as such by a State, County, City, town or other law enforcement department. A tattoo shall be applied with an indelible or permanent ink. The tattoo number or embedded chip number shall be recorded on the license of the tattooed animal. 
G.  Police Department Notification. The owner, keeper or caretaker shall notify the City of Huron police department or its designated authority within three hours if a fierce, dangerous, or vicious animal is loose, unconfined, has attacked another animal or has been given away, the owner, keeper or caretaker must give notice to the Huron police department within two working days pursuant to Section 6.04.110 of this chapter. 
H.  Insurance Requirements. The owner or caretaker of a fierce, dangerous or vicious animal shall present to the City of Huron police department or its designated authority, proof that the owner or caretaker has procured liability insurance in the amount of at least twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), covering any damage or injury which may be caused by such fierce, dangerous or vicious animal during the twelve (12) month period for which licensing is sought, which policy shall contain a provision requiring the City of Huron police department to be notified by the insurance company of any cancellation, termination or expiration of the liability insurance policy. 
I.  Strict Liability. In the event that a minor is the owner, keeper or caretaker of a fierce, dangerous or vicious animal, the parent or guardian of that minor shall be responsible for compliance with the specifications of the ordinance for the care and housing of the animal and shall also be strictly liable for all injuries and property damage sustained by any person or domestic animal caused by an unprovoked attack by the animal. 
J.  Vaccinations. All vicious, dangerous and fierce animals shall obtain all appropriate vaccinations for the particular species as it relates to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Huron. 
K.  Damage by Vicious, Dangerous or Fierce Animals. If any vicious, dangerous or fierce animal shall, when unprovoked, kill or wound, or assist in killing or wounding any domestic animal, or shall, when provoked, attack, assault, bite or otherwise injure any human being or assist in attacking, assaulting, biting or otherwise injuring any human being while out of or within the enclosure of the owner or keeper of such animal, or while otherwise, on or off the property of the owner or keeper whether or not such dog was on a lease and securely muzzled or whether the animal escaped without fault of the owner or keeper, the owner or keeper of such animal shall be strictly liable to the person aggrieved as aforesaid, for all damage sustained. It is rebuttably presumed as a matter of law that the owning, keeping or harboring of a vicious, dangerous or fierce animal, in violation of this chapter is a nuisance. It shall not be necessary, in order to sustain any such action, to prove that the owner or keeper of such vicious, dangerous or fierce dog possessed the propensity to cause such damage or that the vicious animal had a vicious, dangerous or fierce nature. Upon such attack or assault, the animal control officer or police department is hereby empowered to immediately impound the vicious, dangerous or fierce animal. 
L.  Enforcement. The animal control officer is hereby empowered to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter; and any police officer or peace officer is hereby empowered to seize and impound any vicious, dangerous or fierce animal whose owner or caretaker fails to comply with the provisions hereof. 
M.  Penalties. In the event that the owner or caretaker fails to comply with the specifications of the ordinances hereby adopted which include but are not limited to, any vicious, dangerous or fierce animal which does not have a valid license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; or whose owner or caretaker does not secure the liability insurance coverage required in accordance with this chapter; or which is not maintained on property with an enclosure; or which is found to be outside of the dwelling of the owner or caretaker, or outside of an enclosure except as provided in this chapter; or which is not tattooed; shall be impounded by the animal control officer or police officer and the owner or caretaker guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.280 - Determination, seizure, impoundment and disposition of vicious, dangerous or fierce animals. 
A.  Notice and Hearing. The animal control officer, police officer or the police chief's designee, in their discretion or upon receipt of a complaint alleging that a particular dog is a vicious, dangerous or fierce animal, as defined in this chapter, may initiate proceedings to declare such a dog a vicious, dangerous or fierce animal. In determining whether or not an animal shall be declared a vicious, dangerous or fierce animal, the animal control officer, police officer or police chief's designee may consider, as a mitigating factor, that the actions of the animal were provoked, as defined in this chapter. A hearing on the matter shall be conducted by the police chief, which shall serve as the administrative agency set up by the City of Huron. The person owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring the animal in question shall be given not less than seventy-two (72) hours written notice of the time and place of the hearing. Said notice shall set forth the description of the animal in question and the basis for the allegation of viciousness, dangerousness or fierceness. The notice shall also set forth that if the animal is determined to be vicious, the owner will be required to register and restrain it in accordance with this chapter, remove it from the City, or allow it to be destroyed. The notice shall be served upon any adult residing at the premises where the animal is located or may be posted on those premises if no adult is present to accept service. 
B.  Decision and Order. If, after the hearing, the police chief determines that an animal is vicious, dangerous or fierce as defined in this chapter, the police chief shall order the person owning, sheltering, harboring or keeping the animal to register the animal in compliance with this chapter or remove it from the City, or to cause it to be destroyed in a humane manner. The order shall immediately be served upon the individual or entity against whom issued in the same manner as the notice of hearing. If the order is not complied within three days of its issuance, the police chief is authorized to order the seizure and impoundment of the animal. An animal so sized shall be impounded for a period of six days, (not including the day of impoundment), from the date the order is served upon the owner or keeper. If, at the end of the impoundment period, the person against whom the order of the police chief was issued has not appealed such order to the city manager, the police chief shall cause the animal to be destroyed. 
C.  Appeal to City Manager. The order to register, remove, or destroy a vicious, dangerous or fierce animal issued by the police chief may be appealed to the city manager. To appeal the order, written notice of appeal must be filed with the city manager within three days after receipt of the order to remove, register, or destroy the vicious animal. Failure to file such written notice of appeal shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal the order of the police chief. The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and shall be delivered personally or by certified mail to the city manager. The hearing of the appeal shall be held by the city manager within five days after receipt of the notice of appeal. The hearing may be continued for good cause. After such hearing, the city manager may affirm, reverse, or modify the order of the police chief. Such determination shall be contained in a written decision and shall be made within three days after the hearing, or any continued session thereof. 
D.  Decision and Order. If, after the hearing, the city manager determines that an animal is vicious, dangerous or fierce as defined in this chapter, the city manager shall order the person owning, sheltering, harboring or keeping the animal to register the animal in compliance with this chapter or remove the dog from the City or cause that the animal be destroyed in a humane manner. The order shall immediately be served upon the individual or entity against whom issued in the same manner as notice of hearing. If the order is not complied within three days of issuance, the city manager is authorized to order the seizure and impoundment of the animal. An animal so seized shall be held impounded for a period of six days, (not including the day of impoundment), from the date the order is served upon the owner or keeper. If, at the end of the impoundment period, the person against whom the order of the city manager was issued has not appealed such order to the city council, the city manager shall cause the animal to be destroyed. 
E.  Appeal to the City Council. The order to register, remove, or destroy a vicious, dangerous or fierce animal issued by the chief of police may be appealed to the city manager. In order to appeal the order, written notice of appeal must be filed with the mayor within three days after receipt of the order to register, remove or destroy a vicious, dangerous or fierce animal. Failure to file such written order of appeal shall constitute a waiver. The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for such appeal and shall be delivered personally. The hearing shall be held within five days after receipt of the notice to appeal. The hearing may be continued for good cause. After such hearing, the city council may affirm, reverse or modify the order of the police chief or city manager. Such determination shall be contained in a written decision and shall be made within three days after the hearing or any continued session thereof. 
F.  Decision and Order. If the city council affirms the action of the police chief or city manager, the city council shall order in its written decision that the person owning, sheltering, harboring or keeping such vicious dangerous or fierce animal shall comply with the requirements of this chapter or remove such animal from the City, or cause it to be destroyed in humane manner. The decision and order shall immediately be served upon the person or entity against whom rendered in the same manner as the order to remove or destroy. If the order of the city council, after appeal is not complied with within three days of its issuance, the animal control officer or a police officer is authorized to seize and impound such vicious, dangerous or vicious animal. Any animal so sized shall be impounded for a period of six days, (not including the day of impoundment), days from the date the order is served upon the owner, keeper or caretaker. If, at the end of the impoundment period, the individual or entity against whom the decision and order of the chief of police was issued has not complied with the order to the animal control officer shall cause the animal to be destroyed in a humane manner. 
G.  Violation. Failure to comply with an order of the animal control officer or police officer or their designee issued pursuant hereto and not appealed, or of the police chief, city manager or city council after appeal, shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
H.  Vicious, Dangerous or Fierce Animals at Large. Any animal found at large which displays vicious, dangerous or fierce tendencies may be processed as a vicious, dangerous or fierce animal pursuant to the foregoing. 
I.  Vicious, Dangerous or Fierce Animals Impounded. Any animal which is alleged to be vicious, dangerous or fierce and which is under impoundment or quarantine at the animal shelter shall not be released to the owner, but shall continue to be held at the expense of the owner pending the outcome of the hearing and all appeals. All costs of such impoundment or quarantine shall be paid by the owner if the animal is determined to be vicious, dangerous or fierce. If collection of expenses is pursued through the court, the City shall file suit and receive a judgment for all expenses, together with reasonable attorney's fees, interest and court costs. If the animal is not determined to be vicious, all costs of such impoundment or quarantine shall be paid by the City. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.290 - Food and water. 
Every owner or animal keeper shall supply each animal food and water daily. The food shall be free from contamination, wholesome, palatable, and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal as specified by a veterinarian. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.300 - Inhumane treatment and cruelty to animals. 
A.  Physical and Emotional Abuse. It is unlawful to: (1) willfully or maliciously kill, maim, disfigure, torture, beat, mutilate, burn, scald, overdrive, physically or emotionally mistreat or otherwise treat cruelly an animal; to (2) burden the animal with heavy chains or leashes, padlocks or weights around any part of the body of the animal; or to (3) expose the animal to extreme temperatures. 
B.  Care and Maintenance. It shall be the duty of any person to provide any animal in charge or custody, as owner or otherwise, with adequate food, drink, care and shelter. 
C.  Animals in Vehicles. It shall be unlawful to carry or confine any animal in or upon any vehicle in a cruel or inhumane manner, including but not limited to carrying or confining such animal without adequate ventilation or for an unusual length of time. 
D.  Abandonment of Animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any animal within the City. "Abandonment" includes neglect, whether intentionally or otherwise, whereby an animal becomes a stray. 
E.  Animal Poisoning. Except as otherwise provided herein for the destruction of animals, it shall be unlawful to make accessible to any animal, with intent to cause harm or death, any substance which has in any manner been treated or prepared with any harmful or poisonous substance. This provision shall not be interpreted so as to prohibit the use of poisonous substances for the control of vermin in furtherance of the public health when applied in such a manner as to reasonably prohibit access to other animals. 
F.  Injury to Animals by Motorists. 
1.  Aid. Every operator of a vehicle upon the streets of the jurisdiction shall immediately upon injuring, striking, maiming or running down any domestic animal give such aid as can reasonably be rendered. In the absence of the owner, he shall immediately notify the City of Huron police department, furnishing requested facts relative to such injury. 
2.  Remaining at the Scene. It shall be the duty of such operator to remain at or near the scene until such times as the appropriate authorities arrive, and upon the arrival of such authorities, the operator shall immediately identify himself to such authorities. Alternatively, in the absence of the owner, a person may give aid by taking the animal to the animal control facility or other appropriate facility and notifying the City of Huron police department. Such animal may be taken in by the animal control facility and dealt with as deemed appropriate under the circumstances. 
3.  Emergency Vehicles. Emergency vehicles are exempted from the requirements of this provision. 
4.  Violation. Violation of this section is an infraction. Each such act or repetition thereof shall constitute a separate violation. 
G.  Animals for Fighting. It shall be unlawful to raise, train, keep or use any animal, fowl, or bird for the purpose of fighting or baiting; and for any person to be present as a spectator at any such fighting or baiting of any animal or fowl; to knowingly rent any building, shed, room, yard, ground or premises for any such purposes as aforesaid, or to knowingly suffer or permit the use of his buildings, sheds, rooms, yards, grounds, or premises for the purposes aforesaid. 
H.  Killing of Birds. It shall be unlawful to kill any bird(s), or to rob or destroy any nest, egg or young of any bird in violation of the laws of the State of California. 
I.  Malicious Impounding. It shall be unlawful for anyone not authorized by the City to hide or impound the animal of another. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.310 - Sale of animals. 
A.  Rabbits or Fowl. Rabbits or fowl under two months of age shall not be sold if artificially dyed or colored. Nothing in this provision shall be construed or prohibit the raising of such rabbits and fowl by a private individual for his personal use and consumption, provided that he shall maintain proper brooders and other facilities for the care and containment of such animals while they are in his possession. 
B.  Premiums and Novelties. It shall be unlawful for any person to offer as a premium, prize, award, novelty, or incentive to purchase merchandise, any live animal. 
C.  Pet Turtles. It shall be unlawful for any pet shop to raise or sell any Pseudemys Scripta-Elgas, or P. Troostii family Testudinidae, "Pet Turtles." 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.320 - Wild or dangerous animals. 
A.  Sale Prohibited. It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale, barter, give away, keep or purchase any wild animal as defined herein or any animal which is fierce, dangerous, noxious, or naturally inclined to do harm, except the animal shelter, a zoological park, veterinary hospital, humane society shelter, public laboratory, circus, sideshow, amusement show, or facility for education or scientific purposes may keep such an animal if protective devices adequate to prevent such animal from escaping or injuring the public are provided. 
B.  Protected Species. It shall be unlawful to keep an animal of a species prohibited or protected by Title 50 of the Code of Federal Regulations, or by the California Endangered Species Act (Fish and Game Code Section 2050, et seq.). 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.330 - Special animal permit. 
A.  When Required. No person shall own or harbor more than the maximum number of dogs and/or cats, including persons operating catteries, kennels or animal rescue facilities without obtaining a valid special animal permit pursuant to this section. For purposes of this section, the maximum number equals four provided that not more than three of the number are dogs. In calculating the maximum number or the number of animals permitted by an issued permit, one litter shall not be counted until the dogs or cats of the litter reach six months of age. Violation of this subsection shall be a misdemeanor. 
B.  Issuance. A person may apply for a special animal permit by: (1) paying the required and nonrefundable application fee set by resolution, and (2) furnishing the information requested by the staff of the planning commission. The application is then reviewed: (1) by the Fresno County health department, (2) if approved by the health department, by the planning commission, and (3) by city council. The planning commission shall recommend, deny or grant the application to the city council; the city council may thereupon finally grant or deny the application. No permit will be issued unless the uses disclosed in applying for the permit conform to applicable zoning ordinances, and until the permit fee, in addition to the application fee, is paid in the amount set by resolution of the city council. 
C.  Nontransferability. A permit shall not be valid in relation to a person whom it was not issued or to premises not named in the permit. The permittee shall immediately notify the director of community development/planning of any change which may affect the status of his permit. 
D.  Renewal of Permit. Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall expire on each December 31st following the date of issue. Within two months prior to the expiration of the permit, the permitee may apply for a renewal of the permit and pay the required fee. Any application made after December 31st, shall be accompanied by a late application fee in addition to the regular permit fee. 
E.  Exemptions. Animal establishments operated by state or local government on which are licensed by federal law or licensed veterinary facilities or licensed grooming salons or a facility operated by a nonprofit society incorporated in California for the primary purpose of preventing cruelty to animals are excluded from the licensing requirements of this chapter. 
F.  Inspections. All establishments required to obtain a permit under this section shall be subject to periodic inspections. The inspector shall make a report of such inspection with a copy to be filed with the City of Huron police department and the community development department. 
The animal control officer, police officer or other authorized city-employee is hereby authorized to enter and inspect the premises of any holder of a special animal permit for the purpose of determining whether such special animal permit holder is in compliance with the provisions of City ordinances and the conditions of the special animal permit. As a condition of issuance of a special animal permit, each permit holder shall agree to allow such entry and inspection. Such agreement shall be made a part of the license application. Inspections shall be made during reasonable hours when the special animal permit holder is present, and such inspections may be made without prior notice to the permit holder. Willful refusal on the part of a special animal permit holder to allow such inspection shall be grounds for summary denial of an application for a special animal permit or for summary suspension or revocation of a special animal permit. 
G.  License. Nothing in this section exempts any animal from the license requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.340 - Standards for special animal permit establishments. 
The city council or the city manager may promulgate rules and regulations governing the operation of kennels, catteries, groomeries, pet shops, riding stables, animal rescue facilities, veterinary clinics or hospitals. Such rules and regulations shall provide for the type of structures, buildings, pens, cages, runways or yards required for the animal sought to be kept, harbored or confined on such premises; the manner in which food, water and sanitation facilities will be provided to such animals; measurers relating to the health of said animals, the control of noise and odors, and the protection of persons or property on adjacent premises; and other such matters as the city council or city manager shall deem necessary such rules or regulations shall have the affect of law, and violation of such rules and regulations shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and grounds for revocation of a special animal permit issued by the City. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.350 - Zoning. 
The requirements of this chapter shall be deemed to be in addition to, and not in limitation of, the requirements of any applicable zoning laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.360 - Suspension or revocation. 
A.  Grounds. A permit or license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the police chief or city manager or a permit application or license application rejected on any one or more of the following grounds: 
1.  Misrepresentation. Falsification of facts in a license or permit application. 
2.  Violation of Law. Violations of any of the provisions of this chapter or any other applicable law or regulation including noise, building and zoning ordinances. 
3.  Cruelty or Inhumane Treatment of Animals. Conviction on a charge of cruelty or inhumane treatment of animals. 
B.  Notice. Upon learning of a violation of this chapter, the enforcing animal control officer prior to a suspension or revocation, shall notify the permit or license holder of such violation in writing. The notification shall: 
1.  Set forth the specific violation(s) found; 
2.  State that failure to comply with any notice issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter may result in suspension or revocation of the license or permit after a specified time period which shall not be less than three days; 
3.  State that an opportunity for appeal from any notice or inspection findings will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the Huron police department within three days of the date of the notice. 
C.  Authorized Revocation. Any license or permit granted under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the police chief or city manager for violations listed in subsection A of this section, after and in accordance with notice in the preceding section. 
D.  Appeal. If an appeal is requested for any revocation or suspension, the matter shall be placed on the agenda for the next city council meeting. The owner of the licensed animal and the enforcing animal control officer may appear before the city council at the scheduled time and place to present arguments regarding the revocation or suspension. The city council shall thereupon render a decision revoking, suspending, or continuing the license or permit. 
E.  Emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, any animal control officer may, without notice or opportunity for a hearing, suspend any license or permit for five days and impound any animal(s) kept or harbored with such a suspended license, upon finding that the health, safety and welfare of the animal or community is substantially endangered. 
F.  Delivery of Notice. Notice provided for under this section shall be deemed to have been properly served when a manually signed original or copy has been delivered personally to the permit or license holder or person in charge, or such notice has been sent certified mail to the last known address of the permit or license holder. For notice sent by mail, the above minimum time period is extended to five days. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.370 - Enforcement. 
A.  Responsibility. The police department under the direction of the city manager shall supervise the administration and enforcement of this chapter and of the laws of the State of California pertaining to the control of animals and shall have charge of the city's animal shelter, employees and facilities. 
B.  Agreement. The city council may enter into a written agreement with any veterinarian or by any organized humane society or association, which will undertake to carry out the provisions of this chapter and maintain and operate an animal shelter, and which will license, take up, impound and dispose of animals. Any such veterinarian or society or association which shall enter into such agreement shall carry out all of the provisions of this chapter in the manner herein prescribed. 
C.  Interference with Officer. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, oppose or resist any officer or person empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter while such officer or person is engaged in the performance of his duties as provided herein. 
D.  State Law. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the animal control officer from acting, when he or she deems it appropriate to do so, under the applicable provisions of California Penal Code, Section 597, et seq. 
E.  Violation. Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. Each day of a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
F.  Recoupment of Enforcement Costs. The intent of this section is to authorize the recoupment of administrative costs reasonably related to the enforcement of this chapter. In furtherance of this intent the City shall be entitled to recover costs, including staff time in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
G.  Records of Costs. The animal control officer or his designee shall maintain records of all administrative costs incurred in the processing of violations in the enforcement of this chapter and other applicable chapters and may recover such costs from the violation and/or property owner or property occupier as provided herein. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
6.04.380 - Severability. 
If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or applications of this chapter which can be given effect independent from the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. 
(Ord. 345 § 2 (part), 2006)  
Chapter 6.08 - ANIMALS AND FOWL 
Sections: 
 
6.08.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
"Animal control officer" shall mean an animal control officer, humane officer or other officer employed by the division of animal control whose duties relate to the enforcement of this chapter. 
"Animal control shelter" shall mean the facilities provided for the impounding of animals. 
"Chief of animal control" shall mean that person designated by the council, or if none, then by the city manager, as the director of animal control for the City. 
"Division of animal control services" shall mean that section of the local government, or its designated contract agent, which is specifically charged with the regulation and enforcement of laws dealing with animals within its jurisdiction. 
"Health officer" shall mean that person appointed by the board of supervisors of the County and any other person duly authorized by him to act on his behalf. 
"Impoundment" shall mean the taking up and confining of any animal by the chief of animal control. 
"Kennel" shall mean any enclosure, premises, building, structure, lot or area in a lot in which dogs or cats of at least four (4) months of age are kept, harbored or maintained for commercial purposes. 
"Owner" shall mean a member of the household of business where an animal is being kept or a designated agency of that household or business. 
"Person" shall mean a fictional entity, such as a corporation, estate, association, partnership or trust, as well as one or more individual human beings. 
(Ord. 311 § 1 (part), 1995)  
6.08.020 - Chief of animal control—Duties. 
A.  Responsibility. The chief of animal control shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter, and his duties shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
1.  To administer the animal control shelter and keep such records as may be required by law or by contract; 
2.  To take up and impound animals which are in violation of this chapter or for the safekeeping of the animal to protect its health and welfare; 
3.  To remove and dispose of the carcass of any animal found on any public highway, street, alley or other place; 
4.  To quarantine animals and to cooperate with the health officer; and 
5.  To enforce the provisions of this chapter related to regulations and prohibitions as to the number, type, and location of animals. 
B.  Enforcement. The chief of animal control and his officers shall have the duty of enforcing this chapter and the laws of the State relating to the care, treatment or impounding of animals or for the prevention of cruelty thereto. 
C.  Authority to Arrest. In the performance of their duties the chief of animal control and his officers shall have the authority to issue notices to appear in court pursuant to Chapter 5c (commending with Section 853.5) of Title 3, Part 2 of the Penal Code of the State for violations of State and Local animal control laws. This authority is based on Section 607 (b) and (g) of the Civil Code of the State. 
D.  Authority to Enter Premises. The chief of animal control shall have the right to enter upon any private or public property in the City of Huron in order to examine or capture any animal thereon or therein; provided, however, that no such officer or employee shall have the right to enter a house which is in use as residence without first having secured a search warrant therefore. The chief of animal control is authorized to enter upon any premises upon which any animal is kept, for the purpose of taking up, seizing or impounding any animal found running at large, or staked, herded or grazing thereon, contrary to the provisions of this code, or for the purpose of ascertaining whether such animal is registered as provided in this code, or for the purposes of inspecting the premises to ascertain whether a law of the City or State relating to the care, treatment or impounding of dumb animals or the prevention of cruelty to dumb animals is being violated. 
(Ord. 311 § 1 (part), 1995)  
6.08.030 - Rabies vaccinations. 
Every dog owner, after his dog attains the age of four (4) months, shall procure every other year its vaccination by a licensed veterinarian with a canine anti-rabies vaccine approved by and in a manner prescribed by the State Department of Public Health. 
(Ord. 311 § 1 (part), 1995)  
6.08.040 - Animal license. 
A.  Requirements. The owner of every dog over the age of four (4) months owned and harbored in the City shall obtain an animal license therefor. New residents shall have sixty (60) days in which to acquire such license. The fee for such license shall be in accordance with the fee schedule provided by resolution. The fee paid for the licensing of spayed or neutered dogs shall be one-half (½) or less of such license upon the presentation of the proper certification. Any person who shall fail to pay such license fee after such fee is due, or such dog is required to be licensed, shall pay a penalty in accordance with the fee schedule. A license shall be obtained, but no license fee shall be payable, for the licensing of any dog which is being used for guide purposes by a handicapped resident of the City, or for a dog which has served as a member of the armed forces of the United States of America, or for any dog currently being used by a local law enforcement agency for the purposes of crime prevention. 
B.  Exemptions. The licensing regulations of this chapter shall not be applicable to the following: dogs used for diagnostic purposes or research, the use having been approved by the State Board of Public Health pursuant to Section 1666 of the Health and Safety Code of the State; dogs which are owned by veterinarians licensed by the State and which are kept or maintained on the premises used by such veterinarians in their practice; and dogs kept by owners of pet shops for the purposes of sale, circuses, animal exhibits, or other enterprises maintaining dogs for sale which have been granted business licenses by the City. 
C.  Tags. The chief of animal control is required to procure plates or tags having thereon the number of the license or figures indicating the year for which the fee has been paid, and he shall keep a record of the name of the owner or possessor and a description of the dog for which the license is issued and the number of the license, and he shall deliver such tag to the person paying for such license tag as provided by this chapter. 
D.  Duplicate Tags. Whenever a license tag has been stolen or lost, the owner or possessor of the dog for which the tag was issued, upon the payment of the required fee may receive a duplicate tag for the remaining portion of the license period. 
E.  Wearing of Tags by Animals Required. Any animal for which a license is required shall have around its neck a suitable collar, having attached thereto such plate or tag with such inscription thereon as is required by this section. 
F.  Records. The owner or operator of any kennel, animal breeding facility, pet shop, or any place or establishment where animals are sold shall keep a permanent record of the name, address, and phone number of the purchaser of any canine along with the breed, color, sex and age of each mammal, bird, reptile and amphibian sold or given away. In addition, the owner or the operator shall forward such information to the chief of animal control within thirty (30) days after a sale of transaction. The chief of animal control shall have the right to inspect the records during normal business hours related to sales or transactions under the provision of this section. 
(Ord. 311 § 1 (part), 1995)  
6.08.050 - Prohibited conduct. 
No owner or possessor of any animal shall cause, permit or allow the animal to do any of the following: 
A.  To be upon any public street, sidewalk, park, school ground, any public property, or upon any unenclosed premises in the City unless the animal is properly licensed and saddled, harnessed, haltered or leashed by a substantial chain, lead rope, or leash, which chain, lead rope, or leash shall be continuously held by some competent person capable of controlling such animal. All cats shall be exempted from the provisions of this section; 
B.  To trespass upon any private property without the consent of the owner thereof, and it shall further be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any animal, after receiving written notice by registered mail from any owner or tenant of private property, to allow or permit the animal to remain upon the property or to habitually continue to trespass thereon; 
C.  To suffer or permit such animal to habitually bark or act in such a manner as to continuously disturb the peace of any citizen or otherwise be a public nuisance; and 
D.  To be without proper and adequate food, water, shelter, care and attention pursuant to Section 597F of the Penal Code of the State; 
E.  To wilfully abandon any dog or other animal within the City; 
F.  To keep any hive of bees within two hundred (200) feet of any residence, hospital, sanitarium, public eating place, school, church, office building, store, hotel, apartment house, roominghouse or any other place of habitation. This section shall not apply to the keeping of bees within an educational institution for study or observation, or within a physician's office or laboratory for medical research, treatment or other scientific purposes, provided they are not permitted to fly at large; 
G.  To keep the stable, barn, stall, pen, coop, building or place in which any animal, fowl or bird is kept in an unclean or unsanitary condition; 
H.  To slaughter or cause to be slaughtered any animal within two hundred (200) feet of any residence, hospital, sanitarium, public eating place, school, church, office building, store, hotel, apartment house, roominghouse or any place of habitation. This subsection shall not apply to the slaughter of animals within an educational institution for study or observation, or within a laboratory or such other facility which has been approved for such use. In areas where slaughtering is allowed, the entrails must be buried on-site to a depth of at least three (3) feet within two (2) hours of slaughtering or shall be picked upon and disposed of in an approved manner. 
(Ord. 311 § 1 (part), 1995)  
6.08.060 - Animals kept in residential zones. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this code with regard to uses as of right or under a conditional use permit, the provisions of this section with regard to animals in residential zoned property shall be enforced. For these purposes, "residentially zoned property" shall include any property which is zoned R-1, R-2 or R-3, under the provisions of the zoning ordinance, and which has, since residential zoning has been imposed, been used for residential purposes. It is unlawful to maintain any animals in a residential zone in the City of Huron, other than household pets. It is unlawful in a residential zone to maintain any animals, including household pets, for a commercial purpose. For the purpose of interpreting this section, the term "household pets" is defined as follows: 
A.  The following are household pets: 
1.  Dogs; 
2.  Domesticated cats; 
3.  Small birds (including parakeets, canaries and other birds of similar size); 
4.  Larger birds (including chickens, pigeons, quail, pheasants, doves and other birds of similar size) not to exceed ten (10) per residential lot; and 
5.  Rabbits, hamsters, chinchilla, guinea pigs and rodents of a similar size, not to exceed four (4) per residential lot. 
B.  Household pets shall not include horses, cows, goats, sheep, other equine, bovine, avian or ruminant animals, pigs, including but not limited to pot-bellied pigs, predatory wild animals, ducks, geese, turkeys, roosters, fighting cocks, fowl which normally constitute an agricultural use, zoo animal, poisonous reptiles and bees. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted so as to allow the keeping any animal species which is listed as either an endangered species or a threatened species under either the California Endangered Species Act or the federal Endangered Species Act. 
C.  Any animal which is not listed in the definition of a household pet given in this section but also not mentioned in the list of animals which are specifically not household pets, shall be presumed to be not a household pet, unless the city council determines otherwise. 
D.  All animals kept as household pets pursuant to this section shall be maintained in a manner which does all of the following: 
1.  Provides a healthy environment for the animal; 
2.  Does not constitute a risk to the health or safety of humans; 
3.  Does not constitute a nuisance to the neighborhood; and 
4.  Is approved by the county health officer. 
(Ord. 311 § 1 (part), 1995)  
6.08.070 - Animals to be impounded. 
Every animal kept or found in violation of the provisions of this chapter may be taken up and impounded by the chief of animal control. Such animal may be redeemed by the owner or person entitled to its possession within seventy-two (72) hours thereof on the payment of such fees and charges as provided by resolution but, if not so redeemed, such animal may be destroyed by the chief of animal control. If no person appears and redeems said animal within seventy-two (72) hours from the giving of the notice as therein provided, the person in charge of the impound facility may cause and direct the animal to be sold, or may cause and direct the animal to be placed with a home by such person to be suitable. The receipt for the sale thereof, shall be a valid title to the purchaser, subject, however, to the right of redemption as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 311 § 1 (part), 1995)  
6.08.080 - Diseased or vicious animals. 
Whenever the chief of animal control shall have reasonable cause to believe that any animal, either licensed or unlicensed, regardless of whether it is a household pet, is diseased or vicious or dangerous to any person or other animal, the chief of animal control is directed to take custody of such animal and impound the animal in a safe place for such period of time as is required in order to observe, examine and determine whether or not such animal is diseased or vicious or dangerous or constitutes a menace to the public health or safety. It shall be the duty of the chief of animal control to observe and examine any such animal and determine whether the animal is diseased or vicious or dangerous or does constitute a menace to the public health or safety. If it is so determined, it shall be unlawful for any person to continue to maintain such animal; otherwise, such animal shall be returned to the owner or person entitled to its possession. 
(Ord. 311 § 1 (part), 1995)  
6.08.090 - Notices to owners of animals impounded. 
Within twenty-four (24) hours after the impoundment of any animal, the chief of animal control shall notify the owner or possessor of the animal, if known, that the animal has been impounded and the date of impounding. If the owner or possessor of such animal is not known to the chief of animal control, the chief shall maintain records of such impoundment for at least thirty (30) days after the date of the impoundment. 
(Ord. 311 § 1 (part), 1995)  
6.08.100 - Hearings following impoundment. 
Any owner or possessor of any animal impounded pursuant to this chapter that is (a) found to be without proper and adequate food, water, shelter, care and attention; or (b) found to be diseased or vicious or dangerous to any person or other animal or has bitten any person or other animal shall be entitled to a hearing conducted by the city manager, health officer or designee into such seizure within ten (10) days following such impoundment provided such owner or possessor files a written request with the chief of animal control within three (3) days following the notice of such impoundment. In any case, such owner or possessor shall be liable for all costs related to such seizure. 
(Ord. 311 § 1 (part), 1995)  
6.08.110 - Redemption. 
The owner or person entitled to the control or custody of any animal impounded, at any time before the sale or other disposition thereof, may redeem the animal by paying all the proper fees and charges thereon made by virtue of any of the provisions of this chapter. Whenever such animal is redeemed, the person redeeming shall receive from the chief of animal control duplicate receipts for the same. The chief of animal control shall give to any person redeeming such animal a receipt for the redemption money. 
(Ord. 311 § 1 (part), 1995)  
6.08.120 - Redemption fees. 
The fees for animal shelter services in impounding and caring for animals shall be by type of animal as follows, and no animal shall be released by its owner or possessor before such fees as are provided by resolution are paid in full: 
A.  Type A: horse, mare, mule, ass, bull, ox, calf or other animal of similar size; 
B.  Type B: sheep, lamb, goat, hog or other animal of similar size; 
C.  Type C: dog; 
D.  Type D: cat; 
E.  Type E: bird, fowl, rabbit, hamster or rodent; or 
F.  Type F: all other animals not otherwise listed in this section. 
(Ord. 311 § 1 (part), 1995)  
6.08.130 - License fees to be paid upon redemption. 
If a license fee has not been paid for the then current period for any impounded dog, the party redeeming, before redemption, shall pay such license fee. 
(Ord. 311 § 1 (part), 1995)  
6.08.140 - Records of impounded animals. 
The chief of animal control shall keep a record of the number of all animals impounded, showing in detail, in the case of each animal, the description, date of receipt, the date and manner of disposal, the name of the person redeeming or purchasing, the fees and charges and proceeds of sales received on account thereof, and such additional records as may be required. 
(Ord. 311 § 1 (part), 1995)  
6.08.150 - Epidemics. 
The county department of health and welfare may determine and declare that rabies are epidemic or that another unusually dangerous health situation exists around dogs and other animals in the jurisdiction, or in any part thereof. Upon the making of such description, the health officer shall prepare and promulgate such rules and regulations as are necessary for the control of the dogs and other animals within such area. Such rules and regulations of the health officer may include, but are not limited to, the quarantine, vaccination and destruction of diseased or suspected or stray animals by humane methods. It shall be the duty of the chief of animal control to assist the health officer in carrying out such rules and regulations. 
(Ord. 311 § 1 (part), 1995)  
6.08.160 - Duty to report bites. 
It shall be the duty of any person having knowledge that any animal has bitten a human being to report the fact immediately to the county department of health and welfare, the chief of animal control, or the local law enforcement agency having jurisdiction and to furnish complete information thereof. 
(Ord. 311 § 1 (part), 1995)  
6.08.170 - Right to contract for animal control services. 
The council may contract for animal control service with the County or any humane society or other organization, corporation or association upon such terms and conditions as may be agreeable. 
(Ord. 311 § 1 (part), 1995)  
6.08.180 - Use of license and other revenue. 
All revenue derived from the fee schedule (except for board fees), and all revenue derived from fines, forfeitures and penalties related to the enforcement and administration of these provisions, shall go to the general fund. 
(Ord. 311 § 1 (part), 1995)  
6.08.190 - Interference with officer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to interfere or attempt to interfere with any duly authorized enforcement officer engaged in the performance of any duty imposed or authorized by this chapter, or for any person to unlawfully take or attempt to take any dog or other animal seized pursuant to the provisions of this chapter from the custody of such officer, or for any person to remove or attempt to remove from impoundment any dog or other animal without first having redeemed such dog or animal as provided in this chapter, or without first having obtained their permission of such officer to do so. 
(Ord. 311 § 1 (part), 1995)  
6.08.200 - Vicious animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any vicious animal owned by such person, or under his control, to run at large. Any dog which viciously attacks other dogs or animals, or which has once bitten or otherwise has physically attacked a human being without reasonable provocation, shall be conclusively presumed to be vicious. 
Any animal which has been taken into custody as the result of a complaint under this section shall be held by the animal control division of the City at the cost and expense of the owner of such animal pending a resolution of the charges so filed and until a determination is made of the case. 
When the charge has been finally determined, the court, in addition to other penalties imposed by this chapter, may order that the animal be destroyed or otherwise disposed of. 
(Ord. 311 § 1 (part), 1995)  
6.08.210 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person who commits any act declared by any provision of this chapter to be unlawful, or who violates the provisions, or fails to comply with the mandatory requirement of any section or portion of this chapter shall be punishable as for an infraction. Each violation within a single twelve (12) month time period shall be punishable by: 
A.  A fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation; 
B.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second violation of this chapter within one (1) year; 
C.  A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each additional violation of this chapter within one (1) year; and 
D.  Repeated violation of this chapter may be punishable as a misdemeanor. 
The amount of the fine may, from time to time, after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, be changed by the city council by resolution without the necessity of amending said ordinance. Only the initial amount of the fine is set forth herein. 
(Ord. 311 § 1 (part), 1995)  
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapters:  
Chapter 8.04 - ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORTS 
Section: 
 
8.04.010 - Adoption. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions for local implementation of the Environmental Quality Act of 1970, "CEQA," as amended. 
(Ord. 122 Part A (part), 1973)  
8.04.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide the necessary information and procedures for the preparation and evaluation of Environmental Impact Reports (EIR's) on projects in the City of Huron which would have a significant effect on the environment. 
(Ord. 122 Part A §1, 1973)  
8.04.030 - Policy. 
As outlined in Sections 21000 and 21001 of the CEQA, every public agency and every citizen has an obligation to take all action necessary to protect, rehabilitate and enhance the environment of the State. 
An environmental impact report is an informational document which, when fully prepared in accordance with the CEQA and this chapter, will inform public decision-makers of the environmental effects of projects they propose to carry out or approve. 
(Ord. 122 Part A §2, 1973)  
8.04.040 - Evaluating environmental significance. 
A.  It is necessary for the sponsor of a project to determine if the project will have a significant effect upon the environment. Only those projects which may have a significant effect on the environment require the preparation of an EIR. 
B.  The determination of whether a project may have a significant effect on the environment calls for careful judgment. An iron-clad definition of significant effect is not possible because the significance of an activity may vary with the setting. Examples of significant impact include the following consequences and potential consequences: 
1.  Disrupts, alters or destroys an historic or archaeological site, or its immediate surroundings; 
2.  Has a substantial impact on natural, ecological, recreational or scenic resources; 
3.  Displaces substantial numbers of people; 
4.  Is inconsistent with environmental plans and goals that have been adopted by the community; 
5.  Causes increased congestion (traffic, recreational, other); 
6.  Has a substantial aesthetic or visual effect; 
7.  Breaches any national, state or local standards relating to the environment; has a detrimental impact on air and water quality or on ambient noise levels for adjoining areas; involves the possibility of contaminating a public water supply system or affecting ground water, flooding, erosion or sedimentation; is subject to major geologic hazards; 
8.  Involves extensive use of pesticides or rodenticides; 
9.  Affects a rare or endangered species of animal or plant, or habitat of such a species; 
10.  Causes substantial interference with the movement of any resident or migratory fish or wildlife species; 
11.  Induces substantial growth or concentration of population; and 
12.  Causes a seriously adverse public reaction based on environmental issues. 
C.  If any of the following conditions are found to exist as a result of a project, the project will be found to have a significant effect on the environment: 
1.  Impacts which have the potential to degrade the quality of the environment, curtail the range of uses of the environment, or reduce the diversity in the environment; 
2.  Impacts which achieve short-term, to the disadvantage of long-term, environmental goals. A short-term impact on the environment is one which occurs in a relatively brief, definitive period of time, while long-term impacts are effects which will endure well into the future; and 
3.  Impacts with substantial primary or secondary consequences. Primary consequences are immediately related to the project, while secondary consequences are related more to primary consequences than to the project itself; 
4.  Impacts for a project which are individually limited, but cumulatively considerable. A project may impact on two (2) or more separate resources where the impact on each resource is relatively small. If the effect of the total of those impacts on the environment is significant, an EIR must be prepared. This provision does not apply to two or more separate projects where the impact of each is insignificant; 
5.  The environmental effects of a project will cause substantial adverse effects on human beings, either directly or indirectly. 
D.  An EIR must also be prepared whenever a proposed activity will impact on a resource of critical concern, as identified by the California Office of Planning and Research, and specified in the Environmental Goals and Policies of the State adopted by the Governor, due to the extreme likelihood of significant impact. The EIR must specify how the critical resources of the area will be protected. 
E.  The following have been found not to have a significant impact upon the environment, and are declared to be categorical exemptions: 
1.  Class 1. Repair, maintenance or minor alteration of existing structures, facilities or machinery, such as: 
a.  Interior alterations, involving, for example plumbing and electrical conveyances that do not lead to increased use or capacity, 
b.  To public utility construction and facilities, 
c.  To existing private and public streets, sidewalks, gutters and similar public service facilities, 
d.  Reconstruction or restoration of a damaged structure, unless it is determined that the damage resulted from an environmental (particularly geologic) hazard, such as an earthquake or landslide, 
e.  Additions to existing buildings provided there is no requirement for a zoning amendment or variance or it will not result in an increase of more than twenty-five (25) percent of the building size, 
f.  Addition of safety or health protection devices for use during construction or in conjunction with existing structures, which will not alter the physical character of the area, or involve fresh impacts on the environment. 
2.  Class 2. Construction of individual (where not in conjunction with a residential development of two (2) or more such structures) detached, single- and double-family residential structures and attendant facilities, such as: 
a.  Involving building permits for single-family and duplex structures by individual builders, 
b.  Water main, sewage, electrical, gas and other utility extensions to serve such construction, as long as the extension is of no greater length than the dimension of the property itself, 
c.  Construction of reasonable accessories attached to such structures including garages, carports, patios, swimming pools, fences, where there is existing zoning for such uses, and where there would be no impact on resources of critical environmental concern. 
3.  Class 3. Certain alterations in the condition of land, such as: 
a.  Involving grading permits for less than three hundred (300) cubic yards of earthwork, unless the grading is located in a scenic area, a drainage channel, a streambed or a geologically hazardous area, 
b.  Involving permits for gardening and landscaping on small tracts of land (e.g., right-of-way strips), 
c.  Filling of earth into previously excavated land, 
d.  Clearance of land by demolition and removal of buildings and related structures, except where they are of historical or archaeological significance, where there would be no impact on resources of critical environmental concern. 
4.  Class 4. Certain alterations in land use regulation or limitations, such as: 
a.  Lot line adjustments, 
b.  Zoning reclassifications from existing residential, commercial or industrial zones to new zones to provide more beneficial environmental impact from the land use, 
c.  Issuance of encroachment permits, where there is no impact on a resource of critical environmental concern. 
(Ord. 122 Part B §1, 1973)  
8.04.050 - Preparing environmental impact reports and exemptions. 
A.  If a sponsor is proposing to undertake a project, he must first determine whether it qualifies or not under an existing categorical exemption (see above). If the project does qualify, no further action need be taken. 
B.  If the project does not qualify under an existing categorical exemption, it may still be part of a class of projects which will not significantly affect the environment. 
C.  If the project is not part of a class of projects that qualify for a categorical exemption, the sponsor should conduct an initial study to determine if the project would have a significant impact on the environment. If it is determined that the project would not have a significant impact, the sponsor may prepare a negative declaration instead of an environmental impact report. 
1.  A negative declaration is a statement by the sponsor that the project in question will not have a significant effect on the environment. A negative declaration must include a description of the project as proposed, a description of the environment existing before commencement of the project, and detailed information supporting the contention that the project will not have a significant effect on the environment. 
2.  The negative declaration should be filed with the city clerk at least thirty (30) days before action is taken by the city council regarding the project. The negative declaration followed by notice of the action taken regarding the project (approval or disapproval) must be filed with the city clerk and the Fresno County clerk. 
3.  If the sponsor finds, after an initial study, that the project will have a significant effect on the environment, the sponsor must prepare or cause to be prepared by contract, an environmental impact report and must file it with the city clerk for approval or disapproval by the city council. 
E.  If the project is being proposed to meet an emergency as defined in the CEQA or Guidelines issued by the Resources Agency of California, the sponsor is not required to prepare an EIR. 
(Ord. 122 Part B §2, 1973)  
8.04.060 - Content of EIR—Description of project. 
A.  The precise location and boundaries of the proposed project must be shown on a detailed map included in the EIR. 
B.  A statement of the objectives sought by the proposed project must be included. This can be as detailed as desired by the sponsor. 
C.  A general description of the project's physical (technical and environmental) characteristics, considering the principal engineering proposals, must be included. The description should not supply extensive detail beyond that needed for evaluation and review of environmental impact. 
D.  Any applicable governmental agency public notice or permit number should be referenced with dates. 
(Ord. 122 Part C §1, 1973)  
8.04.070 - Content of EIR—Environmental description. 
An EIR must include a description of the environment as it exists before commencement of the project, from both a local and a regional perspective. 
(Ord. 122 Part C §2, 1973)  
8.04.080 - Content of EIR—Environmental impact. 
All phases of a project must be considered when evaluating its impact on the environment: acquisition, development and operation. 
A.  The environmental impact of the proposed action: Describe the direct and indirect impacts of the project on the environment, giving due consideration to both the short-term and long-term effects. 
It shall include specifics of the area, the resources involved, physical changes, alterations to ecological systems and changes induced in population distribution, population concentration, the human use of the land (including commercial and residential development) and other aspects of the resource base such as water, scenic quality and public services. 
Both quantitative and qualitative information should be included, but quantitative data should not be over-emphasized at the expense of qualitative judgments. Qualitative judgments should be based on factual information. 
B.  Any adverse environmental effects which cannot be avoided if the proposal is implemented: Describe any adverse impacts, including those which can be reduced to an acceptable level but not eliminated. Where there are impacts that cannot be alleviated without imposing an alternative design (see subsection D below), their implications and the reasons why the project is being proposed, notwithstanding their effect, shall be described in detail. Do not neglect impacts on any aesthetically valuable surroundings, or on human health. 
C.  Mitigation measures proposed to minimize the impact: Describe any mitigation measures written into the project plan to reduce significant environmentally adverse impacts to acceptable levels, and the basis for considering these levels acceptable. Where a particular mitigation measure has been chosen from among several alternatives, the other alternatives must be discussed and reasons should be given for the choice made. 
D.  Alternatives to the proposed action: Describe any known alternatives to the project, or to the location of the project, which could feasibly attain the basic objectives of the project, and why they were rejected in favor of the ultimate choice. The specific alternative of "no project" must also always be evaluated, along with the impact. Second, describe any mitigation measures which could be feasibly incorporated into the project plans to alleviate any significant environmentally adverse impact (and which were not discussed under paragraph c above) and the reason these have not been included. Attention should be paid to alternatives capable of substantially reducing or eliminating any environmentally adverse impacts, even if these alternatives substantially impede the attainment of the project objectives. 
E.  The relationship between local short-term uses of man's environment and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term productivity: Describe the cumulative and long-term effects of the proposed project which adversely affect the state of the environment, from the perspective that each generation is trustee of the environment for future generations. Special attention shall be given to impacts which narrow the range of beneficial uses of the environment or pose long-term risks to health or safety. In addition, the reasons why the proposed project is believed by the sponsor to be justified now, rather than reserving an option for further alternatives, shall be explained. 
F.  Any irreversible environmental changes which would be involved in the proposed action should it be implemented: Uses of renewable and nonrenewable resources during the initial and continued phases of the project are basically irreversible since a large commitment of resources makes removal or nonuse thereafter unlikely. Primary impacts and, particularly, secondary impacts (such as a highway improvement which provides access to a nonaccessible area) generally commit future generations to similar uses. Also irreversible damage can result from environmental accidents associated with the project. Any irretrievable commitments of resources shall be evaluated to assure that such current consumption is justified. 
G.  The growth-inducing impact of the proposed action: Discuss the ways in which the proposed project could foster population growth, either directly or indirectly, in the surrounding environment. Included in this are projects which would remove obstacles to population growth. Increases in the population may further tax existing resources, so consideration must be given to this impact. With or without anticipated population growth as a result of the project, it should be recognized that some projects may encourage and facilitate other projects that could significantly affect the environment, either individually or cumulatively. This aspect must be discussed as well. It must not be assumed that growth in any area is necessarily beneficial, detrimental, or of little significance to the environment. 
H.  The identity of all federal, state or local agencies, other organizations and private individuals consulted in preparing the EIR, and the identity of the persons, firm or agency preparing the EIR, by contract or other authorization must be given. 
With respect to water quality aspects of the proposed project which have been previously certified by the appropriate state or interstate organization as being in substantial compliance with applicable water quality standards, reference to the certification should be made. 
(Ord. 122 Part C §3, 1973)  
8.04.090 - Final environmental impact statement. 
Along with the above elements, the final EIR must summarize the comments and suggestions made by those who reviewed a draft of the EIR, and must describe the disposition of issues raised (e.g., revisions to the proposed project to mitigate anticipated impacts or objections). In particular the major issues raised when the sponsor's position is at variance with recommendations and objections must be addressed in detail (e.g., reasons why specific comments and suggestions could not be accepted, and factors of overriding importance prohibiting the incorporation of suggestions). 
(Ord. 122 Part C §4, 1973)  
8.04.100 - Public hearings. 
A.  A public hearing on the environmental impact of a proposed project shall be held when the city council determines it would facilitate the resolution of controversy over environmental issues or when the city council needs information about public opinion on a proposed project. This hearing may be held in conjunction with hearings on other aspects of the project, especially as part of normal planning activities. Issues raised in a hearing should be addressed in the final EIR. 
At the option of the city council, the hearing may be before the planning commission or the council. If the hearing is before the planning commission, the commission shall make recommendations to the council. In that event, council shall consider the commission's recommendations in reaching the council's decision. 
B.  A draft EIR may be used as the outline for discussion at a public hearing, if it is available. 
C.  Public notice for a hearing should be given in the same manner as the notice of adoption of ordinances, no later than fifteen (15) days before the hearing. The notice should briefly describe the project, highlight the major environmental impacts expected, and indicate where the EIR can be obtained if it is available. 
(Ord. 122 Part D §1, 1973)  
Chapter 8.08 - FIRE CONTROL REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
8.08.010 - Burning of materials within City limits—Permit required. 
A.  No person, firm or corporation shall set, kindle or maintain any fire, or cause any fire to be set, kindled or maintained, to any trash, grass or any inflammable material upon their own property or upon the property of another, or in, or on, any street, alley, road, land or public grounds within the corporate limits of the City of Huron without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the fire chief of the City of Huron. 
B.  The aforesaid permit shall be in printed form and shall contain such rules and regulations as the fire chief of the City of Huron shall deem necessary for the protection of persons and property. The permittee or his duly authorized agent, upon receipt thereof, shall sign said permit in the place so designated, and the signature as aforesaid shall be prima facie evidence of knowledge by the permittee and/or his agent of the rules and regulations contained in the permit. 
C.  Any burning allowed by permit as aforesaid shall comply with the rules and regulations contained in the permit, and any violation thereof shall constitute cause for permanent cancellation of such permit in addition to the other punishment provided herein. Such permits shall be available for inspection at any time to the members of the fire department and the police department of the City of Huron. 
D.  Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both. 
(Ord. 24 §§1—4, 1952)  
8.08.020 - Haystacks and strawstacks—Storage and use regulated. 
A.  No haystacks or strawstacks over three (3) tons in weight shall be stored or maintained within the limits of the City of Huron. 
B.  Straw used for packing melons or in connection with melon operations shall be so placed that it will have adequate clearance from buildings, and such straw must be removed fifteen (15) days after the termination of melon packing operations in each particular case. 
C.  The city council of Huron herewith makes a finding that acts committed in violation of the foregoing subsections of this section constitute a fire hazard and a public nuisance. 
D.  Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00), or by imprisonment in the Fresno County jail for not more than ninety (90) days, or be both such fine and imprisonment. 
E.  This section is enforceable by district fire chiefs, California Division of Forestry Officers, and fire and police officials of the City of Huron. 
(Ord. 75 §1—5, 1959)  
Chapter 8.12 - GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
Sections: 
 
8.12.010 - Provision of garbage services. 
The City shall provide or contract with another to provide for the collection or disposal, or both, of garbage, waste, refuse, rubbish, offal, trimmings or other refuse matter under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by a resolution or ordinance. 
It shall further be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to be engaged in or carry out the business of collecting or disposing of garbage, waste, rubbish, offal, trimmings or other refuse matter within the City of Huron except by contract as authorized by Public Resources Code Section 49300. 
(Amended during 1995 codification; Ord. 238 §1, 1987)  
8.12.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the words "garbage," "refuse," "ashes," "living unit," and "business establishment" have the following meanings: 
"Ashes" means residue from fires used for cooking and for heating buildings. 
"Business establishment" means stores, restaurants, banks, service stations and garages, passenger and freight depots, places of amusement, professional and business offices, and any and all other commercial or business establishments not elsewhere specifically mentioned herein. 
"Garbage" means wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food; and wastes from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
"Living unit" means a living quarter, whether located in a single- or multiple-family dwelling. 
"Refuse" means combustible and semi-combustible trash, including, but not limited to, paper, cartons, boxes, wood, and tree and yard trimmings; noncombustible trash, including, but not limited to, metals, tin cans, dirt, small quantities of rock and pieces of concrete, glass, crockery and mineral waste; and street rubbish, including but not limited to, street sweepings, dirt, leaves, catch-basin dirt, and contents of litter receptacles. Refuse shall not include earth and wastes from building operations. 
(Ord. 114 §1, 1971)  
8.12.030 - Receptacles required—Use. 
A.  It shall be the duty of every person in possession, charge or control of any living unit, business establishment, hotel, motel, trailer camp or labor camp with the City of Huron to provide or cause to be provided, and at all times keep or cause to be kept, receptacles adequate to contain the amount of garbage, refuse and ashes ordinarily accumulated at such place during the intervals between collections made by the City. The city manager or his delegate shall be empowered to set the number and type of receptacles required to service any living unit or business establishment covered by this chapter. All such receptacles shall be kept in a single convenient place, easily accessible to city employees engaged in collecting garbage. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, keep or accumulate, or cause or permit to be deposited, kept or accumulated, any garbage, or other material subject to decay other than leaves or grass, at any place in the City of Huron unless such garbage or material is enclosed in metal receptacles conforming to the specifications contained in Section 8.12.030. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any person other than the owner or person lawfully in control thereof, or an officer or employee of the City of Huron, to interfere in any manner with any receptacles used for the accumulation or handling of garbage, refuse or ashes, to remove any such receptacle from the location where it shall have been placed by the owner or person lawfully in control thereof, or to remove the contents from it. 
(Ord. 187 §1, 1993: Ord. 114 §§2—4, 1971)  
8.12.040 - Collection and conveyance restrictions. 
All garbage, refuse and/or ashes accumulated in the City of Huron shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the City. Reasonable collection schedules shall be established from time to time by the city council. No person other than officers or employees of the City shall collect, convey over any of the streets or alleys of the City, or dispose of, any garbage, refuse and/or ashes accumulated in the City, except as follows: 
A.  Exception for Actual Producers. This chapter shall not prohibit the actual producers of refuse or ashes, or the owners of premises upon which refuse or ashes has accumulated, from personally collecting, conveying and disposing of such refuse at a disposal site designated jointly by the City of Huron and the County of Fresno; provided, however, there shall be no rebate or credit in the service charges prescribed by this chapter by reason of any such producer or owner so doing. 
B.  Exception for Outside Collectors. This chapter shall not prohibit commercial or charitable collectors of refuse from hauling such refuse over City streets, if authorized by the City to do so. 
(Ord. 114 §5, 1971)  
8.12.050 - Burying garbage unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or bury garbage or refuse in any hole or excavation within the City. 
(Ord. 114 §6, 1971)  
8.12.060 - Burning garbage. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any garbage within the City. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any combustible or semi-combustible refuse except to the extent, if any, such burning is permitted by applicable air pollution laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. 114 §7, 1971)  
8.12.070 - Service charges. 
Service charges for collection, removal and disposal of garbage, refuse and/or ashes shall be set from time to time by the city council. 
(Ord. 187 §2, 1983: Ord. 180, 1981: Ord. 114 §8, 1971)  
8.12.080 - Billing. 
The service charges provided for herein shall be billed monthly. 
(Ord. 114 §10, 1971)  
8.12.090 - Delinquent accounts. 
Any account not paid within thirty (30) days after rendition of the bill therefor shall be deemed delinquent and shall bear interest at one (1) percent per month thereafter. Any delinquent account is subject to stoppage of service without notice. 
(Ord. 114 §11, 1971)  
8.12.100 - Service charges—Exceptions. 
No service charges need be paid for any living unit, business establishment, hotel, motel, trailer camp or labor camp which has remained entirely unoccupied for thirty (30) days or more, or for any manufacturing or industrial processing facility which has not been operated for thirty (30) days or more, if at the time the charges otherwise would be due for that period, the owner, operator or his duly authorized agent or representative files with the city clerk a declaration under penalty of perjury correctly setting forth the pertinent facts. 
(Ord. 114 §12, 1971)  
8.12.110 - Enforcement authority. 
The police department and health officer of the City of Huron are empowered and required to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and they shall have the right to enter upon all premises, except within private dwellings, for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of this chapter are being complied with. 
(Ord. 114 §13, 1971)  
8.12.120 - Portable toilets and private lunch wagons—Dumping of sewage prohibited. 
A.  Portable toilets and private lunch wagons are prohibited from dumping sewage and wastes into the City sewer system; and 
B.  A penalty of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per lunch wagon will be issued to the owner of such vehicle for violation of this section. 
(Ord. 307, 1995)  
8.12.130 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any provisions of Sections 8.12.030, 8.12.040, 8.12.050 and/or 8.12.060 shall be guilty of misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00); or by imprisonment of not more than six (6) months; or by both such fine and such imprisonment. 
(Ord. 114 §16, 1971)  
Chapter 8.13 - CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE RECYCLING 
Sections: 
 
8.13.010 - Definitions. 
(a)  "Applicant" means any individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever who applies to the City for the applicable permits to undertake any construction, demolition, or renovation project within the City. 
(b)  "Collector" means the City's exclusive service provider under contract to collect, refuse, green waste, recyclables, and construction and demolition materials. 
(c)  "Construction" means the building, rehabilitation, remodeling, renovation or repair of any facility or structure or any portion thereof, including any tenant improvements to an existing facility or structure. 
(d)  "Construction and/or demolition debris" means discarded materials generally not considered water soluble, and nonhazardous in nature, including, but not limited to, steel, glass, brick, concrete, asphalt material, pipe, gypsum, wallboard, wood and lumber from the construction or destruction of a structure as part of a construction, renovation, demolition or landscaping project, and including rocks, soils, tree remains, green waste and bulky waste that normally results from land clearing, landscaping and development operations for a construction and demolition project. 
(e)  "Covered project" shall have the meaning set forth in Section 8.13.020 of this Chapter. 
(f)  "Demolition" means the decimating, razing, ruining, tearing down or wrecking of any facility, structure, pavement or building, whether in whole or in part, whether interior or exterior. 
(g)  "Divert", "diverted", or "diversion" means to use material for any purpose other than disposal in a landfill or transformation facility. 
(h)  "Diversion requirement" means the diversion of at least fifty (50) percent of the total construction and demolition debris generated by a project via reuse or recycling, unless applicant has been granted an exemption, in which case the diversion requirement shall be the maximum feasible diversion rate. Applicants must also comply with the 2010 California Green Building Standard Code. 
(i)  "Hazardous waste" means any solid or liquid waste that is defined under Section 40141 of the California Public Resources Code, as amended periodically. 
(j)  "Project" means any activity involving construction, demolition, or renovation in the city which requires issuance of a demolition permit, building permit or other similar permit from the City. Project also includes city public project construction, demolition or renovation. 
(k)  "Recycling program application" means a form that is approved by the City for the purpose of compliance with this chapter submitted by the applicant for any covered project. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 1, 1-11-12)  
8.13.020 - Covered projects. 
(a)  Covered Projects: All construction and renovation projects within the city in which the total permit valuation is greater or equal to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) shall comply within section. In addition, all demolition projects having a total square footage of more than one thousand (1,000) shall be a covered project. 
(b)  City Covered Projects: All city construction and renovation projects which have estimated construction costs or contract price that is or is projected to be greater than or equal to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) and all city demolition projects, regardless of value, are covered projects and shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 1, 1-11-12)  
8.13.030 - Exempt projects. 
The following projects are exempt from the requirements of this chapter: 
(1)  Construction and renovation projects that do not meet the value thresholds or size for covered projects as set forth in subsections (a) and (b) above. 
(2)  Projects where only one of the following separate permits is required: 
(a)  Kitchen/bath remodel; 
(b)  Electrical, mechanical or plumbing; 
(3)  Projects that will generate only hazardous waste. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 1, 1-11-12)  
8.13.040 - Disposal site, recyclers and waste materials processors. 
All applicants shall contract roll-off services through the City's exclusive hauler or shall self haul construction and demolition material to the City's exclusive hauler's transfer station. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 1, 1-11-12)  
8.13.050 - Minimum construction and demolition diversion requirements. 
Every applicant shall divert from the landfills or disposal sites a minimum of fifty (50) percent diversion requirement, measured by tonnage, of all construction and demolition debris generated as a result of any covered project. Applicants for newly constructed buildings must comply with the diversion requirements of the 2010 Green Building Standards Code. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 1, 1-11-12)  
8.13.060 - Construction and demolition recycling program application. 
(a)  Applicants for a demolition, building or other similar permits for any covered project shall complete the following sections of the Construction and Demolition Recycling Program Application (RPA) and submit to the City Public Works and Planning Department prior to permit issuance. 
1.  Project location. 
2.  Contractor name. 
3.  Applicant name. 
4.  Mailing address. 
5.  Phone number. 
6.  Type of project. 
7.  Expected project start date. 
8.  Project address and lot #. 
9.  Signed and dated. 
(b)  Prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy or final inspection for the project, the applicant shall place the diversion rate percentage on the recycling program application and submit to the city's planning department. The diversion rate percentage should be provided by the collector/city's exclusive hauler at the end of the project. 
(c)  Once the RPA form is complete the city planning department will review and determine if applicant has met the following conditions: 
1.  The RPA form provides all information required. 
2.  The RPA indicates that at least fifty (50) percent of remaining C&D debris generated by the project was diverted from a landfill. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 1, 1-11-12)  
8.13.070 - Administrative cost recovery fee. 
(a)  Each RPA form will require an application fee. This cost is the cost for staff time and materials to review and process documentation related to the administration of this chapter. 
(b)  The administrative cost-recovery fee shall be set by resolution as approved by city council. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 1, 1-11-12)  
8.13.080 - Performance security deposit. 
As a condition precedent to the issuance of any permit for construction or demolition for a covered project, the applicant shall post a performance security (cash, letter of credit, performance or surety bond, money order) in the amount of one dollar ($1.00) for each estimated square foot, but not less than fifty dollars ($50.00). The performance security shall be returned, without interest, in total or pro-rated, upon proof of satisfaction of the RPA by the City's planning department that no less than the required percentage of the construction and demolition material tonnage generated by the covered project has been diverted from disposal and has been recycled or reused or stored for later reuse or recycling. If a lesser percentage of construction and demolition material tonnage than required is diverted, a proportionate share of the performance security deposit shall be returned. The performance security shall be forfeited entirely or the pro-rated extent that there is a failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter. The City may, by formal resolution, modify the amount of the required performance security. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 1, 1-11-12)  
8.13.090 - Appeals. 
The applicant or any interested person may appeal to the city manager any decision of the city's public works and planning department. Notice of any appeal from the decision of city's public works and planning department must be filed with the city manager's office within ten calendar days of the date of the decision being appealed. The notice of appeal shall set forth in concise language that particular decision or decisions complained of and the reason why the person feels aggrieved thereby. Failure to file a notice of appeal within the time prescribed herein shall constitute a waiver of any objection to the decision(s) of the city's public works and planning department and such decision(s) shall be final; otherwise the decision of the city manager shall be final. The fee for any appeal authorized herein shall be set forth by city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 1, 1-11-12)  
8.13.100 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase, or portion of this Ordinance [Ordinance No. 363] is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this Ordinance or any part thereof. The city council herby declares that it would have adopted this Ordinance and each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance irrespective of the fact that one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional or invalid or effective. To this end the provisions of this Ordinance are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 1, 1-11-12)  
Chapter 8.16 - GRAFFITI ABATEMENT PROCEDURE 
Sections: 
 
8.16.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide a procedure for removal of graffiti from walls and structures on both public and privately owned property in order to reduce blight and deterioration within the City and to protect the public safety. 
The City finds and determines that graffiti is obnoxious and a public nuisance, as defined in Section 8.16.020 and must be abated to avoid the detrimental impact of such graffiti on the City and its residents, and to prevent the further spread of graffiti. 
(Ord. 258 §1, 1990)  
8.16.020 - Definitions. 
Whenever the following terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the meaning established by this section: 
"Graffiti" means the unauthorized spraying of paint or marking of ink, chalk, dye or other similar substances on public and private buildings, structures and places. 
"Graffiti abatement procedure" means an abatement procedure which identifies graffiti, issues notice to the landowner to abate the graffiti, and cures in absence of response. 
"Private contractor" means any person with whom the City shall have duly contracted to remove graffiti. 
(Ord. 258 §2, 1990)  
8.16.030 - Graffiti prohibited. 
No person shall place graffiti or other writing upon any public or privately owned permanent structure located on publicly or privately owned real property within the City of Huron. 
No person owning or otherwise in control of any real property within the City shall permit or allow any graffiti to be placed upon or remain on any permanent structure located on such property when the graffiti is visible from the street or other public or private property. 
(Ord. 258 §3, 1990)  
8.16.040 - Notice. 
Whenever the city manager determines that graffiti exists on any permanent structure in the City of Huron which is visible from the street or other private property, the city manager shall cause a notice to be issued to abate such nuisance. The property owner shall have ten (10) days after the date of notice to remove the graffiti, or the property will be subject to abatement by the City. 
(Ord. 258 §4, 1990)  
8.16.050 - Service of notice. 
The notice to abate graffiti pursuant to Section 8.16.040 shall cause a written notice to be served upon the owner(s) of the affected premises, as such owner's name and address appears on the last equalized property tax assessment rolls of the County of Fresno. If there is no known address for the owner, the notice shall be sent in care of the property address. The notice required by this chapter may be served in any one of the following manners: 
A.  By personal service on the owner, occupant or person in charge or control of the property; 
B.  By registered or certified mail addressed to the owner at the last known address of said owner. If this address is unknown, the notice will be sent to the property address. 
The notice shall be substantially in the following form: 
NOTICE OF INTENT TO REMOVE GRAFFITI 
Date: 
 NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that you are required by law at your expense to remove or paint over the graffiti located on the property commonly known as ___________, Huron, California, which is visible to public view, within ten (10) days after the date of this notice: or, if you fail to do so, City employees or private contractors employed by the City will enter upon your property and abate the public nuisance by removal or painting over the graffiti. The costs of the abatement by the City employees or its private contractors will be assessed upon your property and such costs will constitute a lien upon the land until paid. 
 All persons having any objection to, or interest in said matters are hereby notified to submit any objections or comments to the City Manager for the City of Huron or his/her designated representative within ten (10) days from the date of this notice. At the conclusion of this ten (10) day period the City may proceed with the abatement of the graffiti inscribed on your property at your expense without further notice. 
(Ord. 258 §5, 1990)  
8.16.060 - Appeal. 
Within ten (10) days from the mailing or personal service of the notice, the owner or person occupying or controlling such premises or lot affected may appeal to the city council of the City of Huron. At a regular meeting or regular adjourned meeting of the city council not more than twenty (20) days thereafter, the council shall proceed to hear and pass upon such appeal. The decision of the council thereupon shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 258 §6, 1990)  
8.16.070 - Removal by City. 
Upon failure of persons to comply with the notice by the designated date, or such continued date thereafter as the city manager or his/her designated representative approves, then the city manager is authorized and directed to cause the graffiti to be abated by the City forces or private contract, and the City or its private contractor is expressly authorized to enter upon the premises for such purposes. All reasonable efforts to minimize damage from such entry shall be taken by the City, and any paint used to obliterate graffiti shall be as close as practicable to background color(s). 
(Ord. 258 §7, 1990)  
8.16.080 - Private property consent forms. 
Property owners in the City of Huron may consent in advance to City entry onto private property for graffiti removal purposes. The City will make forms for such consent available. 
(Ord. 258 §8, 1990)  
8.16.090 - Public property. 
Where a structure is owned by a public entity other than the City, the removal of the graffiti may be authorized only after securing the consent of an authorized representative of the public entity having jurisdiction over the structure. 
(Ord. 258 §9, 1990)  
8.16.100 - Record of cost for abatement. 
The city manager shall keep an account of costs (including incidental expenses) of abating such nuisance on each separate parcel of land where the work is done and shall render an itemized report in writing to the city council showing the costs of abatement; provided, that before the report is submitted to the council, a copy shall be served in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.16.050, together with a notice of time when the report shall be heard by the council for confirmation. 
A.  The city council shall set the matter for hearing to determine the correctness and reasonableness of such costs. 
B.  The term "incidental expenses" shall include, but not be limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the City in the preparation of notices, specifications and contracts and in inspecting the work, and the costs of printing and mailing required hereunder. 
(Ord. 258 §10, 1990)  
8.16.110 - Report—Hearing and proceedings. 
At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering the report, the city council shall hear and pass upon the report of such costs of abatement, together with any objections or protests. Thereupon, the city council may make such revision, correction or modification in the report as it may deem just, after which, by motion, the report as submitted or as revised, corrected or modified shall be confirmed. The decision of the city council on all protests and objections which may be made shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 258 §11, 1990)  
8.16.120 - Assessment of costs against property. 
The total cost for abating such nuisance, as confirmed by the city council, shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates, and upon recordation in the office of the Fresno County recorder of a notice of lien, as so made and confirmed, shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of such assessment. 
A.  After such confirmation and recordation, a copy shall be filed with the assessor and tax collector of Fresno County, acting for the City, in order that said County officials may add the amounts of the respective assessments to the next regular tax bills levied against the respective lots and parcels of land, and thereafter said amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes; or 
B.  After such recordation, such lien may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner and means provided by law; 
C.  Such notice of lien for recordation shall be in form substantially as follows: 
NOTICE OF LIEN 
  
(Claim of City of Huron) 
 Pursuant to the authority vested by the provisions of Ordinance No. _____, the City Manager of the City Huron did, on or about the _____ day of _______, 199___, cause the painting over or removal of graffiti at the premises hereinafter described in order to abate a public nuisance on said real property; and the City Council of the City of Huron did on the _____ day of _______, 199___, assess the cost of such abatement upon the real property hereinafter described, and the same has not been paid nor any part thereof; and that said City of Huron does hereby claim a lien on such costs of abatement in the amount of said assessment (the sum of $_____); and the same shall be a lien upon said real property until the same has been paid in full and discharged of record. 
 The real property hereinbefore mentioned, and upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain parcel of land in the City of Huron, County of Fresno, State of California, and particularly described as follows: 
  
(Description) 
  
DATED: This _______ day of _______, 199___. 
	_____
City Clerk of the City of 

Huron, California 
 
(Ord. 258 §12, 1990)  
8.16.130 - Limitation of filing judicial action. 
Any owner, lessee, occupant or other interested person having any objections or feeling aggrieved at any proceeding taken on appeal by the city council in ordering the abatement of any public nuisance under the provisions of this chapter, must bring an action to contest such decision within thirty days after the date of such decision of the city council. Otherwise, all objections to such decision shall be deemed waived. 
(Ord. 258 §14, 1990)  
8.16.140 - Violation—Penalty. 
The owner, occupant or agent of any lot or premises within the City who shall permit or allow the existence of a public nuisance as defined in this chapter, upon any lot or premises owned, occupied or controlled by him, or who shall violate any of the provisions of the chapter, shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same provision within one year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of the same provision within one year. An infraction is not punishable by imprisonment. 
(Ord. 258 §13, 1990)  
Chapter 8.20 - NUISANCES 
Sections: 
 
8.20.010 - Public nuisances designated. 
The following conditions are public nuisances: 
A.  Any property or portion thereof which, as the result of the development, use and/or conditions created thereon, has become unsafe, injurious to health, indecent, offensive to the senses, or which unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any City park, square, street or highway, or which constitutes a fire hazard; 
B.  Any dangerous building or structure; 
C.  Any substandard housing or dwelling; 
D.  Any attractive nuisance. 
(Ord. 279 (part), 1992)  
8.20.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Abandoned building or structure" means any building or structure which has not been actively utilized for a lawful purpose, which has not been maintained, and which has been rendered inaccessible to members of the public by boarding or similar means, for a continuous period of not less than six months. 
A "dangerous building or structure" means that the condition or defect hereinafter described exists to the extent that life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered: 
1.  Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size, or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic; 
2.  Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half (1½) times the working stress or stresses allowed in the city building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location; 
3.  Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the City building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location; 
4.  Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property; 
5.  Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenances or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half (½) of that specified in the City building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the City building code for such buildings; 
6.  Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction; 
7.  Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; faulty construction; the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse; 
8.  Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used; 
9.  Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumbline passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third ( 1/3 ) of the base; 
10.  Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows thirty-three (33) percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, fifty (50) percent damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings; 
11.  Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated through lack of maintenance, as to become an attractive nuisance to children; a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons; or as to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts; 
12.  Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws or ordinances, has in any nonsupporting part, member or portion, less than fifty (50) percent, or in any supporting part, member or portion less than sixty-six (66) percent of the strength, fire-resisting qualities or characteristics, or weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location; 
13.  Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise is determined by the community development director or his designee, to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease; 
14.  Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, faulty gas connections or heating apparatus, faulty construction, or other cause, is determined to be a fire, health or safety hazard; 
15.  Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure; 
16.  Whenever any building or structure is abandoned. 
A "public nuisance" is one which affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal. 
"Substandard housing" and/or "unsafe use of property" means, in addition to the conditions described in Section 8.20.020 and the definition of "substandard building" as set forth in the State of California, Health and Safety Code 17920.3, as amended, that one or more of the following conditions or defects are present in a dwelling unit, guest room, suite of rooms or the premises on which the same are located; or a condition created on the property through use of the property, which are ordinarily and customarily used for human habitation, to the extent that the life, limb, health, safety or property of the occupants or the public are in danger: 
1.  Inadequate sanitation, which shall include but not be limited to the following: 
a.  Lack of or improper water closet, lavatory, bathtub or shower in a dwelling unit, 
b.  Lack of or improper water closets, lavatories, and bathtubs or showers per number of guests in a hotel, 
c.  Lack of or improper kitchen sink, 
d.  Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a hotel, 
e.  Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a dwelling unit, 
f.  Lack of adequate heating facilities, 
g.  Lack of or improper operation of required ventilation equipment, 
h.  Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation as required by this code, 
i.  Room and space dimensions less than required by this code, 
j.  Lack of required electrical lighting, 
k.  Excessive dampness of habitable rooms, 
l.  Excessive infestation of insects, vermin or rodents, 
m.  General dilapidation, 
n.  Lack of connection to functional sewage disposal system, 
o.  Discharge of sewage on the surface of the ground, and 
p.  Lack of an adequate and safe water supply; 
2.  Structural hazards, which include but are not limited to the following: 
a.  Deteriorated or inadequate foundations, 
b.  Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports, 
c.  Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety; 
d.  Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that split, lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration, 
e.  Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety, 
f.  Members of ceiling, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members which sag, split or buckle due to defective material or deterioration, 
g.  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety, 
h.  Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge or have settled, due to defective materials or deterioration, 
i.  Fireplaces or chimneys which are of insufficient size or strength or carry imposed loads which safety, and 
j.  Cesspools and septic tanks which are structurally unsound; 
3.  Hazardous wiring; 
4.  Hazardous plumbing which includes but is not limited to the following: 
a.  Any trap which is defective, unprotected against siphonage and back-pressure by vent pipe or does not have a functional sanitary trap seal, 
b.  Any plumbing fixture or other waste discharging receptacle or device which is not supplied with sufficient water for flushing to maintain it in a clean condition, and 
c.  Any other plumbing condition which is sanitarily unsafe to any person who may occupy the building; 
5.  Hazardous mechanical equipment; 
6.  Faulty weather protection, which includes but is not limited to the following: 
a.  Deteriorated, crumbling or loose plaster, 
b.  Deteriorated or ineffective water proofing of exterior walls, roof, foundations or floors, including broken windows or doors, 
c.  Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings, including lack of paint or weathering, and 
d.  Broken, rotted, split or buckled exterior wall or roof coverings; 
7.  Fire, hazard, which shall mean any building (or portion thereof), device, apparatus, equipment, combustible waste or vegetation which is likely to provide a ready source of fuel to augment the spread and intensity of a fire or explosion; 
8.  Faulty material of construction; 
9.  Hazardous or unsanitary premises, which shall mean those premises on which an accumulation of weeds, vegetation, junk, abandoned refrigerators/freezers, dead organic matter, debris, garbage, offal, rodent harborages, stagnant water, combustible materials, hazardous materials, and similar materials or conditions constitute fire, health or safety hazards; 
10.  Inadequate exits; 
11.  Inadequate fire-protection or fire-fighting equipment, which shall mean all buildings or portion thereof which are not provided with the fire-resistive construction or fire-extinguishing system or equipment required by this code, or whose fire-resistive integrity and fire-extinguishing systems or equipment have not been adequately maintained and improved in relation to any increase in occupant load, alteration, addition, change in occupancy or change in use; 
12.  The presence, disposals, releases or threatened releases of hazardous substances, or hazardous wastes, on, from or under the property. The terms "disposal," "releases," "threatened release," "hazardous substances" and "hazardous wastes" shall have definitions assigned thereto by the Federal Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, 42 U.S.C. Section 9601, as amended; 
13.  Overcrowding as defined by the Uniform Housing Code. 
(Amended during 1995 codification; Ord. 279 (part), 1992)  
8.20.030 - Warning of proceeding and fees. 
Upon inspection, if the enforcement officer identifies conditions which may lead to a substandard structure enforcement proceeding, the owner shall be provided, in person or by mail, a warning letter describing the procedure and the associated fees. 
(Ord. 279 (part), 1992)  
8.20.040 - Notice to owners. 
A.  The building official or respective designees may determine that a building or structure or other property within the city constitutes a public nuisance. The building department will have primary authority for the enforcement of substandard housing, unsafe structure, and/or unsafe use of property violations. 
B.  If it appears to the building official or his designee that a substandard housing, unsafe structure and/or unsafe use of property is located or existing on private or public property, he may follow such administrative procedures to secure voluntary removal, destruction, correction and/or abatement of such substandard housing, unsafe structure and/or unsafe use of property as appears advisable in each individual case prior to giving a notice of intention to abate pursuant to this chapter. 
C.  Upon such determination, the building official shall notify, by means of certified or registered mail, the owner, as such person's name appears on the last equalized county assessment roll, mortgagees and beneficiaries under any deed of trust relating to such property of record (if such persons' addresses are known or reasonably available) that the building, structure, use of property, or property is a public nuisance. A copy of such notice shall also be posted at conspicuous places (front and rear) on such building, structure or property and recorded in the office of the Fresno County recorder. 
D.  Upon such determination and noticing, the property owner shall be liable to pay a fee for initial actions to enforce against substandard housing, unsafe structure and/or unsafe use of property violations as set forth in the schedule of fees, charges and costs recovery. The fee, if not paid within thirty (30) days of noticing, shall constitute a lien on the real property subject to the enforcement action. 
E.  Such notice shall contain a statement describing the condition which renders such building, structure, property and/or use of property, a nuisance. If, in the opinion of such official, such condition can be corrected or abated by repair or other work, such notice shall also state and describe the specific repairs or other work required to abate such condition. The notice shall: 
1.  Order that the conditions which constitute the nuisance be abated by demolition, repair or other means within thirty (30) days after the date such notice was mailed. However, such official may further order upon a finding that there exists extreme and imminent danger to the lives or safety of the occupants, that the building, structure or property, or any portion thereof be immediately vacated. 
2.  Such notice shall include in capital letters the following notice: 
RIGHT TO APPEAL 
 YOU HAVE THE RIGHT TO APPEAL FROM THE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS NOTICE BY FILING A WRITTEN APPEAL WITH THE BOARD OF REVIEW IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 8.20.040 OF THE HURON MUNICIPAL CODE WITHIN TEN DAYS AFTER THE DATE OF POSTING, SERVING OR MAILING OF THIS NOTICE OF ABATEMENT, WHICHEVER IS LATER. 
 Dated at Huron, California this _____ day of _______, ___ 
	_____
Building Official 

City of Huron 
 
3.  The notice shall be entitled "NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE." 
F.  At any time after a property owner has been notified of an unsafe structure, substandard housing and/or unsafe use of property pursuant to this chapter, any interested party, may cause such unsafe structure, substandard housing and/or unsafe use of property to be removed, razed, corrected and/or abated. If the official has assessed administrative costs and the cost of removal, destruction, correction and/or abatement against the property on which the unsafe structure, substandard housing and/or unsafe use of property is located or exists, and the unsafe structure, substandard housing and/or unsafe use of property is removed, razed, corrected and/or abated, without costs to the City, only the administrative costs shall thereafter be collected from the property owner. 
(Ord. 323 §1, 1998; Ord. 279 (part), 1992)  
8.20.050 - Proceeding before the board of review. 
A.  The board of review is hereby established, the members of which shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by a majority vote of the city council as follows: 
1.  One member shall be a current, sitting member of the city council who may be but is not required to be the mayor of the City of Huron; 
2.  One member shall be a current, sitting member of the planning commission who may be but is not required to be the chairman of the planning commission; 
3.  One member shall be neither a council member nor a commission member and not a current City employee, but shall be a resident of the City of Huron. 
B.  Within ten days after the date of the date of posting, mailing or serving of the notice discussed in Section 8.20.040, whichever shall be the last, the owner, agent of the owner, or person in possession who may have been served with such notice, or any person interested in the property, building, structure or improvements affected by such notice may appeal to the board of review on the contents of the notice. Such appeal shall be in writing, shall state the objections of the person filing the appeal and shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall schedule a date for the hearing of the appeal by the board of review. The failure to appeal shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing on the building official's determination set forth in the notice. 
C.  Notice of the initiation of the appeal to the board of review and the time and place of the hearing before the board of review shall be served and posted in the manner prescribed in Section 8.20.040 and in the event all such persons' addresses are not known or reasonably available to the official, it shall also be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Huron. The property owner shall be liable to pay a second fee for actions to enforce against substandard housing, unsafe structure and/or unsafe use of property violations as set forth in the schedule of fees, charges, and costs recovery, adopted by the city council and as subsequently amended. 
D.  The failure of any owner or other person to receive any notice required to be given or posted by this chapter shall not affect in any manner the validity of any proceedings taken hereunder. 
(Ord. 323 §2, 1998: Ord. 279 (part), 1992)  
8.20.060 - Hearing. 
At  the time fixed in the notice, the board of review shall proceed to hear all competent, relevant and reliable evidence respecting the conditions of the building, structure, use of property, the estimated cost of its reconstruction, repair, removal or other work, and any other matter which the board of review may deem pertinent thereto. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the board of review shall, by resolution, make its findings, based on the weight of the evidence presented at the hearing. The board shall determine whether the official shall proceed in accordance with the notice as given or as modified by the board of review, or not at all, and its decision thereon shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 323 §3, 1998)  
8.20.080 - Time to bring action. 
Any  interested person feeling aggrieved by the actions of the board of review may, within thirty (30) days after the date of notice to the parties of its decision, bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to contest the validity of the proceedings. 
(Ord. 323 §5, 1998; Ord. 279 (part), 1992)  
8.20.090 - Jurisdiction to abate. 
Thirty (30) days after posting the resolution of the board of review respecting the building, structure, use or property, the City may take such action to abate the nuisance as was authorized and directed by the board of review unless the nuisance has previously been abated by the owner or other interested person. 
(Ord. 323 §6, 1998; Ord. 279 (part), 1992)  
8.20.100 - Itemization and posting of expenses. 
A.  The building official shall keep an itemized account of the expenses incurred in razing, removing or otherwise abating any such building, or structure or use of property. 
B.  The building official shall cause to be conspicuously posted on the property from which the building, structure or use of property, was razed, removed or otherwise abated a statement, verified by the planning department, showing expenses incurred in the work, together with a notice of the time and place that the statement will be submitted to the board of review for approval and confirmation. 
C.  The board of review shall consider objections or protests, if any, which may be raised by any person liable to be assessed for the cost of such work and any other interested person. A copy of the statement and notice shall be mailed in the manner prescribed in Section 8.20.040. The time for submitting the statement to the board of review for confirmation shall be not less than five days from the date of posting and mailing the statement and notice. 
(Ord. 279 (part), 1992)  
8.20.110 - Statement of expense. 
A.  At the time fixed for hearing objections or protest to the statement of expenses, the board of review shall consider the statement, together with any objections or protests which may be raised. The board of review may make such revisions, corrections or modifications in such statement as it may deem just. The board's decisions on the statement, protests and objections shall be final and conclusive. 
B.  The cost of razing, removing or abating the nuisance, if any, if not paid within five days after the decision, shall constitute a lien on the real property upon which the same was abated or removed or on any other real property as authorized under Health and Safety Code Sections 510 and 510.7 as amended. Such lien shall continue until the amount thereof and interest thereon (at the rate of ten percent per year computed from the date of confirmation of the statement) is paid or discharge of record. Such costs shall be collected with the property taxes for such property, and such lien shall have, for all purposes, parity with state, county and municipal tax liens. The building official, within sixty (60) days after the decision of the board of review on the statement, cause to be filed in the office of the recorder of Fresno County a certificate substantially in the following form: 
"NOTICE OF LIEN" 
Pursuant to the authority vested in the undersigned by Chapter 5 of the Ordinance Code of the City of Huron, Government Code Section 38773.5 of the State of California and Title 25 of the Code of Regulations of the State of California and Title 25 of the Code of Regulations of the State of California, the undersigned did on the _____ day of _______, 19___ cause a nuisance to be abated on the real property hereinafter described; and the undersigned did, on the _____ day of _______, 19 ___ assess the cost of such abatement, upon the real property hereinafter described, and the same has not been paid nor any part thereof; and the said City of Huron does hereby claim a lien on said real property for the expense of doing said work in the sum of $_____, and the same shall be a lien upon said real property to be collected, together with the real property taxes, until the said sum, with interest at the rate of ten percent (10% per annum) from the _____ day of _______, 19___, (insert date of confirmation of statement) has been paid in full and discharge of record. The real property hereinbefore mentioned, and upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain piece or parcel of land lying and being in the County of Fresno, State of California and particularly described as follows: 
	(space left for description and 

Assessor's parcel number) 	
DATED:________ 
		PLANNING DEPARTMENT 
		BY _____
 
C.  From and after the date of recording the notice of lien, all persons shall be deemed to have notice of the contents thereof. The statute of limitations shall not run against the right of the City to enforce the payment of the lien. 
(Ord. 279 (part), 1992)  
8.20.120 - Interpretation and penalty for violation. 
A.  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter may be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or imprisonment in county jail up to six (6) months. 
B.  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and the penalty shall be that as prescribed in Section 1.16.010. 
C.  No provision of this chapter shall be deemed to bar any legal, equitable or summary remedy to which the City or any person may otherwise be entitled to under applicable state and/or federal laws, regulations and statutes. This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of substandard housing, unsafe structures and/or unsafe uses of property. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the State, the City or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 279 (part), 1992)  
8.20.130 - Enactment of fees and service charges. 
A.  Schedule of Fees and Service Charges. The city manager and each city department head, under the direction of the city manager, shall annually review all services provided by the various city departments to all users and the costs and charges, if any associated with those services. The city manager will provide, by resolution, an adjusted schedule of services and the associated fees and charges to the city council for its consideration so as to recover the costs reasonably borne for providing those services. 
B.  Amendment of Charges. The charges and fees may be amended or updated by resolution. Resolutions presented to the council may combine the services and their associated fees and charges allowed by this chapter with services and fees provided for in other chapters of this code. 
C.  Collection of Fees. The finance department shall be the collector agent for the City and is authorized to take all action necessary to collect same. All receipts shall be deposited into the City's banking agencies and any receipts and disbursements shall be accounted for by that department. 
(Amended during 1995 codification; Ord. 279 (part), 1992)  
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
  
Chapters:  
Chapter 9.04 - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND DECENCY 
Sections: 
 
9.04.010 - Preventing free passage prohibited. 
No person shall block, impede or obstruct any public place or any entrance, exit or approach to any place of business in or upon any public place in a manner calculated or with the intent to prevent, delay, hinder or interfere with the free passage therealong or therethrough of any other person who is entering, occupying or leaving any place of business, or who is performing any services of labor, or who is seeking or obtaining employment, or who is purchasing, selling, using, delivering, transporting or receiving any goods, wares, merchandise, services, entertainment, accommodations or articles, or who is attempting or seeking to do any of the foregoing; or to prevent, delay, hinder or interfere with the free passage therealong or therethrough of any vehicle or conveyance operated by or in the custody of any such other person or in which any such other person is riding or attempting to ride. 
(Ord. 84 § 1, 1961)  
9.04.020 - Picketing personal premises unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person to beset or picket the premises of another or any approach thereto, where such employee or person seeking employment lodges or resides, for the purpose of inducing such employee or person seeking employment, by means of compulsion, coercion, intimidation, threats, acts of violence or fear, to quit his or her employment or to refrain from seeking or freely entering into employment. 
(Ord. 84 § 2, 1961)  
9.04.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof, shall be fined the sum not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 84 § 3, 1961)  
Chapter 9.08 - ALCOHOL-RELATED OFFENSES[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 358, § 1, adopted July 6, 2011, amended Chapter 9.08 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Chapter 9.08,§§ 9.08.010—9.08.030 pertained to alcohol related offenses and derived from Ord. 117, §§ 1—5, adopted 1971; and Ord. 300, § 2, adopted 1995. 
 
9.08.010 - Drinking and possession of alcoholic beverages and controlled substances in public. 
A.  The drinking of alcoholic beverages, and the possession of opened containers of alcoholic beverages, while upon the public streets, public sidewalks, public alleys and public grounds of the City of Huron is found to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the City of Huron. 
B.  No person shall drink any alcoholic [beverage] while upon any public streets, public sidewalks, public alleys and public grounds of the City of Huron. 
C.  No person shall have in his or her possession, while upon any public streets, public sidewalks, public alleys and public grounds of the City of Huron, any bottle, can or other receptacle, containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or the seal broke, or the contents of which have been partially removed. 
D.  Any person who is found in any place under the influence of intoxicating liquor, any drug, controlled substance, toluene, or any combination of any intoxicating liquor, any drug, controlled substance, toluene, in a condition that he or she is unable to exercise care for his or her own safety or the safety of others, or by the reason of his or her being under the influence of intoxicating liquor, any drug, controlled substance, toluene, or any combination of intoxicating liquor, any drug, controlled substance, toluene, interferes with or obstructs or prevents the free use of any street, sidewalk, or other public walkway is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
E.  No person shall use, or be under the influence of any controlled substance, while in public, which is (1) specified in subdivision (b), (c), or (e), or paragraph (1) of subdivision (f) of Section 11054 of the Heath & Safety Code, specified in paragraph (14), (15), (21), (22), or (23) of subdivision (d) of Section 11054 of the Health & Safety Code, specified in subdivision (b) or (c) of Section 11055, or specified in paragraph (1) or (2) of subdivision (d) or in paragraph (3) of subdivision (e) of Section 11055 of the Heath & Safety Code, or (2) a narcotic drug classified in Schedule III, IV, or V, except when administered by or under the direction of a person licensed by the state to dispense, prescribe, or administer controlled substances. Any person convicted of violating this subdivision is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 1, 7-6-11)  
9.08.020 - Drinking and possession of alcoholic beverages in motor vehicles. 
The provisions of Section 9.08.10(B) and (C) shall not apply to drinking alcoholic beverages or the possession of opened containers of alcoholic beverages in motor vehicles insofar and so long as those matters are regulated by Sections 23220 through 23223 of the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 1, 7-6-11)  
9.08.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision(s) of Section 9.08.010 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and such imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 1, 7-6-11)  
Chapter 9.12 - OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
9.12.010 - Placing certain dangerous substances upon sidewalks, parks or other public places prohibited. 
No person shall throw, place or deposit upon any sidewalk, park or other public place in the City of Huron any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, hoops, wires, cans or any other substance likely to injure any person or animal upon such place, except in a proper receptacle designated and installed for the purpose of receiving such trash, rubbish or material. 
(Ord. 102 § 1, 1966)  
9.12.020 - Placing garbage, paper or other offensive rubbish upon sidewalks, parks or other public places prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to place, deposit or dump, or cause to be placed, deposited or dumped, any garbage, swill, cans, bottles, papers, ashes, refuse, carcass of any dead animal, offal, trash or rubbish or any noisome, nauseous or offensive matter in or upon any sidewalk, park or other public place in the City of Huron, except in a proper receptacle designated and installed for the purpose of receiving such trash, rubbish or material. 
(Ord. 102 § 2, 1966)  
9.12.030 - Dumping rocks or dirt on sidewalks, parks or other public places prohibited without consent. 
It shall be unlawful to place, deposit or dump, or cause to be placed, deposited or dumped, any rocks or dirt in or upon any sidewalk, park or other public place within the City of Huron, without the express consent of the City of Huron. 
(Ord. 102 § 3, 1966)  
9.12.040 - Dumping prohibited. 
It is unlawful to dump or cause to be dumped waste matter in or upon a public or private highway or road, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or in or upon private property into or upon which the public is admitted by easement or license, or upon private property without the consent of the owner, or in or upon a public park or other public property other than property designated or set aside for that purpose by the City. 
(Ord. 102 § 4, 1966) 
(Ord. No. 378 , § 1, 7-17-2019)  
9.12.050 Violation - of sections 9.12.010 through9.12.040 - penalty 
A.  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of sections 9.12.010 or 9.12.020 shall be punishable for the first convition thereof by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days or by both such fine and imprisonment, and for the second and each subsequent convision thereof by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six months or by such fine and imprisonment. The City may, utilize any other method of enforcement to enforce the provisions of this chapter including, but not limited to, the issuance of administrative citations as set forth in chapter 1.18 of the Huron Municipal Code. 
B.  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of section 9.12.030 shall be punished for the first conviction thereof by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days or by both such fine and imprisonment, and for the second and each subsequent conviction thereof by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six months or both such fine and imprisonment. If such violation of section 9.12.030 shall be for the dumping of commercial quantities as defined in California Penal Code § 374.3 then such fine shall be not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) upon a first conviction, not less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), nor more than six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) nor more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) upon a third or sebsequent conviction. The City may also utilize any other method of enforcement including, but not limited to, issuance of administrative citations pursuant to chapter 1.18 of the Huron Municipal Code. 
C.  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of section 9.12.040 shall be punished by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months or both such fine and imprisonment. If such violation of section 9.12.040 shall be the dumping of commercial quantities as defined by California Penal Code 374.3 such fines shall be not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)nor more than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) upon a first conviction, not less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), nor more than six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) nor more than ten thousand dollars (10,000.00) upon a third or subsequent conviction. The City may also utilize any other method of enforcement including, but not limited to, issuance of administrative citations pursuant to chapter 1.18 of the Huron Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 102 §§ 5, 6, 1966) 
(Ord. No. 378 , § 2, 7-17-2019)  
9.12.060 - Posting and depositing of notices. 
A.  No person shall post, stick, stamp, print or otherwise affix or cause to be posted, stuck, stamped, printed or otherwise affixed, any bill, poster, advertisement, notice (except official notices) or candidate card upon any telegraph pole, telephone pole, fire-alarm pole, electric light pole, electrolier, awning or shelterpole, or upon the curbing of any public street; or to mar, deface, change the appearance of, injure or write upon any such pole or curbing. 
B.  No person shall post, stick, stamp, print or otherwise affix or cause to be posted, stuck, stamped, printed or otherwise affixed, any bill, poster, notice, advertisement or candidate card to or upon any house or part thereof or outbuilding or upon any wall, fence, gatepost, sidewalk, trees or boxes around trees, awning or shelterpost, without the permission in writing of the owner, agent or occupier of the premises so to do. 
C.  No person shall place, throw or deposit, or cause to be placed, thrown or deposited, into or upon any motor vehicle, doorstep, porch, yard or lawn or upon any public street, any advertisement, paper, bill, poster, notice, handbill, advertising card, business card, advertising device, dodger or emblem. 
(Ord. 85 §§ 8—10, 1961)  
9.12.070 - Obstructing or injuring persons passing on public street prohibited. 
No person shall engage upon any street in any sport or exercise having a tendency to injure persons passing, nor shall any person, whenever the free passage of a street or sidewalk shall be obstructed by a crowd, fail or refuse to disperse or move on when directed so to do by any peace officer. 
(Ord. 85 § 2, 1961)  
9.12.080 - Extinguishing lights maintained for public safety prohibited. 
No person shall, without authority, extinguish during the night time any light maintained for public convenience or safety. 
(Ord. 85 § 6, 1961)  
9.12.090 - Dust control. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to maintain, conduct or carry on, or permit to be maintained, conducted or carried on, the following condition within the City of Huron; the following condition is also declared to be and constituted a public nuisance and a menace to public health and safety: 
The maintenance of any real or personal property, whether improved or unimproved in such a manner that dust, sand or any other foreign material shall be caused to be blown into the atmosphere or spread or drift upon property or premises of any other person, firm or corporation, in such a manner as to be a detriment to the public health and safety and/or the property of others. 
(Ord. 103 § 1, 1967)  
9.12.100 - Violation of Sections 9.12.060 through 9.12.090—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate the provisions of Sections 9.12.060 through 9.12.090 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 103 § 2, 1967: Ord. 85 § 12, 1961)  
9.12.110 - Abandoned chests—Prohibited. 
No chest or box with more than one and one-half (1½) cubic feet in capacity, with an attached latch, door or cover, shall be discarded or abandoned, including refrigerators, iceboxes and other appliances. 
(Ord. 224 § 1, 1986)  
9.12.120 - Glass containers in city parks—Prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to bring, possess, carry or use glass bottles or glass containers in or on the Huron City parks or the parking lots. 
B.  Violation—Infraction. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00)on a first conviction, not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) on a second conviction and not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) on any third or subsequent conviction. 
(Ord. 206, 1984)  
9.12.130 - Tents prohibited. 
No tents may be erected or occupied in the City for the purposes of living or sleeping, except in a campground established for such purpose. All buildings used for living or sleeping purposes shall be erected in accordance with the City Building Code and the State Housing Act. 
(Ord. 220 § 1, 1986)  
Chapter 9.16 - FIREARMS 
Sections: 
 
9.16.010 - Discharge of firearms. 
From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, it shall be unlawful and is prohibited for any person to discharge any kind of firearm within the City of Huron, including but not restrictive to, the discharge of any air rifle, pistol or other weapon operated or controlled by means of air compression or plunger; provided, however, that this chapter shall not prohibit the discharge of any firearm in defense of life or property in those cases which are allowed by the laws of the State of California; and provided further that whenever the city council of the City of Huron deems it proper to grant a permit to any person, firm, association or corporation to discharge firearms within the City, such council may so do, in which permit the council shall designate the particular place in the City where such discharge is or will be allowed and the period of time which such permit shall last, and shall also therein designate the purposes for which such discharge of firearms is granted. 
(Ord. 18 § 1, 1952)  
9.16.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), or by imprisonment for a period of not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 18 § 4, 1952)  
Chapter 9.20 - CURFEW 
Sections: 
 
9.20.010 - Definitions. 
In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires: 
"Expense of a police response" means the costs incurred by the City in responding directly to a loud or unruly assemblage. It includes the cost of providing police, fire fighting, rescue and emergency medical services, together with the salaries of the responding police personnel, damages and clean up to the City property, injuries to City personnel, and transporting minors to a parental pickup station. 
"Loud or unruly assemblage" means the presence of two or more persons who: 
1.  Unlawfully fight; 
2.  Maliciously or wilfully disturb another person by loud and unreasonable noise; 
3.  Use offensive words in a public place which are inherently likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction; 
4.  Use force or violence, disturb the public peace or threaten to use force or violence accompanied by the ability to carry it out; 
5.  Assemble and act together to urge a riot or urge others to commit acts of force or violence; 
6.  Assemble together to do an unlawful act or to do a lawful act in a violent, boisterous or tumultuous manner. 
"Parental pick-up station" means the place where minors arrested or detained for violations of this title are delivered to the custody of their parents or guardians. 
(Ord. 288 § 2 (part), 1994)  
9.20.020 - Curfew restrictions. 
It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, or aimlessly drive or ride about in or upon any public street, avenue, highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground, or other public ground, public place or public building, place of amusement or eating place, vacant lot or unsupervised place between the hours of ten p.m. on any day and sunrise of the immediately following day. 
(Ord. 288 § 2 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 354, § 1, 3-4-09)  
9.20.024 - Curfew—Exceptions. 
Section 9.20.020 shall not apply when: 
(A)  The minor is accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the minor, or by his or her spouse eighteen (18) years of age or older; 
(B)  The minor is on an errand directed by his or her parent or legal guardian or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the minor, or by his or her spouse eighteen (18) years of age or older; 
(C)  The minor is returning directly home from a public meeting, or a place of public entertainment, such as a movie, play, sporting event or school activity; or 
(D)  The presence of such minor in said place or places is connected with or required with respect to a business, trade, profession or occupation in which the minor is lawfully engaged. 
(Ord. No. 354, § 1, 3-4-09)  
9.20.028 - Daytime curfew. 
It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years, who is subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuation education to be in or upon any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground, or other public ground, public place, public building, place of amusement, eating establishment or vacant lot during the hours of eight-thirty a.m. to one-thirty p.m. on days when said minor's school is in session. This section does not apply: 
(A)  When the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care or custody of the minor; or 
(B)  When the minor is on an emergency errand directed by his or her parent or guardian or other adult person having care or custody of the minor; or 
(C)  When the minor is going or coming directly to or from his or her place of gainful employment or to or from a medical appointment; or 
(D)  To any minor who has permission to leave school campus for lunch or school-related activity and has in his or her possession a valid, school issued, off-campus permit; or 
(E)  When the minor is exempt by law from compulsory education or compulsory continuation education; or 
(F)  When the minor is authorized to be absent from his or her school pursuant to the provisions of California Education Code Section 48205, or any other applicable state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 354, § 1, 3-4-09)  
9.20.030 - Parental responsibility. 
A.  Every parent, guardian or other person having the legal care, custody or control of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who permits such person to violate the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or person having a minor in his or her charge, after receiving notice of the apprehension, arrest or detention of the minor, to fail or neglect to go in person or send some suitable person after the minor so detained. 
C.  Every parent, guardian or other person having the legal care, custody or control of any person under the age of eighteen (18) who violates this section and Section 9.20.020 shall be liable for the expense of a police response and the cost of transporting the minor to a parental pickup station. The terms "expense of a police response" and "parental pickup station" shall have the meanings contained in Section 9.20.010. 
(Ord. 288 § 2 (part), 1994)  
9.20.040 - Purpose of provisions. 
A.  In enacting this chapter, the city council intends to exercise the authority it has to recover the expense of responding to a loud or unruly assemblage (see Government Code Section 53158). This chapter is in addition to the authority granted by Government Code Sections 53150 through 53158. 
B.  The City may elect to proceed under either enactment where both apply. 
(Ord. 288 § 2 (part), 1994)  
9.20.050 - Liability for City expense incurred in response to loud or unruly assemblage. 
A person who owns or is in control of premises on which a loud or unruly assemblage occurs or from which a loud or unruly assemblage emanates is liable for the expense of a police response. 
(Ord. 288 § 2 (part), 1994)  
9.20.060 - Charge against person liable—Minors. 
A.  The expense of police response is a charge against the person liable for the expense. If the person liable is a minor, the parents or guardian of the minor are liable. 
The charge is a debt and the City may collect the debt in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under an express or implied contract. 
B.  The debt bears interest at the rate of nine (9) percent a year. Interest accrues from the due date stated on the billing. 
(Ord. 288 § 2 (part), 1994)  
9.20.070 - Limit on liability. 
The liability under this chapter for the expense of a police response may not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. 288 § 2 (part), 1994)  
9.20.080 - Evidence not admissible in criminal proceedings. 
The testimony, admission or statement made by a person in a proceeding to collect the expense of a police response is not admissible in a criminal proceeding arising out of the same incident. 
(Ord. 288 § 2 (part), 1994)  
Chapter 9.30 - LIMITATION OF SALES AND DISPLAY OF PRODUCTS CONTAINING PSEUDOEPHEDRINE 
Sections: 
 
9.30.010 - Purpose. 
The Huron city council finds that the use of methamphetamine is a national health crisis that affects the health and welfare of the citizens of the City of Huron and that the local production of methamphetamine, a key component of which is pseudoephedrine, is of staggering proportions. This chapter places limits on the display of medications containing pseudoephedrine in an attempt to limit a methamphetamine manufacturer's ability to obtain pseudoephedrine for the illegal production of methamphetamine. 
(Ord. 341 § 1 (part), 2006)  
9.30.020 - Limitations of sales and display. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation doing business within the incorporated area of the City of Huron to store, stock, keep, or display for sale or transfer any product containing pseudoephedrine in an area other than a place that is locked and secure or is otherwise made unavailable to the public and which is accessible only to employees of such businesses. 
(Ord. 341 § 1 (part), 2006)  
Chapter 9.34 - ADULT USE BUSINESSES 
Sections: 
 
9.34.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate adult use businesses, including the regulation of live nude and live semi-nude entertainment, in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent any deleterious location and concentration of adult use businesses within the City, thereby reducing or eliminating the adverse secondary effects from such adult use businesses. The city council finds that among these secondary effects are increased incidents of unlawful conduct and disorderly behavior, generating a disproportionate demand for police responses; depreciated property values; vacancy problems; blighted conditions; and interference with neighbors' enjoyment of property due to debris, noise, vandalism, and depreciated property values. The city council in adopting the ordinance codified in this chapter takes legislative notice of the existence and content of the following studies that substantiate the adverse secondary effects of adult use businesses: 
A.  Neighborhood Deterioration and the Location of Adult Entertainment Establishments in St. Paul, Minnesota, Minnesota Crime Control Planning Board, April 1978. 
B.  Effects on Surrounding Area of Adult Entertainment Businesses in Saint Paul, Minnesota, Minnesota Crime Control Planning Board, June 1978. 
C.  Adult Entertainment Businesses in Indianapolis, Indiana: An analysis, Department of Metropolitan Development, February 1984. 
D.  Final Report to the City of Garden Grove, California: The Relationship Between Crime and Adult Business Operations on Garden Grove Boulevard, Richard McCleary, PhD, James W. Meeker, J.D., PhD, October 23, 1991. 
E.  Adult Entertainment. Land Use and Legal Perspectives, Rochester Consolidated Planning Department, Rochester, New York, 1988. 
F.  Adult entertainment, 40-Acre Study, Department of Planning and Economic Development, Saint Paul, Minnesota, April 1987. 
G.  Report on the Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses, Hubert H. Humphrey, III, Attorney General, State of Minnesota, June 6, 1989. 
H.  Report to The American Center for Law and Justice on the Secondary Impacts of Sex Oriented Businesses, Environmental Research Group, March 31, 1996. 
I.  Report to Reedley City Council Regarding Municipal Code Amendments Establishing Regulations for Sexually Oriented Businesses, Reedley Administrative Staff, Reedley, California, May 9, 2000. 
J.  Summary of the Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography, Richard E. McLawhorn, July 1986. 
The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any nonobscene communicative materials, including nonobscene sexually oriented material. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor the effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to nonobscene sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of nonobscene sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor the effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material or material harmful to minors. 
The city council takes note of the proliferation of adult material on the Internet and its availability as an alternative avenue of communication. The city council also considers and relies on published decisions examining the proliferation of communications on the Internet. Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union, 521 U.S. 844, 117 S.Ct. 2329, 138 L.Ed.2nd 874 (1997) [the principle channel through which many Americans now transmit and receive sexually explicit communication is the Internet]; Anheuser-Busch v. Schmoke, 101 F. 3d 325, 329 (4th Cir. 1996), cert. denied 520 U.S. 1204 (1997) [the Fourth Circuit rejected a First Amendment challenge to a Baltimore ordinance restricting alcohol advertisements on billboards acknowledging that the Internet is one available channel of communication]; U.S. v. Hockings, 129 F. 3d 1069 (9th Cir. 1997); see also U.S. v. Thomas, 74 F. 3d 701 (6th Cir. 1996), cert. denied 520 U.S. 820 [recognizing the Internet as a medium for transmission of sexually explicit material in the context of obscenity prosecutions]. The emergence of the Internet brings with it a virtually unlimited additional source of adult-oriented sexual materials available to interested persons in every community with a mere keystroke. An adult business no longer has to be "actually" physically located in a City to be available in the community. 
(Ord. 343 (part), 2006)  
9.34.020 - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings as described to them in this section: 
"Adult arcade" shall mean an establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, or similar machines, or other image-producing machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are used to show still or moving images, by means of film, motion picture, video disk, photographic slide, or other photographic or computer-generated means, where such still or moving images are characterized by the depiction, simulation, or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
"Adult bookstore," "adult novelty store," or "adult video store" shall mean a commercial establishment which devotes a "significant or substantial portion" of its interior business or advertising to the sale, rental or viewing, for any form of consideration, of one or more books, magazines, periodicals or other printed or photographs or still or moving images by means of film, motion picture, video cassette, video disk, photographic slide, or other photographic or computer-generated means, where such still or moving images are characterized by the depiction, simulation, or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; provided, that an establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale, rental or viewing of materials depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical activities," and still be categorized as an "adult novelty store" or "adult video store" and such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such establishment from being categorized as an "adult bookstore," "adult novelty store" or "adult video store" so long as one of its principal business purposes is offering for sale or rental, for any form of consideration, one or more of the specified materials which depict, simulate, or describe "specific anatomical areas" or "specific sexual activities." 
"Adult cabaret" shall mean a nightclub, bar, restaurant, "bottle club," or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are there served, which "regularly features": (1) persons who appear "semi-nude"; or (2) live performances which are characterized either by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by the performance or simulation of "specific sexual activities"; or (3) the person presentation, showing sale rental, or viewing of photographs or still moving images by means of the sale, rental, or showing of film, motion, picture, video, cassette, video disk, photographic or computer-generated devices or mechanisms, where such still or moving images available thereby or manifested therewith are characterized by the depiction, simulation, or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
"Adult motel" shall mean a motel, hotel or similar commercial established which: (1) offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration, and which provides patrons with closed-circuit television, films, motion pictures, video cassette, video disks, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specific sexual activities" or "specific anatomical areas" and which advertises the availability of this "sexually oriented material" by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising including but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets, leaflets, radio, television; or (2) offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten consecutive hours; or (3) allows a tenant or occupant to sub-rent the sleeping room for a time period of less than ten consecutive hours. 
"Adult motion picture theater" shall mean a commercial establishment where film motion pictures, video cassettes, video disks, slides or similar photographic reproductions characterized by the depicting or description of "specific sexual activities" or "specific anatomical areas" are "regularly featured" for any form of consideration. 
"Adult theater" shall mean a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which for any form or consideration "regularly features" persons who appear semi-nude or live performances which are characterized by exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specific sexual activities." 
"Adult use businesses" shall mean any and all of the following: 
1.  Adult arcade; 
2.  Adult bookstore; 
3.  Adult cabaret; 
4.  Adult motion picture theater; 
5.  Adult novelty store; 
6.  Adult theater; 
7.  Adult video store; 
8.  Adult motel. 
"Employee" shall mean a person who works or performs in and/or for an "adult use business," regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business. 
"Establishing" shall mean and include any of the following: 
1.  The opening or commencement of any business as a new business subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; 
2.  The conversion of any existing business (whether or not an "adult use business") to an "adult use business," as defined in this chapter, subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; 
3.  The addition of any "adult use business," as defined in this chapter, to any other existing "adult use business"; or 
4.  The relocation of any "adult use business." 
"Nude," "nudity," or "state of nudity" shall mean the appearance or showing of the human bare buttocks, anus, male genitals, female genitals, areola or nipple of the female breast, pubic hair, or pubic region. 
"Operator" shall mean and include the owner, custodian, manager, operator or person in charge of any adult use business. 
"Person" shall mean an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity. 
"Public building" shall mean any building owned, leased or held by the United States, the State, the County, the City, and special district, school district, or any other agency or political subdivision of the State or the United States, which building is used for governmental purposes. 
"Public building regularly frequented by children" shall mean any building owned, leased or held by the United States, the County, the City, any special district, school district, or any other agency or political subdivision of the State or the United States, which building is used as a library, community center, children's museum or youth center, or any other use having special attraction to children, or which building is often visited by children for social activities, unaccompanied by their parents or other adult custodians. 
"Public park or recreation area" shall mean public land which has been designated for park, recreational or arts activities including but not limited to a park, playground, nature trail, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis court, pedestrian/bicycle path, open space, or similar public land within the City which is under the control, operation or management of the City or the recreation district. 
"Regularly features" or "regularly featured" shall mean, with respect to an "adult cabaret," "adult theater," or "adult motion picture theater," what is featured or shown at least one time within any thirty (30) day period; or carried on as part of the business' routine scheduling of events or activities and not so infrequently as to constitute a single, rare or unusual event or occurrence. 
"Religious institution" shall mean any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities. 
"Residential zone" shall mean property which is zoned as residential and/or as a single-family house, duplex, townhouse, multiple-family dwelling, or mobilehome park or subdivision, including property within the single-family residential/agricultural district (R-A); single-family/low density residential district (R-1-A); single-family/medium density residential district (R-1); medium/high density residential district (R-2); high density multiple-family residential district (R-3); high density multiple-family residential district, one story (R-3-A); mobilehome park district (MHP). 
"School" shall mean any public or private educational facility including but not limited to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges, colleges, and universities. "School" includes the school grounds, but does not include the facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school. 
"Semi-nude" shall mean a state in which clothing or other opaque covering covers and obscures no more than the genitals and pubic region of a male human, or no more than the genitals, pubic region, and entirety of the breast of a female human below a point at the top of the areola, with the exception of portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
"Sensitive use" shall mean property and uses which are adversely affected by adult use business. These uses include residential zones, schools, religious institutions, youth and senior centers, day care centers, parks, libraries, post offices and other public buildings. 
"Sexually oriented material" shall mean any physical object or visual image, however stored, recorded, or manifested, that is offered for sale, rental or viewing and that simulates, depicts or describes "specified anatomical areas" or that is offered for sale or rental for use in "specified sexual activities" (other than condoms sold in conformity with laws otherwise applicable). 
"Significant or substantial portion" shall mean that fifteen (15) percent or more of interior floor space or display space is devoted to depiction of "specified sexual activities" or "sexually oriented material," or that fifteen (15) percent or more of actual stock in trade regularly displayed and immediately available for use, rental, purchase, viewing or perusal is comprised of "sexually oriented materials," as defined in this section. 
"Specified anatomical area" shall mean and include any one or more of the following: 
1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast below the top of the areola; or 
2.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
"Specified sexual activity" shall mean and include, without limitation, any of the following: 
1.  The fondling or other intentional touching of one's own or another's human genitals, pubic region, pubic hair, perineum, anus, or female breast, whether the person so touched is nude, semi-nude, or clothed or covered; 
2.  The fondling or other intentional touching of the buttock of any nude or semi-nude person; 
3.  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, whether the actor or actors is or are nude, semi-nude, or clothed or covered, including actual or simulated vaginal intercourse, anal intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, flagellation or masochism or torture in the context of a sexual act, anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, or sapphism; 
4.  Whether the actor is nude, semi-nude, or clothed or covered, acts of human masturbation, actual or simulated, animal masturbation, actual or simulated, erotic or lewd touching of an animal, actual or simulated, or human or animal ejaculation, actual or simulated; 
5.  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence discernible to any other person or male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; 
6.  The display or showing of excretory, urinary, or female menstrual functions or vaginal or anal irrigation as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections 1 through 4 of this definition; or 
7.  Dancing by one or more live persons in a manner that exposes to the view of any other person a "specified anatomical area" or that constitutes the public stimulation by a clothed person of any "specified sexual activity." 
"Substantial enlargement of a sexual-oriented business" shall mean an increase in the floor areas occupied by the business by more than fifteen (15) percent, as the floor exists on July 12, 2006. 
"Transfer of ownership or control of an adult use business" shall mean and include any of the following: 
1.  The sale, lease or sublease of the business; 
2.  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or 
3.  The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers ownership or control of the business except for transfers by request or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. 343 (part), 2006)  
9.34.030 - Location. 
Subject to compliance with all conditions, regulations and procedures enumerated in this chapter, a person may use a premises for an adult use business only within the following specified areas within the central trading district (C-4) as: 
A.  Within the central trading district (C-4) located in the easternmost part of town. This section is bounded by Highway 269 to the west, 10th Street to the north, Central Avenue to the south and M Street to the east. 
Adult use businesses shall be prohibited in all other areas of the City. 
(Ord. 343 (part), 2006)  
9.34.040 - Regulated uses. 
The following adult use businesses are subject to the provisions of this chapter: 
A.  Adult arcade; 
B.  Adult bookstore; 
C.  Adult cabaret; 
D.  Adult motel; 
E.  Adult motion picture theater; 
F.  Adult novelty store; 
G.  Adult theater; 
H.  Adult video store; 
I.  Any other business which devotes fifteen (15) percent or more of its interior floor space or display space to sexually oriented materials or specified sexual activities, regardless of the name, title or designation used by the business itself. 
(Ord. 343 (part), 2006)  
9.34.050 - Regulations governing existing adult use business. 
An adult use business hereinafter lawfully established and operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to its establishment, of a sensitive use within three hundred (300) feet of the adult use business. 
(Ord. 343 (part), 2006)  
9.34.060 - Locational regulations. 
No person shall cause or permit the establishing of any adult use business (as defined within Section 9.34.020 of this chapter) within three hundred (300) feet of another adult use business; or within three hundred (300) feet of any sensitive use as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. 343 (part), 2006)  
9.34.070 - Measurement of distance. 
For purposes of Sections 9.34.030 and 9.34.060 of this chapter, the distance between any two adult use businesses or between an adult use business and a sensitive use shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or topography, from the nearest point on the property line of the property on which the one adult use business is located to the nearest point on the property line of the property on which the other adult use business, or the sensitive use is located. 
(Ord. 343 (part), 2006)  
9.34.080 - Permits required. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in the City of Huron, the operation of an adult use business unless the person first obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect a permit from the City of Huron as herein required (adult use business regulatory permit). 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any persons to engage in or participate in any live performance depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities in an adult use business unless the person first obtains and continues in full force and effect a permit from the City of Huron as herein required (adult use business performer permit). 
(Ord. 343 (part), 2006)  
9.34.090 - Adult use business regulatory permit required. 
A.  Every person who proposes to maintain, operate or conduct an adult use business in the City of Huron shall file an application with the police chief upon a form provided by the City of Huron and shall pay a filing fee, as established by resolution adopted by the city council from time to time, which shall not be refundable. 
B.  Adult use business regulatory permits are nontransferable, except in accordance with Section 9.34.110 of this chapter. Therefore, all applications shall include the following information: 
1.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name, including any aliases, address, and submit satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
2.  If the applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state the partnership's complete name, address, the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any. 
3.  If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall provide its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of California, the names and capacity of all officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process. 
4.  If the applicant is an individual or a partnership, whether the individual applicant or any general partner has ever been convicted of: 
a.  Any of the offenses set forth in Sections 313.1, 316, 266a, 266b, 266c, 266e, 266f, 266g, 266h, 266i, 647(a), 647(b) and 647(d) of the California Penal Code as those sections now exist or may hereafter be amended or renumbered; 
b.  The equivalent to the aforesaid offenses outside the State of California. 
C.  If the applicant is an individual, he or she shall sign the application. If the applicant is other than an individual, an officer of the business entity or an individual with a ten percent or greater interest in the business entity shall sign the application. 
D.  If the applicant intends to operate the adult use business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall file the fictitious name of the adult use business and show proof of registration of the fictitious name. 
E.  A description of the type of the adult use business for which the permit is requested and the proposed address where the adult use business will operate, plus the names and addresses of the owners and lessors of the adult use oriented business site. 
F.  The address to which notice of action on the application is to be mailed. 
G.  The names of all employees, independent contractors, and other persons who will perform at the adult business, who are required by Section 9.34.080 of this chapter to obtain an adult use business performer permit (for ongoing reporting requirements, see Section 9.34.090 of this chapter.) 
H.  A site plan, drawn to scale which indicates clearly, with full dimensions, the following information: 
1.  Lot or site dimensions; 
2.  All buildings and structures: location, size, height, and proposed use; 
3.  Yards and space between buildings; 
4.  Walls and fences: location, height and materials; 
5.  Off-street parking and off-street loading: location, number of space and dimensions of parking and loading areas, internal circulation pattern; 
6.  Access-pedestrian, vehicular, service: points of ingress, internal circulation; 
7.  Signs: location, size, height and type of illumination, if any, including hooding devices; 
8.  Exterior lighting: location and general nature, hooding devices, strength (in foot-candles), site coverage. 
I.  Within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the completed application, the police chief shall complete the investigation, grant or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this section, and so notify the applicant as follows: 
1.  The police chief shall write or stamp "granted" or "denied" on the application and date and sign such notation. 
2.  If the application is denied, the police chief shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial. 
3.  If the application is granted, the police chief shall attach a copy of the application to an adult use business regulatory permit. 
4.  A copy of the application as granted or denied and the permit, if any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address stated in the application. 
J.  The police chief shall grant the application and issue the adult use business regulatory permit upon findings that the proposed business meets the locational criteria of Section 9.34.030 of this chapter, and that the applicant has met all of the development and performance standards and requirements of Section 9.34.120 of this chapter unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set forth in Section 9.34.100 of this chapter. The permittee shall post the permit conspicuously in the adult use business premises. 
K.  If the police chief grants the application or if the police chief neither grants nor denies the application within forty-five (45) days after it is stamped as received (except as provided in Section 9.34.120 of this chapter), the applicant may begin operating the adult use business for which the permit was sought, subject to strict compliance with the development and performance standards and requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 343 (part), 2006)  
9.34.100 - Permit denial. 
The police chief shall deny the application for any of the following reasons: 
A.  The building, structure, equipment, or location used by the business for which an adult use regulatory permit is required do not comply with the requirements and standards of the health, zoning, fire and safety laws of the City and the State of California, or with the locational or development and performance standards and requirements of these regulations. 
B.  The applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, shareholder or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for an adult use business regulatory permit. 
C.  An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age. 
D.  The required application fee has not been paid. 
E.  The adult use business does not comply with the Huron zoning ordinance locational standards, Section 9.34.030 of this chapter. 
F.  The applicant or any of his or her employees, partners, officers or directors (if the applicant is a corporation or partnership) has been convicted of any of the offenses specified in Section 9.34.140 of this chapter. 
Each adult use business regulatory permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance, and may be renewed only by filing with the police chief a written request for renewal, accompanied by the annual permit fee and a copy of the permit to be renewed. The request for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date of permit. When made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided herein for action upon applications for permits. 
(Ord. 343 (part), 2006)  
9.34.110 - Transfer of adult use business regulatory permit. 
A.  A permittee shall not operate an adult use business under the authority of an adult use business regulatory permit at any place other than the address of the adult use business stated in the application for the permit. 
B.  A permittee shall not transfer ownership or control of an adult use business or transfer an adult use business regulatory permit to another person unless and until the transferee obtains an amendment to the permit from the police chief stating that the transferee is now the permittee. Such an amendment may be obtained only if the transferee files an application with the police chief in accordance with Section 9.34.090 of this chapter, accompanies the application with a transfer fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council, and the police chief determines in accordance with Section 9.34.090 of this chapter that the transferee would be entitled to the issuance of an original permit. 
C.  No permit may be transferred when the police chief has notified the permittee that the permit has been or may be suspended or revoked. 
D.  Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is declared void, and the permit shall be deemed revoked. 
(Ord. 343 (part), 2006)  
9.34.120 - Adult use business performer permit. 
A.  No person shall engage in or participate in any live performance depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities in an adult use business in any location within the City of Huron, without a valid adult use business performer permit issued by the City for the said location. All persons who have been issued an adult use business regulatory permit shall promptly supplement the information provided as part of the application for the permit required by Section 9.34.090 of this chapter with the names of all performers required to obtain an adult use business performer permit, within thirty (30) days of any change in the information originally submitted. Failure to submit such changes shall be grounds for suspension of the adult use business regulatory permit. 
B.  The police chief shall grant, deny and renew adult use business performer permits. 
C.  The application for a permit shall be made on a form provided by the police chief. An original and two copies of the completed and sworn permit application shall be filed with the police chief. 
D.  The completed application shall contain the following information and be accompanied by the following documents: 
1.  The applicant's legal name and any other names (including "stage names" and aliases) used by the applicant; 
2.  Age, date and place of birth; 
3.  Height, weight, hair and eye color; 
4.  Present residence address and telephone number; 
5.  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of: 
a.  Any of the offenses set forth in Sections 313.1, 315, 316, 266a, 266b, 266c, 266e, 266f, 266g, 266h, 266i, 647(a), 647(b) and 647(d) of the California Penal Code as those sections now exist or may hereafter be amended or renumbered, 
b.  The equivalent of the aforesaid offenses outside the State of California; 
6.  Whether such person is or has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other jurisdiction to engage in prostitution in such other jurisdiction. If any person mentioned in this subsection has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other state to engage in prostitution, a statement shall be submitted giving the place of such registration, licensing or legal authorization, and the inclusive dates during which such person was so licensed, registered, or authorized to engage in prostitution; 
7.  State driver's license or identification number; 
8.  Satisfactory written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
9.  The applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the police department, and a color photograph clearly showing the applicant's face. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant; 
10.  If the application is made for the purpose of renewing a permit, the applicant shall attach a copy of the permit to be renewed. 
E.  The completed application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee. The amount of the fee shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
F.  Upon receipt of an application and payment of the application fees, the police chief shall immediately stamp the application as received and promptly investigate the application. 
G.  If the police chief determines that the applicant has completed the application improperly, the police chief shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and grant the applicant not more than ten days to complete the application properly. The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time. 
(Ord. 343 (part), 2006)  
9.34.130 - Investigation and action on application for adult use business performer permit. 
A.  Within forty-five (45) days after receipt of the properly completed application, the police chief shall grant or deny the application and so notify the applicant as follows: 
1.  The police chief shall write or stamp "approved" or "denied" on the application and date and sign such notation. 
2.  If the application is denied, the police chief shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial. 
3.  If the application is approved, the police chief shall attach to the application a copy of the adult use business performer permit. 
4.  A copy of the application as granted or denied and the permit, if any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the residence address stated in the application. 
B.  The police chief shall grant the application and issue the permit unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set forth in subsection D of this section. 
C.  If the police chief grants the application or if the police chief neither grants nor denies the application within forty-five (45) days after it is stamped as received (except as provided in Section 9.34.120 of this chapter), the applicant may begin performing in the capacity for which the permit was sought. 
D.  The police chief shall deny the application for any of the following reasons: 
1.  The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit or in any report or document required to be filed with the application; 
2.  The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age; 
3.  The adult use business performer permit is to be used for performing in a business prohibited by State or City law; 
4.  The applicant has been registered, licensed or permitted in any State as a prostitute; 
5.  The applicant has been convicted of any of the offenses enumerated in this section or convicted of an offense outside the State of California that would have constituted any of the described offenses if committed within the State of California. A permit may be issued to any person convicted of the described crimes if the conviction occurred more than five years prior to the date of the application. 
E.  Each adult use business performer permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by filing with the police chief a written request for renewal, accompanied by the application fee and a copy of the permit to be renewed. The request or renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date of the permit. When made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided in this chapter for applications for permits. 
F.  It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, or permittee in charge of or in control of an adult use business which provides live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities to allow any person to perform such entertainment who is not in possession of a valid, unrevoked adult use business performer permit. 
(Ord. 343 (part), 2006)  
9.34.140 - Suspension or revocation of adult use business regulatory permits and adult use business performer permits. 
An adult use business regulatory permit or adult use business performer permit may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section. 
A.  In the event that the chief of police of the City has reasonable cause to believe and does believe that any permittee or other person employed by or representing such permittee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or any other law or ordinance relating to the business of the permittee, including, but not limited to those offenses listed in subsection B of this section, he or she shall have power to and shall be authorized to suspend such license and all permits issued. If no written appeal is filed with the city clerk protesting such suspension within two business days of the date of such suspension, such suspension shall be deemed permanent and all such permits issued thereunder shall be deemed revoked. 
B.  A permittee may be subject to suspension or revocation of this permit, or be subject to other appropriate disciplinary action, for any of the following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the permittee, or an employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an adult use business: 
1.  The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material facts in the application for a permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with the City. 
2.  The permittee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an adult use business has knowingly allowed or permitted, and has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of any of the following on the premises of the adult use business, or in the case of an adult use business performer, the permittee has engaged in one of the activities described below while on the premises of an adult use business: 
a.  Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation; 
b.  Use of the establishment as a place where unlawful solicitations for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation occur; 
c.  Any conduct constituting a criminal offense which requires registration under Section 290 of the California Penal Code; 
d.  The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution, including any conduct constituting violations of Sections 315, 316, or 318 or Section 647(b) of the California Penal Code; 
e.  Any act constituting a violation of provisions in the California Penal Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors, including but not limited to Sections 311 through 313.4 of the California Penal Code; 
f.  Any conduct prohibited by this chapter. 
3.  Failure to abide by a disciplinary action previously imposed by an appropriate city official. 
(Ord. 343 (part), 2006)  
9.34.150 - Appeal of denial, suspension or revocation. 
In the event that any applicant desires to appeal from any order, denial, order of suspension, or any other ruling of the police chief made under the provisions of this chapter dealing with adult use business regulatory permits or adult use business performer permits, such applicant or any other person aggrieved thereby shall file written notice of such appeal with the city clerk and such matters shall be heard at the next regular meeting of the city council, at which time the city council shall hear and receive evidence, written and oral upon all matters involved. Upon the filing of such written notice of appeal, the order, denial, order of suspension, or other ruling of the police chief shall be stayed pending the decision of the city council. The decision of the city council shall be final upon all parties concerned. The effect of the decision of the city council shall be stayed while the permittee seeks prompt judicial review, if any. 
(Ord. 343 (part), 2006)  
9.34.160 - Prohibitions regarding minors and adult use businesses. 
It is unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he, she, or it operates or causes to be operated an adult use business, and knowingly or with reasonable cause to know, permits, suffers, or allows any one or more of the following to occur: 
A.  Admittance of a person under eighteen (18) years of age to the business premises; 
B.  A person under eighteen (18) years of age to remain at the business premises; 
C.  A person under eighteen (18) years of age to purchase goods or services at the business premises; 
D.  A person who is under eighteen (18) years of age to work at the business premises as an employee; or 
E.  If the business operates under the authority of a license issued by the California Department of Alcohol Beverage Control (ABC), admits anyone under the age of twenty-one (21) or allows any other activity to occur within or on the premises of the business which is prohibited by the license issued by ABC or by ABC regulations. 
(Ord. 343 (part), 2006)  
9.34.170 - Advertising and construction regulations. 
A.  It is unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he, she, or it operates or causes to be operated an adult use business and advertises the presentation of any activity prohibited by any applicable State status or local ordinance. 
B.  It is unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he, she, or it operates or causes to be operated an adult use business and displays or otherwise exhibits the materials or performances of such adult use businesses in any advertising. This prohibition shall not extend to advertising of the existence or location of such adult use business. 
C.  All signing and architectural graphics shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 15 of this code. 
D.  Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, aisles, and fire equipment shall be regulated, designed and provided in accordance with the fire department and building and safety division regulations and standards. 
E.  No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used in an adult use business for the amplification of any sound to a level discernible by the public beyond the walls of the building in which such use is conducted. 
F.  The building entrance to an adult use business shall be clearly and legibly posted by a notice indicating that minors are excluded from entering the premises. 
G.  All off-street parking areas and entrances to the premises of an adult use business shall be illuminated from dusk until at least the closing hour of operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of a twenty (20) foot-candle of light on the parking surface and/or walkway. This required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkway serving the adult use business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises. 
H.  The adult use business shall provide and maintain separate restroom facilities for male patrons and employees, and female patrons and employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for females, and female patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for males, except to carry out duties of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the restroom facilities. The restrooms shall be free from any books, magazines, printed or photographic material described in this chapter. Restrooms shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction equipment. The foregoing provisions of this subsection shall not apply to an adult use business that deals exclusively with the sale or rental of adult material which is not used or consumed on the premises, such as an adult bookstore or adult video store, and which does not provide restroom facilities to its patrons or the general public. 
I.  The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult use business providing live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities, except for businesses regulated by the alcoholic beverage control commission: 
1.  No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of an adult use business except upon a stage at least eighteen (18) inches above the level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least ten feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons, and no patron shall be permitted within ten feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by an entertainer. "Entertainer" shall mean any person who is an employee or independent contractor of the adult use business, or any person who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs live entertainment for patrons of an adult use business. 
2.  The adult use business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for entertainers which are exclusively dedicated to the entertainers' use. 
3.  The adult use business shall provide an entrance/exit for entertainers which is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons. 
4.  The adult use business shall provide access for entertainers between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the adult use business shall provide a minimum three-foot wide walk aisle for entertainers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers capable of (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and entertainers. 
5.  No entertainer, either before, during or after performances, shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any entertainer either before, during or after performances by such entertainer. This subsection shall only apply to physical contact on the premise of the adult use business. 
6.  Fixed rail(s) at least thirty (30) inches in height shall be maintained establishing the separations between entertainers and patrons required by this subsection. 
7.  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any entertainer and no entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
8.  No owner or other person with managerial control over an adult use business (as that term is defined in this chapter) shall permit any person on the premises of the adult use business to engage in live nude entertainment or perform "obscene live conduct" as defined in Section 311(g) of the Penal Code. This provision may not be complied with by applying an opaque covering simulating the appearance of the specified anatomical part required to be covered. 
9.  No person shall engage in nude entertainment or perform any work or service while in a state of nudity, or engage in or perform "obscene live conduct" as defined in Section 311(g) of the Penal Code. 
J.  A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult use business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, video disk, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  The interior diagram of an adult use business regulatory permit, required pursuant to Section 9.34.090 of this chapter shall specify the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted to enter. A manager's stations may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area with no dimensions greater than eight feet. No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the police chief. 
2.  It is the duty of the owner(s) and the operator(s) of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated at each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
3.  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video viewing capability. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
4.  The view area specified in subsection (J)(3) of this section shall remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times. No patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted to enter. 
5.  No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any one time. 
6.  The walls or partitions between viewing rooms or booths shall be maintained in good repair at all times, with no holes between any two such rooms such as would allow viewing from one booth into another or such as to allow physical contact of any kind between the occupants of any two such booths or rooms. 
7.  Customers, patrons or visitors shall not be allowed to stand idly by in the vicinity of any such video booths, or from remaining in the common area of such business, other than the restrooms, who are not actively engaged in shopping for or reviewing the products available on display for purchaser viewing. Signs prohibiting loitering shall be posted in prominent places in and near the video booths. 
8.  The floors, seats, walls and other interior portions of all video booths shall be maintained clean and free from waste and bodily secretions. Presence or evidence of improper maintenance and inadequate sanitary controls; repeated instances of such conditions may justify suspension or revocation of the owner and operator's license to conduct the adult use business. 
K.  All areas of the adult use business shall be illuminated at a minimum of the following foot-candles, minimally maintained and evenly distributed at ground levels: 
Area 	Foot-candles 
Bookstores and other retail establishments 	20 
Theaters and cabarets 	5 (except during performances, at which time lighting shall be at least 1.25 foot-candles) 
Arcades 	10 
Motels/Hotels 	20 (in public areas) 
 
L.  Adult use business shall employ security guards in order to maintain the public peace and safety, based upon the following standards: 
1.  Adult use business featuring live entertainment shall provide at least one security guard at all times while the business is open. If the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than thirty-five (35) persons, an additional security guard shall be on duty. 
2.  Security guards for other adult use businesses may be required if it is determined by the police chief that their presence is necessary in order to prevent any of the conduct listed in Section 9.34.140 of this chapter from occurring on the premises. 
3.  Security guard(s) shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing compliance by patrons of the requirements of these regulations. Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be duly licensed as a security guard as required by applicable provision of State law. No security guard required pursuant to this subsection shall act a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person, or sole occupant of the manager's station while acting as a security guard. 
M.  Nothing contained in this section shall relieve the owner or owners or operator or operators of an adult use business from complying with the requirement of this chapter as it may be amended from time to time, or any other existing or subsequently enacted City ordinances or regulations. 
N.  The foregoing applicable requirements of this section shall be deemed conditions of adult use business regulatory permit approvals, and failure to comply with every such requirement shall be grounds for revocation of the permit issued pursuant to these regulations. 
(Ord. 343 (part), 2006)  
9.34.180 - Register and permit number of employees. 
Every permittee of an adult use business which provides live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities must maintain a register of all persons so performing on the premises and their permit numbers. Such register shall be available for inspection during regular business hours by any police officer of the City of Huron. 
(Ord. 343 (part), 2006)  
9.34.190 - Display of permit and identification cards. 
A.  Every adult use business shall display at all times during business hours the permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for such adult use business in a conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by all persons entering the adult use business. 
B.  The police chief shall provide each adult use business performer required to have a permit pursuant to this chapter, with an identification card containing the name, address, photograph and permit number of such performer. 
C.  An adult use business performer shall have such card available for inspection by a police officer of the City of Huron at all times during which such person is employed by and on the premises of the adult use business. 
D.  It shall be the manager's responsibility to verify that performers have their permits in their possession prior to performing. 
(Ord. 343 (part), 2006)  
9.34.200 - Employment of and services rendered to minors prohibited. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any permittee, operator, or other person in charge of any adult use business to employ, or provide any service for which it requires such permit, to any person who is not at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any permittee, operator, or other person in charge of any adult use business to permit to enter, or remain within the adult use business, any person who is not at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for any permittee, operator or other person in charge of any adult use business which operates the business in conjunction with a license issued by the California Department of Alcohol Beverage Control Commission (ABC), to permit to enter, or remain within the adult use business, any person who is not at least twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(Ord. 343 (part), 2006)  
9.34.210 - Hours of operation. 
A.  It is unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he, she, or it operates, permits or causes to be operated an adult use business, where that person operates or permits or causes such business to remain open for business, or permits or causes any employee to engage in a performance, to solicit a performance, to make a sale, to solicit a service, between the hours of twelve midnight and twelve noon of any day. 
B.  It is unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if, working as an employee of an adult use business, said employee engages in a performance, solicits a performance, makes a sale, solicits a sale, provides a service, or solicits a service between the hours of twelve midnight and twelve noon of any day. 
(Ord. 343 (part), 2006)  
9.34.220 - Time limit for filing application for permit. 
All persons who possess an outstanding business license heretofore issued for the operation of an adult use business and all persons required by this chapter to obtain an adult use business performer permit must apply for and obtain such a permit within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this chapter. Failure to do so and continued operation of an adult use business, or the continued performances depicting specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in an adult use business after such time without a permit shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 343 (part), 2006)  
9.34.230 - Violations. 
In addition, any adult use business shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
A.  A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she or it operates, allows to be operated, or causes to be operated an adult use business outside of the district enumerated in Section 9.34.030 of this chapter or if he, she, or it operates, allows to be operated, or causes to be operated an adult use business within three hundred (300) feet of any sensitive use as defined in this chapter or if he, she, or it operates, allows to be operated, or causes to be operated an adult use business within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary of any residential zone or the boundary of a lot devoted to a conforming residential use or if he, she, or it operates, allows to be operated, or causes to be operated an adult use business within three hundred (300) feet of another adult use business. 
B.  It is a defense to prosecution under this section if a person appearing in a state of nudity does so in a modeling class operated in compliance with both of the following criteria: 
1.  That the class is operated either by a proprietary school, licensed by the State of California; a publicly owned college, junior college or publicly owned university supported entirely or partly by taxation or by a private college or credit are transferable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly taxation; and 
2.  That the class is operated entirely within a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing, 
b.  Where, in order to participate in a class, a student is customarily required to enroll in advance of the class (though late registrations may be allowable by the institution offering the class), and 
c.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(Ord. 343 (part), 2006)  
9.34.240 - Injunction. 
A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult use business in violation of the location restrictions of this chapter, is subjected to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for the criminal violation. Such violation shall be punishable by a fine and imprisonment, as fixed by the superior court, and if an injunction must be sought, attorney's fees and costs will be assessed at the discretion of the court against the adult use business. 
(Ord. 343 (part), 2006)  
9.34.250 - Inspection. 
A.  The operator shall permit representatives of the police department, community development, the County health department, and the fire department to inspect the premises of an adult use business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this chapter and applicable health and safety laws, at any time it is occupied or at any time it is open for business. 
B.  It is unlawful and a person who operates an adult use business or his, her, or its agent or employee commits a misdemeanor if he, she, or it refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time that it is occupied or at any time that it is open for business. 
(Ord. 343 (part), 2006)  
9.34.260 - Criminal penalties and additional legal, equitable and injunctive relief. 
In addition to whatever penalties are applicable under the California Penal Code, if any person fails or refuses to obey or comply with or violates any of the criminal provisions of this chapter, such person, upon conviction of such offense, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine or by imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days in the Fresno County jail, or both, in the discretion of the court. Each violation or noncompliance shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. Further, each day of continued violation or noncompliance shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent or restrict the City from taking such other lawful action in any court of competent jurisdiction as is necessary to prevent or remedy a violation or noncompliance. Such other lawful actions shall include, but shall not be limited to, an equitable action for injunctive relief or an action at law for damages. All remedies and penalties provided for in this section shall be cumulative and independently available to the City and the City shall be authorized to pursue any and all remedies set forth in this section to the full extent allowed by law. 
(Ord. 343 (part), 2006)  
9.34.270 - Immunity from prosecution. 
The City and its designee, the police department and all other department and agencies, and all other City officers, agents and employees charged with enforcement of State and local law and codes shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith entry upon an adult use business while acting within the scope of authority conferred by this chapter. 
(Ord. 343 (part), 2006)  
Chapter 9.38 - SOCIAL HOST ORDINANCE CONCERNING CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BY UNDERAGE PERSON(S) 
Sections: 
 
9.38.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Social Host Ordinance." When used in this chapter, "this chapter" means the Social Host Ordinance. 
(Ord. 350 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.38.020 - Findings and intent. 
The council finds and determines as follows: 
A.  The occurrence of parties on private property where alcohol is served to, or consumed by, underage person(s) is harmful to the underage person(s) and a threat to public health, safety, quiet enjoyment of property and the general welfare of the communities where such parties are held. 
B.  The California Department of Motor Vehicles has determined that the traffic accident rate for drivers age sixteen (16) to nineteen (19) caused by consumption of alcohol is 1.9 times higher than for drivers age twenty (20) and above. 
C.  Underage person(s) often obtain alcoholic beverages at parties held at private residences, or at rented residential and commercial premises, that are under the control of a person who knows, or should know, of the underage service and/or consumption. Person(s) responsible for the occurrence of parties on private property over which they have possession or control, are responsible for insuring that alcoholic beverages are neither served to, nor consumed by, underage person(s) at these parties. 
D.  Control of parties on private property, where underage person(s) are being served or consuming alcohol is necessary, because serving of alcohol to underage person(s), and consumption of alcohol by underage person(s), poses a threat to the peace, health, safety, or general welfare of the public. Law enforcement's ability to abate gatherings where alcohol is served to, or consumed by, underage person(s) on private property will result in a decrease in abuse of alcohol by underage person(s), in physical altercations and injuries, in neighborhood vandalism, and in excessive noise disturbance, thereby improving public safety. 
E.  Problems associated with such parties at which alcoholic beverages are served to, or consumed by, underage person(s) are difficult to prevent and deter unless law enforcement has the legal authority to direct the host to disperse the party. 
F.  Law enforcement, fire and other emergency response services personnel have and are required to respond, on multiple occasions to parties on private property at which alcoholic beverages are served to, or consumed by, underage person(s). Responses to such parties result in a disproportionate expenditure of public safety resources and staff time, leaving other areas of the City with inadequate protection. 
G.  Person(s) held responsible for abetting or tolerating parties where underage persons consume alcohol will be more likely to properly supervise and stop such conduct at parties held on private property under their possession and control. The prohibitions found in this chapter are reasonable and necessary to deter the consumption of alcoholic beverages by underage person(s) by holding person(s) responsible who knowingly allow service to, or consumption by, underage person(s) responsible. 
(Ord. 350 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.38.030 - Purpose. 
The council finds and declares that the purpose of this chapter is: 
A.  To protect public health, safety and general welfare; 
B.  To enforce laws prohibiting the service to and consumption of alcohol by underage person(s); and 
C.  To reduce the costs of providing law enforcement, fire and other emergency response services to parties by imposing a civil fee against social hosts and landowners (including landlords); and for the recovery of costs associated with providing law enforcement, fire and other emergency response services to parties where alcoholic beverages are served to, or consumed by, underage person(s). 
(Ord. 350 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.38.040 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter: 
"Alcohol" means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
"Alcoholic beverage" means and includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances. 
"Juvenile" means any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
"Party" or "parties" means an assembly of two or more individuals for any purpose, unless all of the individuals attending the assembly are members of the same household or immediate family. 
"Person(s)" means and includes, but is not limited to, any business, corporation or other organization. 
"Private party" means a hotel or motel room or bed and breakfast unit, home, yard, apartment, condominium, mobilehome, cottage, cabin, trailer, tent or other dwelling unit, abandoned or vacant warehouse or other building or a hall or meeting room, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation. 
"Public safety services" and/or "response costs" means the costs associated with responses by law enforcement, fire and other emergency response providers to parties, including but not limited to: 
1.  The portion of the cost of salaries and benefits of law enforcement, fire or other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with parties at which alcoholic beverages are served to, or consumed by, underage person(s) and the administrative costs attributable to such response(s); 
2.  The cost of any medical treatment to or for any law enforcement, fire or other emergency response personnel injured responding to, remaining at or leaving the scene of parties at which alcoholic beverages are served to, or consumed by, underage person(s); and 
3.  The cost of the use of any equipment or property, and the cost of repairing any equipment or property damaged, in responding to, remaining at or leaving the scene of parties at which alcoholic beverages are served to, or consumed by, underage person(s). 
"Responsible person" means a person or persons with a right of possession in the residence or other private property on which a party is conducted, including, but not limited to: 
1.  An owner of the private property; 
2.  A tenant or lessee of the private property; 
3.  The person(s) in charge of the private property; and 
4.  The person(s) who organizes, supervises, officiates, conducts or controls the party or any other person(s) accepting responsibility for such party. 
"Underage person(s)" means any person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(Ord. 350 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.38.050 - Consumption of alcohol by underage person(s). 
Except as permitted by Article 1, Section 4 of the California Constitution, it is unlawful for a person to: 
A.  Knowingly permit or host a gathering at his or her place of residence or other private property, place or premises or to host a gathering at a public place under his or her control where two or more persons under the age of twenty-one (21) are present, and alcoholic beverages are in the possession of, being consumed by, or served to any underage person. 
B.  This section shall not apply to conduct involving the service to or consumption of alcoholic beverages, which occurs exclusively between an underage person(s) and his or her parent or legal guardian or during the course of a religious ceremony conducted by an ordained minister. 
C.  This section shall not apply to any location or place regulated by the California Department of Alcohol and Beverage Control. 
(Ord. 350 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.38.060 - Prima facie evidence. 
Whenever a responsible person is present at a private property at the time an underage person(s) is being served or consumes any alcoholic beverage thereon, it shall be prima facie evidence that such person(s) had the knowledge or should have had the knowledge specified in Section 9.38.050(A). 
(Ord. 350 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.38.070 - Separate violation for each incident. 
Each incident in violation of Section 9.38.050 shall constitute a separate offense. An "incident" refers to each time law enforcement, fire, or other emergency personnel respond to a party, i.e., if a response is required multiple times to the same party on the same date, each response shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. 350 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.38.080 - Joint and several liability. 
For purposes of this chapter, if the person responsible for the event that violates Section 9.38.050 is a juvenile, then the juvenile and his parents and/or guardians will be jointly and severally liable for all fines and other costs incurred for public safety services pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 350 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.38.090 - Penalties for violation and enforcement remedies. 
A violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 350 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.38.100 - Reservation of legal options. 
The City does not waive its right to seek other legal remedies or procedures. This chapter in no way limits the authority of peace officers or private citizens to make arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct currently regulated, nor does it limit in any way the City's ability to initiate and prosecute a criminal prosecution for any violation of a criminal offense arising out of the same circumstances. 
(Ord. 350 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.38.110 - Civil cost recovery fee for public safety responses. 
In addition to any fine or other punishment imposed for violation of this chapter, the City may impose a fee for recovery of any costs suffered by, or billed to, the City by another agency for providing public safety services (i.e., fire, ambulance, sheriff, and other emergency services). The cost recovery for public safety responses shall be separate and distinct from any citation, fine, or criminal punishment for violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 350 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.38.120 - Severability and preemption. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase or word of this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The Huron City council hereby declares that it would have passed and adopted the ordinance codified in this chapter and each and all provisions thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more of said provisions be declared unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 350 § 1 (part), 2007)  
CHAPTER 9.39 - MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES OR SALES, USE AND CULTIVATION 
Sections: 
 
9.39.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the City of Huron by prohibiting the establishment of marijuana dispensaries or sales; restricting the cultivation, and use of marijuana in any area within the jurisdiction of the City of Huron. 
( Ord. No. 373 , § 2, 3-15-2017)  
9.39.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words have the meanings ascribed to them in this section as follows: 
"Cannabis" or "marijuana" shall have the same meaning given to the term "marijuana" by § 11018 of the Health and Safety Code. The terms "cannabis" and "marijuana" are interchangeable and shall have the same meaning. 
"Child care center" means any licensed child care or day care center, child care home, or preschool. 
"Commercial marijuana activity" includes the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transportation, distribution, delivery or sale of marijuana and marijuana products. 
"Cultivation" means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of marijuana. 
"Detached structure" means a building fully detached from a residence or other building that complies with the building regulations of the City of Huron and approved by the community development director or his or her designee, as set forth in this chapter. 
"Fence" or "fenced" shall mean a fence constructed of a substantial material that prevents viewing the contents of one side from the other. 
"Identification card" shall have the same meaning given to that term by Health and Safety Code § 11362.7 or as it may be amended. Marijuana shall have the same meaning as Health and Safety Code § 11018 as it is now or may be amended. 
"Marijuana products" and "marijuana accessories" shall have the same meaning given to those terms by Health and Safety Codes §§ 11018.1 and 11018.2, respectively. 
"Medical marijuana" means marijuana authorized for medical use as set forth in and in strict compliance with California Health and Safety Code § 11362.5, et seq., as it is now or as amended. "Non-medical marijuana" shall mean marijuana used for any other purpose authorized by law. 
"Medical marijuana cooperative" or "collective or medical cannabis dispensary" shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the same meaning as "medical marijuana dispensary." 
"Medical marijuana dispensary" or "collective" means any facility or location where medical marijuana is made available to or distributed by or to the following: a primary care giver, a qualified patient, or a person with an identification card in strict compliance with Health and Safety Code § 11362.5, et seq. A "medical marijuana dispensary" shall not include the following uses, as long as the location of such uses are otherwise regulated by this code or applicable law: a clinic license pursuant to Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; a health care facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; a residential care facility for persons with chronic life-threatening illness license pursuant to Chapter 3.01 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; a resident care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.02 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code; a residential hospice, or a home health agency licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 of the Health and Safety Code, as long as any such use strictly complies with applicable law including, but not limited to, Health and Safety Code § 11362.5, et seq. 
"Person with an identification card" shall have the same meaning given to that term by Health and Safety Code § 11362.7 or as it may be amended. 
"Primary care giver" shall have the same meaning given to that term by Health and Safety Code § 11362.7 or as it may be amended. 
"Qualified patient" shall have the same meaning given to that term by Health and Safety Code § 11362.7 or as it may be amended. 
"Residential structure" shall mean a building used for human habitation. 
"School" shall mean an institution of learning whether public or private, offering regular courses of instruction, including, without limitation to, elementary schools, middle or junior high schools, senior high schools, community colleges, or vocational colleges or institutions. 
"Sell", "sale", and "to sell" includes any transaction whereby for any consideration, title to marijuana is transferred from one person to another and includes the delivery of marijuana or marijuana products pursuant to an order placed for the purchase of the same and soliciting or receiving an order for the same. 
( Ord. No. 373 , § 2, 3-15-2017)  
9.39.030 - Commercial marijuana activity, dispensaries and sales prohibited. 
Medical marijuana and non-medical marijuana dispensaries or commercial marijuana activity of every type and/or sale of marijuana and marijuana products are prohibited and it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any such activity in or upon any premises located in any zone or anywhere else within the boundaries or jurisdiction of the City of Huron. 
( Ord. No. 373 , § 2, 3-15-2017)  
9.39.040 - Regulation of consumption of marijuana. 
No person shall smoke, ingest, or otherwise consume marijuana or marijuana products, whether recreational or medical, in the City of Huron, unless such smoking, ingesting or consumption occurs entirely within a private residence. "Within a private residence" shall mean inside habitable areas and shall not include garages, whether attached or detached, and other accessory buildings, unless those buildings are at all times fully enclosed during the consumption. Medical marijuana may also be consumed within a clinic, healthcare facility, residential care facility, or residential hospice licensed pursuant to applicable provisions of the California Health and Safety Code. All consumption shall be done in a manner so as not to cause a nuisance to nearby residents with noxious odors or other adverse health and safety impacts. 
( Ord. No. 373 , § 2, 3-15-2017)  
9.39.050 - Cultivation regulated. 
Cultivation of medical marijuana and non-medical marijuana is prohibited in the City of Huron as follows: 
A.  Outdoor Cultivation. Outdoor cultivation is unlawful and declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any parcel or premises within any zone in the City of Huron to cause or suffer such parcel or premises to be used for the outdoor cultivation of marijuana plants. 
B.  Non-residential Zones. It is unlawful and a public nuisance to cultivate medical marijuana or non-medical marijuana in any non-residential zone in the City of Huron. 
C.  Cultivation Within a Residence. It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to cultivate or allow the cultivation of medical or non-medical marijuana inside any residential structure or building suitable for human habitation in any zone of the City, except as permitted by this chapter. 
D.  Proximity to Child Care Centers, Parks and Schools. It is unlawful and declared a public nuisance to cultivate or allow the cultivation of non-medical marijuana or medical marijuana on any parcel or premises within five hundred (500) feet from any child care center, public park or school. The five-hundred-foot distance shall be measured from the closest property line of the child care center, public park, or school to the closest property line of the parcel upon which the cultivation is present. 
( Ord. No. 373 , § 2, 3-15-2017)  
9.39.060 - Cultivation permit required. 
A.  Cultivation Permit. No person may engage in the cultivation of marijuana without first obtaining a marijuana cultivation permit from the city manager or his or her designee. 
B.  Permit Application. Any person seeking a permit to cultivate marijuana shall complete an application for a cultivation permit on a form provided by the City of Huron which shall contain, but is not limited to, the following: 
1.  The physical site address of the premises where the marijuana will be cultivated. 
2.  The name of each person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge of the premises where the marijuana will be cultivated and, in the event that the person owning said parcel is not the person applying for a cultivation permit, then a signed, notarized, consent to the cultivation of marijuana at the premises on a form provided by the City of Huron. 
3.  A signed consent form from the applicant(s) and/or property owner authorizing city staff, including the Huron Police Department, to conduct an inspection of the area used for the cultivation of marijuana upon request. 
C.  Building Standards—Approval Required. Prior to the issuance of a cultivation permit pursuant to this chapter, the structure wherein the marijuana will be cultivated must be reviewed, inspected and approved by the City Manager or his or her designee. 
D.  Term of Permit. A marijuana cultivation permit shall be valid for no more than one year. 
E.  Permit Renewal. A marijuana cultivation permit may only be renewed upon an application for renewal to the city manager or his or her designee on a form provided by the City of Huron. 
F.  Fees. The city council may establish or amend, by resolution, a fee or fees required to be paid upon the filing of an application for a permit, or renewal thereof, as provided for in this chapter, which shall not exceed the reasonable cost of administering this chapter. 
G.  Denial of Permit. 
1.  The city manager, or his or her designee, may deny any application for a marijuana cultivation permit, or extension thereof, if he or she finds, in his or her discretion, based on the facts available that the issuance of such permit, or extension thereof, does not meet the requirements of this chapter and would be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. 
( Ord. No. 373 , § 2, 3-15-2017)  
9.39.070 - Cultivation—Residential structure. 
A.  Indoor Cultivation. The indoor cultivation of marijuana in a residential zone within a residential structure shall not to exceed an area of fifty (50) square feet, unless a larger area is required to cultivate a greater quantity as allowed either by the Marijuana Medical Regulation and Safety Act for Medical Marijuana or by the Control, Regulate and Tax Use of Marijuana Act for Non-Medical Marijuana. 
B.  Approval Required. Any person applying for a cultivation permit for marijuana pursuant to this chapter in a residential structure shall first obtain approval of the residential structure and a cultivation permit from the city manager or his or her designee. The city manager may establish any procedures or forms necessary for the processing of the approval/cultivation permit described in this chapter. 
C.  Standards. The residential structure to be used for marijuana cultivation shall conform to the City Code, building standards of the City of Huron including all adopted codes, and any requirements deemed necessary by the city manager or his or her designee including, but not limited to, the following minimum standards: 
1.  Indoor grow lights in a residential structure shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) watts or other limit as determined by the City and shall comply with the building regulations of the City of Huron and all adopted codes including, but not limited to, the California Building and Electrical Codes and shall be inspected and approved by the building inspector. 
2.  Indoor cultivation within a residential structure shall not take place in a kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, or common area of the residence and shall be secured by one or more lockable doors. 
3.  Any cultivation within a residential structure shall have a ventilation system separate from the remaining area of the residential structure with a filtration system that shall prevent marijuana plant odors from exiting the interior of the cultivation area or the residential structure. Said ventilation system shall comply with the building regulations of the City of Huron and adopted codes including, but not limited to, the applicable sections of the California Building Code related to mechanical ventilation. 
4.  The use of generators or any other internal combustion engine or use of any combustible products including, without limitation to, gasoline, diesel fuel, butane, propane, or natural gas within the residential structure shall be prohibited. 
5.  City water shall not be used in the cultivation of marijuana. 
( Ord. No. 373 , § 2, 3-15-2017)  
9.39.080 - Cultivation—Detached structure. 
A.  Approval Required. Any person seeking a cultivation permit for marijuana pursuant to this chapter in a detached structure shall first obtain approval of the detached structure and a cultivation permit from the city manager or his or her designee. The city manager may establish any procedures or forms necessary for the processing of the approval/cultivation permit described in this chapter. 
B.  Standards. The detached structure shall conform to the City Code, building standards of the City of Huron including all adopted codes, and any requirements deemed necessary by the city manager or his or her designee including, but not limited to, the following minimum standards: 
1.  The detached structure shall be attached to a slab foundation or equivalent base by bolts or similar attachments. 
2.  The walls and roofs of the detached structure must be constructed of two-inch by four-inch or larger material. The frame of the structure must be overlayed with at least five-eighths-inch exterior plywood or other suitable material and shall be covered with materials similar to or conforming with the materials used on surrounding structures. 
3.  The detached structure shall be accessible by one or more lockable exterior-grade doors. 
4.  The total area of the detached structure shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet unless a larger area is required to cultivate a greater quality of marijuana set forth in the Marijuana Medical Regulation and Safety Act for Medical Marijuana or by the Control, Regulate and Tax Use of Marijuana Act for Non-Medical Marijuana. 
5.  Indoor grow lights shall not exceed a maximum wattage to be determined by the city manager or his or her designee. electricity to the building must be provided by suitable connection as determined by the city manager. Use of portable generators, portable heaters, or combustible products including, but not limited to, gasoline, diesel fuel, propane, butane, or natural gas, unless expressly permitted by the city manager or his or her designee, are strictly prohibited. The detached secure structure shall have a ventilation and filtration system installed to prevent odors from marijuana plants from exiting the interior of the building and shall comply with the building regulations of the city of Huron and all adopted Codes, including, but not limited to, applicable California Building Code sections related to mechanical ventilation. 
6.  The secured structure shall be located within the rear yard of any premises and must be setback at least ten feet from any building, pool, or property line. If any greater setback is required by any other provision of the Huron Municipal Code or any other code, the greater setback distance shall apply. 
7.  The area surrounding the secured structure must be enclosed by a solid fence at least six feet in height and an adequate mechanical or electronic security system approved by the city manager or his or her designee or the chief of police must be installed in and around the detached structure. 
8.  The detached structure shall be inspected and approved by the building inspector. 
9.  City water shall not be used in the cultivation of marijuana. 
( Ord. No. 373 , § 2, 3-15-2017)  
9.39.090 - Violation of permit. 
If any requirement relating to cultivation, or terms of any permit issued for cultivation in accordance with this chapter is determined by any city officer or official to have been violated, that officer or official may immediately revoke the permit and, if deemed necessary to correct or prevent any such or any further violation of either this chapter or the terms of any permit issued thereunder, such officer or official of the City may immediately confiscate or destroy any growing marijuana, harvested or processed marijuana or any marijuana products. The city officer or official shall issue a written order revoking the permit as soon as practicable upon detecting the violation of this chapter or of any permit leading to the revocation. Any confiscation or destruction of any marijuana or marijuana products shall be final and conclusive, and not subject to an appeal insofar as the confiscation or destruction of marijuana or marijuana products occurs in connection with the action taken by the officer or official in revoking the permit. The revocation of the permit shall, however, be subject to an appeal as provided in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 373 , § 2, 3-15-2017)  
9.39.100 - Appeal. 
Any applicant for or holder of a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, which application or permit has been denied, revoked, or suspended by order of the chief of police, city manager, or other officer or official of the City shall have the right to appeal such order or denial, revocation or suspension to the city council within twenty (20) days after the date on which such order is hand delivered to the applicant or permittee, or deposited in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant or permittee. 
An appeal shall be made by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk of the City of Huron within the twenty-day period set forth in this section. The filing of such appeal shall not suspend the order of denial, revocation or suspension of said permit. The city council shall hear the appeal within a reasonable time, not exceeding ninety (90) days, from and after the date of receipt of the notice of appeal by the city clerk. The city council shall conduct a public hearing, written notice of the time and place thereof being mailed to the applicant or permittee not less than ten days prior to said hearing, unless timely notice be waived by the applicant or permittee. The rules of evidence shall not apply to the hearing and the applicant or permittee shall have the right to the assistance of counsel and the reasonable presentation of witnesses and evidence. The council shall make an order affirming, overruling or modifying the denial, revocation or suspension of such permit within sixty (60) days from and after the date the hearing on said appeal is concluded. The city's council appeal and decision shall be limited to addressing whether a permit that has been revoked, denied or suspended shall or shall not be reinstated or issued. Any action taken by the chief of police, city manager or other officer or official of the City in connection with the denial, revocation of or suspension of any permit other than the order revoking, denying or suspending the permit, shall be final, conclusive, and unreviewable. The decision of the city council shall be the final decision of the City. Any person who has a permit issued under this chapter revoked shall be precluded from holding or being issued any such permit for a period of one year from the date of the order revoking the permit or the city council's decision upholding the revocation, whichever is later. 
( Ord. No. 373 , § 2, 3-15-2017)  
9.39.110 - Penalty. 
Any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and constitutes a public nuisance and shall be enforced and/or abated in accordance with any other applicable section of the Huron Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 373 , § 2, 3-15-2017)  
9.39.120 - Non-exclusive. 
Nothing in this chapter is intended to be an exclusive penalty or remedy. Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize the use, possession, sale, distribution or cultivation of marijuana in violation of state or federal law. 
( Ord. No. 373 , § 2, 3-15-2017)  
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters:  
Chapter 10.04 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.04.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined and certain provisions shall be construed as herein set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended. 
"Alley" is every way less than thirty (30) feet in width between property lines. 
"Business district" is that portion of a highway and the property contiguous thereto upon one side of which highway for a distance of three hundred (300) feet, where fifty (50) percent or more of the contiguous property fronting thereon is occupied by buildings in use for business, or upon both sides of which highway collectively for a distance of one hundred and fifty (150) feet, where fifty (50) percent or more of the contiguous property fronting thereon is so occupied. 
"Crosswalk" is either: (a) that portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation or connection of the boundary lines of sidewalks at intersections where the intersecting roadways meet at approximately right angles, except the prolongation of any such lines from an alley across a street; or (b) any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossings by lines or other markings on the surface. 
"Curb" is the boundary of that portion of a street designed for the use of a vehicle. 
"Intersection" is the area embraced within the prolongation of the curb lines of two or more streets which join at an angle, whether or not one such street crosses the other. 
"Loading zone" is that space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles actually engaged in loading or unloading of materials. 
"Official traffic signals" includes any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed, and which is placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction. 
"Official traffic control devices" includes all signs, signals, markings, and devices not inconsistent with this title placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
"Operator" includes the driver, rider or leader of a horse, and a person who pushes, draws, propels, operates or who is in charge of a vehicle. 
"Park" is the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily, for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers or materials. 
"Parkway" is that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk. 
"Driveway apron" is that portion of a regularly established driveway lying between a property line and any curb, the purpose of which is to provide vehicular access from the street across the curb, parkway, and sidewalk to the property fronting thereon or abutting thereto. 
"Passenger loading zone" is that space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles actually engaged in loading or unloading of passengers. 
"Pedestrian" is any person afoot. 
"Roadway" includes that portion of a street between the regularly established curb lines and that portion of any street, parkway, bridge or tunnel, which is included between the curbs. 
"Right-of-way" is the privilege of the immediate use of the street. 
"Safety zone" is that marked portion of a roadway reserved for the exclusive use of pedestrians. 
"Sidewalk" is that portion of a street other than a roadway or a parkway. 
"Stop" or "stop when required" is a complete cessation of movement. 
"Street" is every way more than thirty (30) feet in width between property lines. 
"Traffic" includes pedestrians and vehicles while using any street or alley for purposes of travel. 
"Vehicle" includes every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a street, except a device moved by human power. 
"Vehicle code" is the Vehicle Code of the State of California. 
(Ord. 205 §§ 4.9.00—4.9.23, 1984)  
Chapter 10.08 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
10.08.010 - Obedience to police. 
Officers of the police department are authorized to direct all traffic by means of visible or audible signal, and no person shall fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a traffic signal or police officer. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.24, 1984)  
10.08.020 - Parking and traffic engineer—Chief of police. 
Until such time as the City of Huron employs a parking and traffic engineer, the chief of police is authorized to act in that capacity and as used in this chapter, the titles are synonymous. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.29, 1984)  
10.08.030 - Investigation of accidents by any police officer. 
All members of the Huron police department shall have the power to investigate accidents resulting in personal injuries or death and to gather evidence for the purpose of prosecuting the person or persons guilty of any violation of the law contributing to the happening of such an accident. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.53, 1984)  
10.08.040 - Appearance upon an arrest. 
Whenever a person is stopped in the city for violations of the provisions of this chapter, unless such person demands the right to an immediate appearance before a magistrate, the officer shall, upon producing satisfactory means of identification, take all necessary information and notify him in writing to appear at a time and place specified. Such time and place to be in accordance with court procedures. Whenever such person refuses to give his written promise to appear as herein provided for, or demands an immediate appearance before a magistrate, he shall be taken forthwith before a judge of the justice court. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.81, 1984)  
10.08.050 - Exemptions to certain sections. 
The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles, shall not apply to any vehicle of the police or fire department, any public ambulance, or any public utility vehicle or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified in the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call. 
The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his wilful disregard of the safety of others. 
The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a City department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work, or any vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States Mail or vehicle when displaying identification indicating the vehicle is in city use in a form prescribed by the chief of police and visible from outside the vehicle. Such identification shall be issued by the chief of police subject to approval by the city manager. Such identification shall be displayed on a vehicle only by the person to whom it is issued and only during the time such person is in the course of conducting authorized City business. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.32, 1984)  
10.08.060 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any violations of this title shall be deemed infraction. 
A.  Any person who wilfully violates his promise given in accordance with Section 10.08.040 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested. A promise to appear may be complied with by an appearance by counsel. 
B.  Penalties imposed for violations of this title shall be those as described in Division 18 of the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.82, 1984)  
Chapter 10.12 - TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND DEVICES 
Sections: 
 
10.12.010 - Official traffic signal. 
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting the words, "Go," "Caution" or "Stop," or exhibiting different colored lights successively, one at a time, such signals shall conform with the requirements of the Vehicle Code and all traffic shall comply with such signals. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.25, 1984)  
10.12.020 - Disobeying instructions of various signals. 
No person shall disobey instructions of: 
A.  Any official traffic signal; 
B.  Any traffic sign; or 
C.  Any paint marks placed upon the surface of the roadway; or 
D.  Any banner or sign erected by any of the public departments of the City and erected or placed in accordance with provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.26, 1984)  
10.12.030 - Parking and traffic engineer to establish crosswalks. 
The parking and traffic engineer is authorized and required to establish and maintain, or cause to be maintained, and to designate upon the surface of the roadway by appropriate devices, marks, or white or yellow lines, crosswalks approximately equal in width to the adjacent sidewalk at all intersections and between intersections where, in his opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.27, 1984)  
10.12.040 - Special controls required. 
The parking and traffic engineer is to install and maintain all traffic control devices. The parking and traffic engineer is authorized to determine those streets, intersections and crosswalks at which traffic is hazardous or dangerous to life or property by reason of volume of traffic upon such streets or at such intersections or crosswalks, or lack of visibility or the drivers of vehicles approaching such streets, intersections or crosswalks, or because of the numerous reported accidents or the possibility thereof, or by reason of other physical conditions likely to render any such streets, intersections or crosswalks dangerous or hazardous to life or property. When the parking and traffic engineer has determined that a street, intersection or crosswalk is dangerous or hazardous to life or property, he is authorized and empowered to place, at, on or near such streets, intersections or crosswalks as he shall designate. Every such traffic control device shall conform to the requirements of the Vehicle Code of the State of California. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.28, 1984)  
10.12.050 - Failure to stop when required by sign unlawful. 
No operator of any vehicle shall fail to stop such vehicle at any stop sign erected and maintained pursuant to this chapter at the entrance to any intersection or any other location wheresoever installed, and not proceed until such time that said intersection or location is clear of traffic and safe to proceed. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.30, 1984)  
Chapter 10.16 - PEDESTRIANS 
Sections: 
 
10.16.010 - Right to use of roadway—Restricted. 
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a sidewalk in any business district. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.33, 1984)  
10.16.020 - Standing in roadway or streets. 
No pedestrian shall stand in any roadway or street other than in a safety zone or in a crosswalk if such action interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. 
This section shall not apply to any police officer, surveyor, street sweeper or other person when necessarily upon the street in the line of duty. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.63, 1984)  
10.16.030 - Pedestrians standing on sidewalks. 
In any business district, no pedestrian shall stop or stand on a sidewalk except as near as is physically possible to the building line or the curb line. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.35, 1984)  
10.16.040 - Pedestrians to obey signals. 
At intersections where traffic is directed by a traffic or police officer or traffic sign or signal, no pedestrian shall cross the roadway other than with released traffic. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.34, 1984)  
Chapter 10.20 - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING* 
Sections: 
 
10.20.010 - Investigation of accidents by any police officer. 
All members of the Huron police department shall have the power to investigate accidents resulting in personal injuries or death and to gather evidence for the purpose of prosecuting the person or persons guilty of any violation of the law contributing to the happening of such an accident. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.53, 1984)  
10.20.020 - Stopping, standing and parking—Markings and signs. 
The parking and traffic engineer and/or chief of police is authorized to establish, maintain and designate upon the surface of the roadway or curbs, parking or standing regulation markings, which markings shall conform to the provisions of the Vehicle Code and shall have the meanings therein prescribed. 
When such signs have been posted, or street or curb markings placed, no person shall park, stop or stand a vehicle in violation thereof. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.54, 1984)  
10.20.030 - Removal of illegally parked vehicles. 
Police officers are authorized to remove from streets or highways within the City of Huron to the nearest garage or other place of safety designated or maintained by the police department, any vehicle which has been parked or left standing in violation of an official sign prohibiting the stopping or parking of vehicles and giving notice that such vehicle may be removed. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.55, 1984)  
10.20.040 - Green parking zones. 
A green parking zone shall exist where the curb is painted green with the words "15 Minute Limit" stencilled on the curb within the zone. No person shall stop or park in any green zone for more than fifteen (15) minutes. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.56, 1984)  
10.20.050 - Yellow loading zones. 
A yellow loading zone shall exist where the curb is painted yellow with the words "Loading Zone Only" stencilled on the curb within the zone. No person shall park in any yellow loading zones between the hours of seven a.m. and six p.m., Monday through Saturday. No person shall stop in a yellow loading zone for a longer time than necessary to load or unload and in no event longer than fifteen (15) minutes. A yellow loading zone may be established if all of the following exist: 
A.  Sufficient loading activity exists to warrant reducing curb parking by installing the more restrictive loading zone; 
B.  Curb availability for loading is insufficient due to heavy area parking demand; 
C.  Off-street or alley loading is not available. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.57, 1984)  
10.20.060 - White passenger loading zones. 
A white passenger loading zone shall exist where the curb is painted white with the word "Passenger Loading Only" stencilled on the curb within the zone. No person shall park in any white loading zone. No person shall stop in a white passenger loading zone for a longer time than necessary to load or unload passengers and in no event longer than three (3) minutes. A white passenger loading zone may be established if curb parking is insufficient due to heavy area parking and sufficient loading activity exists to warrant reducing curb parking by installing the more restrictive loading zone. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.59, 1984)  
10.20.070 - Fees required. 
The parking and traffic engineer and/or chief of police may establish loading and limited parking zones upon receipt of an initial fee determined by the city council resolution. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.58, 1984)  
10.20.080 - Physically handicapped zones. 
A physically handicapped zone shall exist where the curb or edge of the paved portion of the street adjacent to the space or where the stall or spaces in any publicly or privately owned or operated off-street parking facility have been designated for parking for physically handicapped persons in the manner required by Section 22507.8 of the Vehicle Code. 
No person shall stop or park a vehicle in a physically handicapped zone unless the vehicle has distinguishing license plates or placards issued to disabled persons pursuant to Section 22511.5 of the Vehicle Code or to disabled veterans as specified in Section 9105 of the Vehicle Code. Any vehicle parked in violation of this section may be removed from the physically handicapped zone by any police officer. 
A physically handicapped zone may be established by resolution of the city council upon request by any individual and consideration by the parking and traffic engineer, or upon recommendation of the traffic engineer if either of the following factors exists: 
A.  Curb parking is insufficient due to heavy area parking; or 
B.  Sufficient vehicular activity by physically handicapped persons exist at the location. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.60, 1984)  
10.20.090 - Parking parallel with curb and head-in parking. 
A.  No person shall stand or park vehicles in a roadway or street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of traffic and with the right hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb line or edge of the roadway, except that on one-way streets, vehicles may be stopped or parked facing in the same direction as traffic movement, adjacent to the left hand side of the roadway, by the left hand wheels of vehicles so stopped or parked must be within eighteen (18) inches of the curb line of edge of the roadway. All parking shall be parallel, except upon those streets which have been marked or signed by the parking and traffic engineer for angle parking upon which streets vehicles shall be parked at the angles to the curb indicated by such marks or signs and not otherwise. 
B.  No person shall disobey instructions of any official traffic sign requiring head-in parking. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.61, 1984)  
10.20.100 - Emergency stopping, standing or parking. 
The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.62, 1984)  
10.20.110 - Standing or parking in alleys. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any alley, except for the loading and unloading of goods. At no time shall the vehicle be left unattended. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.64, 1984)  
10.20.120 - Parking prohibited in specified places. 
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle in front of any entrance to any garage or in front of any driveway. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.65, 1984)  
10.20.130 - Red zone parking prohibited. 
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle upon the portion of any public street or place in the City where the parking and traffic engineer or the chief of police shall erect or cause to be erected a sign or cause to be painted in red a portion of the curb line. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.66, 1984)  
10.20.140 - Parking time limited in specified places. 
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle upon that portion of a public street or place where the parking and traffic engineer or the chief of police shall erect or cause to be erected appropriate signs upon that portion of the public street or place and said signs shall clearly specify between what hours and for what period of time it shall be unlawful to stand or park vehicles. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.67, 1984)  
10.20.150 - Parking of trailers and large vehicles in residential districts. 
Between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m., on any public street or alley in a residential district as established by the zoning ordinance, no person shall park any trailer or any vehicle of which any part of the vehicle, together with all fixtures, accessories or property with the exception of single post radio antennas, measures more than eight (8) feet in width, or seven and one-half (7½) feet in height, or twenty (20) feet in length, unless such person shall have a permit, for such a trailer or vehicle, and in no event for a period exceeding two (2) twenty-four (24) hour periods. 
(Amended during 1995 codification; Ord. 205 § 4.9.69, 1984)  
10.20.160 - Commercial vehicles in residential districts. 
No person shall park any commercial vehicle on a public street or alley in a residential district as established by the zoning ordinance, except in the event of any emergency or for the purpose of loading and unloading, if any part of such commercial vehicle, together with fixtures or property thereon, if any, measures more than seven (7) feet in width or seven (7) feet in height. 
(Amended during 1995 codification; Ord. 205 § 4.9.70, 1984)  
10.20.170 - Parking of vehicles for advertising purposes. 
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or official traffic control device, no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, on a public street or alley, if said vehicle, at the time, is primarily designed and is being used for carrying and displaying commercial advertising. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.71, 1984)  
10.20.180 - Overnight parking permits. 
Overnight parking permits may be issued by the city clerk upon application of any person therefor, and subject to the following provisions: 
A.  Each application for an overnight street parking permit shall be filed with the chief of police or his representative. 
B.  Each such application shall set forth: 
1.  The name, residence and telephone number of the applicant; 
2.  The license number, make, model and type of vehicle for which such permit is requested; 
3.  The name and current address of the registered owner of said vehicle; 
4.  The dates for which the permit is requested. Such dates shall consist of two (2) twenty-four (24) hour periods, to commence in all cases at six a.m., and to end in all cases, at six p.m., the following day; 
5.  The request is accompanied by a three dollar ($3.00) permit fee; 
6.  The signature of the applicant. 
C.  Such permit shall be issued only for a noncommercial passenger vehicle, as defined by the California Vehicle Code and for vehicles specified in Section 10.20.140. This permit will allow overnight parking only in residential areas. 
D.  The permit must be affixed to the lower edge of a rear window on the street side of the oversize vehicle. The permit must be displayed on the vehicle for which it was issued and must be visible from outside the vehicle. The permit is not effective unless so affixed. 
E.  No more than three (3) such permits may be issued for the parking of any oversized vehicle at a single residence address in any thirty (30) day period. 
F.  No more than three (3) such permits may be issued for the parking of the same such vehicle in any thirty (30) day period. 
G.  No permit issued pursuant to this section shall be construed as waiving compliance with any parking law, regulation or ordinance except for the temporary relief from the provisions of Section 10.20.140. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.72, 1984)  
10.20.190 - Parking on private property. 
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle in a private driveway or on private property without the actual or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such driveway or property. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.75, 1984)  
10.20.200 - Impounding vehicles obstructing driveways. 
Any vehicle which is parked or left standing on public property so as to block or obstruct any driveway or other means of ingress to or egress from private property may be, upon complaint of the owner or person in lawful possession of such property, removed and placed in safekeeping by any police officer. Whenever a vehicle is removed pursuant to this section, proper notifications shall be made in accordance with the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.76, 1984)  
10.20.210 - Impounding vehicles from private property. 
The owner or person in lawful possession of private property may remove vehicles parked on such private property without the consent of such owner or lawful possessor, if in compliance with all provisions of Section 22658 of the Vehicle Code. 
Signs to be posted notifying of such removal as required in Section 22658, subsection (a) of the Vehicle Code, shall not be less than eighteen (18) by twenty-four (24) inches in size. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.77, 1984)  
10.20.230 - Car keys left in vehicle. 
No person shall leave a moving vehicle, except a commercial vehicle, unattended on any street, alley, used car lot or unattended parking lot without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, and removing the ignition key therefrom. For the purpose of this section, "motor vehicle" and "commercial vehicle," shall be defined as provided in Vehicle Code Sections 260(a) and 415, respectively. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.79, 1984)  
10.20.240 - Unlawful parking—Peddlers and vendors. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall stand or park any vehicle, wagon or pushcart from which goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables or foodstuffs, are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for sale, or bartered or exchanged on any street, or on any public or private property. The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons delivering any such articles upon order of, or by agreement with a customer from a store or other fixed place of business or distribution. 
B.  No person shall park, or stand on any street or on public or private property any pushcart, vehicle, or wagon from which items enumerated in subsection A of this section are sold without first obtaining a license from the city clerk. The fee for such license being two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per year. The fee shall be paid annually and the license shall be in effect for a period of one year from date of issuance. 
C.  In order to receive a business license, the applicant must possess a valid California Health Certificate for the vehicle used to distribute said foodstuffs. The operator's name and vehicle identification number is required to appear on the certificate. 
D.  The sale of prepared foods shall be prohibited in public right-of-ways and in any area within five hundred (500) feet of an established or existing commercial food service business, or within two hundred (200) feet of the nearest property line of any public school. 
E.  Any conviction of any subsection herein stated shall be grounds for revocation of such license by the chief of police and no permit shall thereafter be issued to such person within the period of six months from the date of such revocation. Any subsequent violation shall be grounds for permanent revocation. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.80, 1984)  
10.20.250 - Parking of vehicles. 
No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley and fail to move the vehicle more than one-tenth of a mile from the original parking space for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two (72) hours. For the purpose of this section, attempting to eradicate or hide the tire markings placed by an authorized City employee may result in the issuance of a citation and removal of the vehicle without further warning pursuant to the requirements of California Vehicle Code § 22669. 
(Ord. No. 360, § 2, 9-28-11)  
Chapter 10.23 - ABANDONED VEHICLE ABATEMENT 
Sections: 
 
10.23.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "City of Huron Abandoned Vehicle Abatement Ordinance." 
(Ord. 337 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.23.020 - Findings—Nuisance declared. 
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the State of California under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city council makes the following findings and declarations: 
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property, including highways, is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects, and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, on private or public property, including highways, except as expressly permitted in this chapter, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 337 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.23.030 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"City" shall mean the City of Huron. 
"City manager" shall mean the City of Huron city manager or person or persons designated by the city manager. 
"Highway" shall mean a way or place, of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. "Highway" includes street. 
"Locally designated officer" means the chief of police, officer or other person designated by the chief of police. 
"Owner of the land" means the owner of the land on which the vehicles, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
"Owner of the vehicle" means the last registered owner and legal owner of record or more current owner, if known. 
"Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. 337 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.23.040 - Exemption. 
This chapter shall not apply to the following: 
A.  A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner so that it is not visible from a road, highway or other public or private property; 
B.  A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is located behind a solid fence six feet in height or which is not plainly visible from a road or highway; 
C.  A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed auto dismantler, vehicle dealer permitted to operate within the city. 
(Ord. 337 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.23.050 - Nonexclusive regulations. 
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in any manner to limit the authority of a peace officer or other public officer to take actions as authorized by law whether or not in compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 337 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.23.060 - Administration and enforcement. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the locally designated officer. In the enforcement of this chapter such officer and his or her deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 337 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.23.070 - Authority of franchisee to enter private property. 
When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 337 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.23.080 - Administrative costs. 
The city council shall, from time to time, determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs, excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle (or parts thereof) under this chapter. 
(Ord. 337 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.23.090 - Abatement generally. 
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the city, the locally designated officer shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. 337 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.23.100 - Abatement—Notices. 
A.  A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership in which case the vehicle and/or land will be posted and the owner of the land noticed as required. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms: 
  
"NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE. 
(Name and address of owner of the land) 
  
 As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at, you are hereby notified that the undersigned, pursuant to (Section of Ordinance No. 337 or Municipal Code) has determined that there exists upon said land an (or part of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts of a vehicle, registered to, license number, which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of (Ordinance No. 337 or Municipal Code Section No.). 
 You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the City and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located. 
 As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the City Manager within such 10-day period, the locally designated officer shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn, written statement within such 10-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle, or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn, written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing. 
  
Notice Mailed________ 
Date________ 
Locally designated officer" 
  
"NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE. 
To: Name of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle—notice should be given to both if different 
Address 
 As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (vehicle: make, model, license number, etc.) you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to (Ordinance No. or Section of the Municipal Code), has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned; wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle at (description of location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of (Ordinance No. or Section of the Municipal Code). 
 You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle or said parts of a vehicle within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice. 
 As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle, or said parts of a vehicle, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing or may submit a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the property, with reasons for such denial, in lieu of appearing. If such a request is not received by the City Manager within such 10-day period, the locally designated officer shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing. 
Notice Mailed________ 
Locally designated officer" 
B.  A notice of intention to abate shall not be required if: (1) the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waive further interest in the vehicle or part thereof; or (2) all the following conditions are satisfied: 
1.  Vehicle or parts thereof is inoperable due to the absence of a motor, transmission, or wheels and is incapable of being towed; 
2.  Vehicle or parts thereof are valued at less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) by the city; 
3.  City has determined that the vehicle or parts thereof constitutes a public nuisance presenting an immediate threat to public health or safety; 
4.  Property owner has signed a release authoring the removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or parts thereof; 
5.  Vehicle is located upon a parcel that is either zoned for agricultural use or is not improved with a residential dwelling; 
C.  If a vehicle is removed pursuant to subsection (B)(2), prior to final disposition, the registered or legal owner shall be notified of the intent to dispose of the vehicle or parts thereof. If the vehicle or parts thereof is not claimed and removed from the impound yard or public disposal area within twelve (12) days after the notice of disposal of the vehicle is mailed, final disposition may proceed. 
(Ord. 337 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.23.110 - Request for public hearing. 
A.  Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the locally designated officer within ten days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the city manager or his or her designee on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located. 
B.  If the owner of the land submits a sworn, written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such ten-day period, said statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his or her presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership in which case the vehicle and/or land shall be posted. 
C.  If such a request for hearing is not received within said ten days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the City shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. 
(Ord. 337 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.23.120 - Public hearing—Conduct—Findings. 
A.  All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the city manager or his or her designee, who shall hear all facts and testimony he deems pertinent. Said facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the private property or public property. The city manager or his or her designee shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial. 
B.  The city manager or his or her designee may impose such conditions and take such other action as he deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. He may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in his or her opinion, the circumstances justify the delay. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the city manager may find that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
C.  If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed without the consent of the owner of the land and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the city manager or his or her designee shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land. 
D.  If the owner of the land submits a sworn, written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the city manager but does not appear, he or she shall be notified in writing of the decision. 
(Ord. 337 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.23.130 - Vehicle removal. 
Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance or five days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to an automobile scrap yard. Removal of an automobile will be done by utilizing a towing business that has a business establishment in the City limits. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates pursuant to Section 5004 of Vehicle Code, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable. 
(Ord. 344 § 1, 2006: Ord. 337 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.23.140 - Notification of the Department of Motor Vehicles and Department of Justice. 
A.  Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, the police department shall notify the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title, and license plates. 
B.  Immediately after removal of the vehicle, the public agency which removed, or caused the removal of, the vehicle shall notify the Stolen Vehicle System of the Department of Justice in Sacramento of the removal. 
(Ord. 337 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.23.150 - Collection of administrative and removal costs. 
A.  If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to this chapter are not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the order, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 25845 or 38773.5 of the Government Code, and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. Said assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. 
B.  The City may also collect fees through other legal means including, but not limited to, court action. 
(Ord. 337 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.23.160 - Violations. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to abandon, park, store, or leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing, or leaving of any licensed or unlicensed vehicle or parts thereof which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition upon any private property or public property including highways within the City for a period in excess of seventy-two (72) hours unless such vehicle or parts thereof is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or other public or private property, or unless such vehicle is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private or highway property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or an auto recycling yard permitted by the City to operate in that location. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or state law where such state law is applicable. 
(Ord. 337 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.23.170 - Penalty for violation. 
A.  Any person violating any provision of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction shall be subject to payment of a fine not to exceed the limits set forth in Section 36900 of the Government Code. 
B.  Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which the violation is committed. 
(Ord. 337 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.23.180 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, word, or phrase of the ordinance codified in this chapter is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter. The city council of the City of Huron hereby declares that it would have passed the ordinance codified in this chapter, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, word, or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, words, or phrases are declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 337 § 1 (part), 2003)  
10.23.190 - Repeal. 
Upon adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter Section 10.20.220 of the Municipal Code is repealed. 
(Ord. 337 § 1 (part), 2003)  
Chapter 10.24 - MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.24.010 - Use of barricaded street or pavement prohibited. 
No person shall ride or drive any animal, or ride, drive or propel any vehicle over or across any new pavement in any public street, across or around which pavement there is a barrier, or at, or near which, there is a person or a sign warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement, or a sign stating that the street is closed. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.31, 1984)  
10.24.020 - Driving or parking on sidewalk. 
Except as hereinafter provided in this section, no operator of a motor vehicle shall drive, on, over, along or upon, or park upon, any sidewalk, parkway or curb other than on or over a regularly established driveway or roadway. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.39, 1984)  
10.24.030 - One-way streets. 
The parking and traffic engineer is authorized to determine those streets or alleys on which traffic is hazardous or dangerous, or by reason of the volume of traffic in such streets or alleys, the public safety or convenience, in his estimation, would be best served by allowing traffic on such streets or alleys to proceed in one direction only. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.40, 1984)  
10.24.040 - Traffic signs to be posted. 
When the parking and traffic engineer has determined that a street or alley is hazardous or dangerous, or by reason of volume of traffic on such streets or alleys, the public convenience would best be served by allowing traffic to proceed in one direction only on such street or alley, he is authorized and empowered to place and maintain an appropriate sign at or near the entrance of and along such streets or alleys as he may designate, and thereafter, no person shall drive a vehicle on such streets or alleys in violation of such posted one-way sign. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.41, 1984)  
10.24.050 - State speed laws applicable. 
The State traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles as stipulated in the California Vehicle Code shall be applicable upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be prima facie unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared in this title when signs are in place giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.42, 1984)  
10.24.060 - Increasing State speed limits in certain zones. 
If, in the future, it is determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey that the speed permitted by State law upon certain streets, or portions thereof, is less than is necessary for safe operation of vehicles thereon by reason of the prevailing speeds as determined by traffic engineering measurements thereupon, accident records, and highway traffic and roadside conditions, and it is thereby declared that the prima facie speed limit, as indicated by and pursuant to said engineering and traffic survey pursuant to Section 627 of the California Vehicle Code, shall be as hereinafter set forth on those streets or portions of streets herein designated at the times specified when signs are erected giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.43, 1984)  
10.24.070 - Emerging from alley or private driveway. 
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving on the sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, driveway or building. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.44, 1984)  
10.24.080 - Crossing fire hose. 
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire chief or officer in command, nor shall any person park any vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.45, 1984)  
10.24.090 - Funeral procession. 
No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicle comprising a funeral procession, provided that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.49, 1984)  
10.24.100 - Clinging to moving vehicles. 
No person traveling upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, motorcycle or any toy vehicle shall cling to or attach himself or his vehicle to any other moving vehicle. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.50, 1984)  
10.24.110 - Scattering load. 
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle so loaded that any part of its load is dropped upon the roadway. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.51, 1984)  
10.24.120 - Driving on rims. 
No person shall tow, propel or operate any motor vehicle, designed for operation on rubber tired wheels, upon or along any surfaced public street so as to permit or cause the metal rim of any wheel thereof to be in contact with the surface of the street, except in cases when, as a direct result of accident or tire failure, it becomes necessary to remove the vehicle to a place of repair or to the residence, or to clear the vehicle from the public way, in which such vehicle shall not be driven to exceed six (6) miles per hour. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.52, 1984)  
10.24.130 - Washing vehicles in streets. 
No person shall dust, wipe, wash or otherwise clean, use or employ any method of dusting, wiping, washing or otherwise cleaning any vehicle or portion thereof while on any street, alley or public place unless such vehicle is owned by the person doing any of the acts herein enumerated or is under the direct control or supervision of the person doing any of the acts herein enumerated. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.73, 1984)  
10.24.140 - Street repairs prohibited. 
No person shall park or leave standing on any street, alley or public place, any vehicle for the purpose of storing, servicing, dismantling, rebuilding or otherwise working upon any such vehicle other than a vehicle which temporarily is disabled in such a manner and to such an extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping such vehicle on such street, alley or public place, and any such temporarily disabled vehicle shall not be parked or left standing in any place more than four (4) hours. 
(Ord. 205 § 4.9.74, 1984)  
10.24.150 - Driver's license required for authorization of off-road vehicle. 
Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle in or upon any property open to and intended for use by the public or the patrons of an adjacent business, commercial, industrial, entertainment or recreational establishment or public facility of any kind without having in his possession a valid operator's license issued in accordance with the California Vehicle Code or in wilful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property. This section shall not apply to any property or portion thereof being used for a special event with the express permission of the owner or his representative and from which the public has been temporarily excluded, nor shall it apply to a public highway or to any act prohibited by the Vehicle Code or other law of the State. 
(Ord. 232 § A, 1987)  
10.24.160 - Off highway use of motorcycles and motor bikes. 
It is unlawful for any person to ride or operate any motorcycle or motor bike of any kind on any private property or unoccupied public property within one-quarter (¼) of a mile of any school, hospital, convalescent home or residential area as herein defined except upon a regularly established private road, driveway or parking lot appurtenant to a structure on that property. A residential area within the meaning of this section means any area one-quarter (¼) mile in depth abutting a public or private road and one-quarter (¼) mile in length measured along such road and which contains any apartment house, condominium, multiple unit dwelling structure or four (4) or more residences of any kind or combination. This section shall not apply to lands or to property specifically devoted to a raceway, hill climb, motorcycle trail or similar use pursuant to a permit therefor issued by a governmental agency. 
(Ord. 232 § B, 1987)  
Chapter 10.28 - BICYCLES 
Sections: 
 
10.28.010 - License periods. 
The bicycle license periods are established to coincide with the Department of Motor Vehicles distribution of standard statewide bicycle plates. 
(Ord. 135 § 1, 1975)  
10.28.020 - Bicycle defined. 
"Bicycle," for the purposes of this chapter, means any device upon which a person may ride, which is propelled by human power through a system of belts, chains or gears and which has wheels at least twenty (20) inches in diameter and a frame size of at least fourteen (14) inches. 
(Ord. 135 § 2, 1975)  
10.28.030 - License—Term. 
Bicycle licenses shall be renewed uniformly throughout the State at periods, not to exceed five (5) years, to be designated by the director. The statewide bicycle "plate" will expire on the thirty-first of December, 1978. Renewal will be indicated by a supplementary adhesive device affixed near the license "plate" and will be issued for a three (3) year period. 
(Ord. 135 § 3, 1975)  
10.28.040 - License issuance. 
The police department is authorized and directed to issue, upon application therefor, a bicycle license. Such licenses, when issued, shall entitle the licensees to operate such bicycles for which such licenses have been issued upon all the streets, alleys and public highways, exclusive of sidewalks thereof, in the City. (Amended during 1995 codification; Ord. 135 § 4, 1975)  
10.28.050 - Supplemental regulations—Fees and charges. 
The council shall, by resolution, establish such fees and charges to be assessed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and adopt such regulations as the council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. 135 § 5, 1975)  
10.28.060 - Registration. 
The City shall issue the insignia and registration form distributed by the Department of Motor Vehicles, pursuant to Section 39001 of the Vehicle Code of the State of California, which section is herein incorporated by reference, as it is presently written or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. 299 § 2, 1995: Ord. 125 § 6, 1975)  
10.28.070 - Secondhand dealers. 
All persons engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles are required to make a daily report to the police department, giving the name and address of the person from whom each bicycle is purchased, a description of each bicycle purchased, the frame number thereof, and the number of the metallic license plate found thereon, if any. All persons engaged in the business of selling new or secondhand bicycles are required to make a monthly report to the police department listing all sales made by such dealers, including the name and address of each person to whom a bicycle was sold, the kind of bicycle sold, a description of the bicycle sold, the frame number on the said bicycle, and the number of the metallic license plate attached thereto, if any. 
(Ord. 135 § 7, 1975)  
10.28.080 - Serial number. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the number of any bicycle frame licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. It shall also be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license plate, seal or registration card during the time such license plate, seal or registration card is operative. 
The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the police department from stamping numbers on the frames of bicycles on which no serial number can be found or on which such number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes. 
(Ord. 135 § 8, 1975)  
10.28.090 - License fee. 
The license fee to be paid for each bicycle shall be two dollars ($2.00) and shall be paid in advance and not be proratable; such license may be transferred when the ownership of the bicycle is transferred, and a fee of fifty cents ($0.50) shall be paid for the registration of such transfer. A fee of one dollar ($1.00) shall be paid for a duplicate registration card or license plate payable at time of filing application for the same. All fees collected shall be paid into the office of the clerk and by the clerk deposited into the general fund of the City. 
(Ord. 135 § 9, 1975)  
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 12.04 - STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR PUBLIC WORKS 
Sections: 
 
12.04.010 - Adopted by reference. 
The standard specifications entitled "City of Huron, Fresno County, California, Standard Specifications, February, 1973, Wm. H. McGlasson, City Engineer," copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the City of Huron, are adopted as the standard specifications of the City of Huron. 
(Ord. 120 § 1, 1973)  
12.04.020 - Charge for copies. 
Copies of the standard specifications shall be made available to members of the public desiring them. A fee of seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50) shall be charged for each copy. The amount of the fee may be changed from time to time by resolution of the council of the City of Huron. 
(Ord. 120 § 2, 1973)  
Chapter 12.08 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS MAINTENANCE 
Sections: 
 
12.08.010 - Purpose and intention. 
The city council finds and declares as follows: 
A.  The growth and accumulation of noxious weeds, debris and shrubs on and around sidewalk areas within the City is a public nuisance. 
B.  The presence of noxious weeds, debris and shrubs on and around sidewalk areas within the City is unsightly and deteriorates the image of the City. 
C.  The presence of noxious weeds, debris and shrubs on or around sidewalk areas within the City constitute a dangerous condition of property posing a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the persons using those sidewalk areas. 
(Ord. 287 § 2 (part), 1994)  
12.08.020 - Sidewalk repair—Adjoining land owner. 
A.  Anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, the maintenance and repair of sidewalk areas and the making, confirming and collection of assessments for the costs and expenses of said maintenance and report may be done and the proceedings therefor may be had and taken in according this part and the procedure therefore provided in Chapter 22 of Division 7, Part 3, of the California Streets and Highways Code as the same as now in effect or may hereafter be amended. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of said Chapter 22 of Division 7, Part 3, of the California Streets and Highways Code in this title, the provisions of this title shall control. 
B.  The owners of lots or portions of lots adjacent to or fronting on any portion of a sidewalk area between the property line of the lots and the street line, including parking strips, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, and person in possession of such lots by virtue of any permit or right shall repair and maintain such sidewalk areas and pay the costs and expenses therefor, including a charge for the City of Huron's costs of inspection and administration whenever the City awards a contract for such maintenance and repair and including the costs of collection of assessments for the costs of maintenance and repair under subsection A of this section or handling of any lien placed on the property due to the failure of the property owner to properly pay such assessment. 
C.  For the purpose of this chapter, maintenance and repair of sidewalk areas shall include, but not be limited to, maintenance and repair of surfaces including grinding, removal and replacement of sidewalks, repair and maintenance of curbs and gutters, removal and filling or replacement of parking strips, removal of weeds and/or debris, tree root pruning and installing root barriers, trimming of shrubs and/or groundcover and trimming shrubs within the area between the property line of the adjacent property and the street pavement line, including parking strip and curbs, so that the sidewalk area will remain in a condition that is not dangerous to property or to persons using the sidewalk in a reasonable manner and will be in a condition which will not interfere with the public convenience in the use of said sidewalk area. 
D.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 5416 of the California Streets and Highways Code, the city manager or his designee may, in her or his discretion, and for sufficient cause, extend the period within which the required maintenance and repair of sidewalk areas must commence by a period not to exceed seventy-four (74) days from the time the notice referred to in Section 5614 is given. 
(Ord. 287 § 2 (part), 1994)  
12.08.030 - Sidewalk repair—Refusal. 
If the owner of said real property fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the provisions of this chapter after (10) days' written notice from the city manager or his designee, he or she shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Said notice shall be served by the City either personally or by registered mail, return receipt requested. 
(Ord. 287 § 2 (part), 1994)  
12.08.040 - Sidewalk repair—Work by City. 
In such cases as set out in Section 12.08.030, besides the penalty attached, the city manager or his designee, shall have the necessary work performed at the expense of the City, and the costs thereof shall be a charged against the property owner and shall be collected from him by the City. (Amended during 1995 codification; Ord. 287 § 2 (part), 1994)  
12.08.050 - Liability for injuries to the public. 
The property owner required by Section 12.08.020 to maintain and repair the sidewalk area shall owe a duty to members of the public to keep and maintain the sidewalk area in a safe and nondangerous condition. If, as a result of the failure of any property owner to maintain the sidewalk area in a nondangerous condition as required by Section 12.08.020, any person suffers injury or damages to person or property, the property owner shall be liable to such person for the resulting damages or injuries. 
(Ord. 287 § 2 (part), 1994)  
Chapter 12.09 - DESIGNATED TRUCK ROUTES AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLE PROHIBITIONS 
Sections: 
 
12.09.010 - Streets designated. 
A.  The following streets within the City are hereby approved as designated truck routes: 
1.  Larsen Avenue (Hwy. 269) from the southerly City limits to the northerly City limits; 
2.  9th Street from Lassen Avenue to the easterly City limits; 
3.  Palmer Avenue from Lassen Avenue to the easterly City limits; 
4.  M Street from 9th street to 10th Street; 
5.  Huron Avenue from Lassen Avenue to its easterly termination; 
6.  10th Street from Lassen Avenue to its easterly termination points; 
7.  First alleys parallel to Lassen Avenue on both east and west sides immediately behind commercial districts and those portions of streets connecting with Lassen Avenue to include Tornado Avenue, Cherry Avenue, Apple Avenue, Railroad Avenue and 4th Street; 
8.  Central Avenue form 4th Street to Huron Avenue. 
B.  The city council finds that the erection of signs on the streets designated as truck routes shall best serve to give notice of this chapter. The city engineer is authorized to designate such streets as truck routes by the erection of appropriate signs. 
C.  All commercial vehicles in excess of ten thousand pounds gross vehicle weight shall be required to drive on a designated truck route as specified in subsection A above while within the City. 
D.  This chapter shall not prohibit any commercial vehicles coming from an unrestricted street having ingress and egress by direct route to and from a restricted street when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or delivery of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on the restricted street or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon the restricted street for which a building permit has been obtained. 
E.  Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be unlawful and constitute an infraction, any person convicted of violating any provisions of this chapter shall be punished by (1) a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation; or (2) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second violation of the same chapter within one year; or (3) a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation of the same chapter within one year. 
(Ord. 316 § 1, 1996)  
Chapter 12.12 - TREES 
Sections: 
 
12.12.010 - Approved trees. 
Except as hereinafter provided, from and after September 1, 1979, no tree or trees shall be planted or transplanted in public property or rights-of-way or planted on private property so as to hang over public property except those trees designated upon an approved street tree list as specified by City planning commission. In the event any person desires to plant a tree within a public right-of-way or which may overhang a public right-of-way which tree is not upon the approved street tree list, such planting may be permitted if authorized by the city administrator of the City of Huron. The city administrator shall not issue any such permit unless he finds and determines that such tree is of a variety having desirable characteristics with regard to surface roots, disease, falling leaves and other qualities pertinent to the maintenance of preferable street trees in the City of Huron. 
(Ord. 104 § 1, 1979)  
12.12.020 - Tree replacement. 
Whenever it becomes necessary to remove a tree to prevent damage to sidewalk or curbs or to make room for sidewalk or street construction or to remove a dying, dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous tree, such tree or trees will be removed by City forces at the request of the owner of the property abutting that portion of the public right-of-way where the tree is located; provided, however, upon removal thereof the property owner shall replace the tree with a tree of an approved type as designated on the approved street tree list unless the area from which the tree was removed is no longer suitable for planting. Nothing in this section, however, shall preclude the removal by City forces of any tree without the request of a property owner. 
(Ord. 104 § 2, 1979)  
12.12.030 - Protection during erection or repair of buildings. 
During the erection, repair, alteration or removal of any building, house or structure in the City, no person in charge of such work shall leave any tree, shrub or plant in any street, park, pleasure ground, boulevard, alley or public place of the City in the vicinity of such building or structure without such good or sufficient guards or protectors as shall prevent injury to the tree, shrub or plant arising out of or by reason of the erection, repair, alteration or removal. 
(Ord. 104 § 3, 1979)  
12.12.040 - Unsafe trees. 
Any trees or shrubs growing in a public parking strip or in any public place or in private property which are endangering or which in any way may endanger the security or usefulness of any public street, sewer, sidewalk or the full and safe operation of public utility wires are hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the city administrator may require the property owner to remove or trim any such tree on private property or on a parking strip abutting upon said owner's property. 
(Ord. 104 § 4, 1979)  
12.12.050 - Abuse of trees unlawful. 
It is unlawful to abuse, destroy or mutilate any tree, shrub or plant in a public parking strip or any other public place, or to attach or place any rope or wire (other than one used to support a young or broken tree), sign, poster, handbill or other thing to or on any tree growing in a public place, or to cause or permit any wire charged with electricity to be attached to any such tree, or to allow any gaseous, liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come in contact with their roots or leaves. 
(Ord. 104 § 5, 1979)  
12.12.060 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail or a period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 104 § 6, 1979)  
Chapter 12.14 - TOWING SERVICE 
Sections: 
 
12.14.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the intent of this chapter and any subsequent amendments thereto to prescribe the basic regulations for the operation of the City of Huron ("City") and Huron Police Department ("Police Department") towing service in emergency situations and in the removal of vehicles that are abandoned, involved in an accident, or constitute an obstruction to traffic because of mechanical failure. It is the purpose of the city council in enacting this chapter to provide a fair and impartial means of distributing requests for towing services among qualified franchises, and to ensure that such service is prompt and reasonably priced, and in the best interests of the public as well as the interest of efficient policing operations for the removal of such vehicles from public streets. 
(Ord. No. 361, 11-16-11)  
12.14.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and derivations shall have the meaning given in this section: 
"Chief" means the chief of police of the police department of the City of Huron. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the City of Huron. 
"Franchisee" means a certain tow truck operator to which the city council may, by the adoption of a resolution or ordinance, grant a nonexclusive franchise for purposes of providing towing services to the City under and pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
"Police department" means the police department of the City of Huron. 
"VICR fees" means the vehicle impound cost recovery fee which is equal to one hour of City of Huron police officer time at the current intermediate deputy rate in effect at the time of the release of the impounded vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 361, 11-16-11)  
12.14.030 - Tow truck operator franchise. 
The city council may at its discretion, by the adoption of a resolution or ordinance, grant a nonexclusive franchise to a tow truck operator ("franchisee") to provide towing services to the City under and pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 361, 11-16-11)  
12.14.040 - Nonexclusive franchise. 
A.  All franchises granted to franchisees pursuant to this chapter shall be nonexclusive and shall be for a term to be specified by the city council in the resolution granting a franchise hereunder and in the franchise agreement between the City and the franchisee. 
B.  No provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to require restricting the number of franchises to one or any particular number, and no provision of this chapter shall be deemed to require the city council to grant any franchise if the city council determines that the grant of any such franchise is not in the best interest of the City and the public. 
C.  All franchisees shall be subject to the terms and conditions specified in this chapter, as well as any terms or conditions specified in the resolution granting the franchise and the franchise agreement. 
D.  In granting any tow truck operator franchise, the city council may prescribe such other terms and conditions, not in conflict with this chapter, as are determined by the city council to be in the best interest of the City and the public. 
(Ord. No. 361, 11-16-11)  
12.14.050 - Selection of franchisees. 
Prior to the City granting a franchise for tow truck services, the city manager shall cause a notice of request for qualifications to be published in a newspaper of general circulation. The city manager or designee shall evaluate the qualifications of the respondents and submit to the city council for consideration the qualifications of the tow truck operator(s) that he/she deems most qualified together with a franchise agreement as provided in Section 12.14.110. 
(Ord. No. 361, 11-16-11)  
12.14.060 - Rotation system. 
A.  The tow truck operators who obtain a franchise pursuant to this chapter shall provide towing service to the City pursuant to the rotation system established by the chief. 
B.  Nothing shall prohibit a Class B, C, or D operator from maintaining a place on a lighter class rotation list. Regardless of the class of tow truck, charges shall not be more than the class of vehicle towed or serviced, except when recovery operations required a larger class of truck. 
(Ord. No. 361, 11-16-11)  
12.14.070 - Conditions of franchise. 
Any tow truck operator that obtains a franchise pursuant to this chapter shall: 
A.  Comply with the City's zoning requirements. All towing operations shall apply for a conditional use permit. Towing operations shall keep current and in good standing the conditional use permit. 
B.  Comply with the State of California, Department of Highway Patrol, Tow Service Agreement (CHP 234(03-009) OPI 062 or any updates). 
C.  Have an office and storage facility in the same location within the City's boundaries, with a sign posted including the company name, address, phone number and hours of operation, to be clearly visible from the roadway. Unless otherwise authorized by the chief, such storage facilities shall contain a minimum of fifteen (15) automobile storage spaces. 
D.  Maintain a sign listing the rates and charges of all towing and storage services offered. Such sign shall be conspicuously posted in the office or other location clearly visible where customer financial transactions take place. 
E.  Furnish each owner of an automobile impounded by the tow truck operator with a fully itemized billing. 
F.  Maintain minimum operating hours for storage facilities of Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., except holidays. 
G.  Respond to police department calls twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven days a week, within the response time as established by the chief. 
H.  Agree to protect, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City and the police department from all claims, demands or liability arising out of or encountered in connection with its agreement with the City or the performance of work in preparation for the towing operation, or claims, demands and liability occurring during the towing and subsequent storage and maintenance activities whether such claims, demands or liability are caused by the tow service or its employees or agents. 
I.  Conduct its business in an orderly, ethical, businesslike manner, and use reasonable means to obtain and keep the confidence of the motoring public. Franchisee shall be responsible for the acts of its employees and agents while on duty and for damage to towed vehicles while in its possession. 
J.  Comply with all applicable federal, state and local regulations for providing towing service and be a currently approved operator for the California Highway Patrol rotational tow list. 
(Ord. No. 361, 11-16-11)  
12.14.080 - Rates. 
A.  Franchisee shall not charge rates in excess of one hundred fifteen (115) percent of the schedule of rates for towing established by the California Highway Patrol for the Fresno County area. 
B.  Storage fees shall be charged by calendar day except that vehicles stored eight hours or less shall be charged no more than one day storage. 
(Ord. No. 361, 11-16-11)  
12.14.090 - Vehicle impound cost recovery fee. 
A.  The vehicle impound cost recovery fee ("VICR fee") is equal to one hour of City of Huron police officer time at the current intermediate deputy rate in effect at the time of the release of the impounded vehicle. 
B.  The franchisee shall collect the VICR fee prior to releasing a vehicle unless such fee has already been paid directly to the police department or has been waived. 
C.  The police department may waive the VICR fee due to extenuating circumstances. It is not the intention of the City nor the police department to penalize victims. Circumstances under which the VICR fee may be waived include the impounding of recovered stolen or embezzled vehicles, and vehicles impounded due to driver injury or incapacitation. 
(Ord. No. 361, 11-16-11)  
12.14.100 - Franchise fees. 
Any tow truck operator granted a franchise pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall pay to the City franchise charges and fees as may be determined by separate resolution of the city council. Such fee shall not exceed the City's annual cost of administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 361, 11-16-11)  
12.14.110 - Franchise agreements. 
All franchises granted by the city council pursuant to this chapter shall be memorialized in a written agreement between the franchisee and the City and approved by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 361, 11-16-11)  
12.14.120 - Additional services to be provided. 
The franchisee will provide emergency response to aid and service City and police department vehicles that are one ton or less, within a reasonable radius no greater than one mile beyond the City's boundaries, at no cost to the City or police department. 
(Ord. No. 361, 11-16-11)  
12.14.130 - Authority to maintain city towing operations and towing yard. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as restricting or prohibiting the City from conducting its own towing operations or maintaining its own towing yard, either in lieu of, or in addition to, any franchise awarded pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 361, 11-16-11)  
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
  
Chapters:  
Chapter 13.04 - UTILITY SERVICES GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
13.04.010 - Natural gas service required. 
From the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, every residence including permanent mobilehome installations or business within the City limits of the City of Huron must connect to the natural gas service provided to residential and commercial users within the City limits. "Permanent mobile home installation" is defined as a mobilehome installation which is intended to stay in the City for period to exceed six months. Provided, however, as existing residential and commercial use, if natural gas hook-up is not available within a distance of two hundred (200) feet or more, then propane may be used as a fuel source. This exception however, shall be available only to the residence or business currently utilizing propane service and shall terminate upon the earliest of the following: 
A.  In the event of the sale to a new individual or business; or 
B.  In the event of any substantial construction on any property located within the City limits which is not connected to natural gas, then this exception shall immediately terminate and the new owner or current owner as a condition of issuance of a building permit shall be required to connect to the City's natural gas service; 
C.  Two years after the enactment of the ordinance codified in this section, all residential and commercial users must connect to the City's natural gas service if they have not otherwise done so. 
(Ord. 268 § 1, 1991)  
13.04.020 - Consolidated water, sewer and garbage service required. 
A.  From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, all residential and commercial developed property must have consolidated water, sewage and garbage service. 
B.  The payment of the consolidated water, sewer and garbage billing shall be attributed as follows: 
Money shall be first credited to the outstanding sewer balance, then to the oldest garbage bill and then to the oldest water bill on a monthly basis. 
C.  The city may discontinue any or all of the consolidated services for failure to pay any one of the consolidated services. 
(Ord. 270 §§ 1—3, 1991)  
Chapter 13.08 - WATER SERVICE SYSTEM 
Sections: 
 
13.08.010 - Definitions. 
A.  Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contain in this section shall govern the construction, meaning and application of words and phrases used in this chapter. The definition of each word or phrase shall constitute, to the extent applicable, the definitions of each word or phrase which is derivative from it, or from which it is a derivative, as the case may be. 
B.  The meaning of additional terms as used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
"Applicant" is the owner or authorized agent of the owner making application for service under this chapter. 
"Air conditioning system" or "refrigeration system" means any combination of equipment, whether compressor or other type, by which heat is removed from the air from which the accumulated heat is wholly or partially removed by the use of water. 
"Air-gap separation device" means a physical air-gap break between a supply pipe and receiving vessel. The air gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, in no case less than one (1) inch. 
"Auxiliary water supply" means any water supply on or available to the premises other than through the City water system. 
"Backflow prevention device" means a device designed to prevent the backflow of water, chemicals or other substances into the City water system. 
"City" is the City of Huron. 
"Completion" means acceptance, in writing by the city administrator for maintenance of an addition to the City water system. 
"Commercial uses" and "business uses" shall include, but not be limited to, offices, merchandising and industrial uses, and residential uses on premises where there are two (2) or more dwelling units. 
"Connected" means the physical joinder to the City water system of any plumbing, water supply or fire protection system on any parcel. 
"Contractor" is an individual, firm, corporation, partnership or association duly licensed by the State of California to perform the type of work to be done under the permit and shall be the owner or his agent. 
"Cost" means the cost of labor, material, transportation, supervision, engineering and all other necessary overhead expenses. 
"Cross-connection" means any connection between any part of a water system used or intended to supply water for drinking purposes and any source of system containing water or substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe, wholesome and potable for human consumption. 
"Distribution mains" means water lines in streets, highways, alleys and easements used for public and private fire protection or for general distribution of water for irrigation, industrial and municipal purposes. 
"Dwelling unit" or "living unit" means a room or suite of rooms which is occupied by one family for living and sleeping purposes. 
"Engineer" is the engineer appointed by and acting for the City and shall be a registered civil engineer. 
"Owner" means the person owning the fee, or the person in whose name the legal title to the property appears, by deed duly recorded in the county recorder's office, or the person in possession of the property or buildings under claim of, or exercising acts of ownership over same for himself, or as executor, administrator, guardian or trustee of the owner. 
"Parcel" or "lot" means each separate parcel shown on the latest equalized assessment roll of the County. 
"Permit" is any written authorization required pursuant to this or any other rule, regulation or ordinance of the City for the installation of any water works. 
"Person" is any human being, firm, company, partnership, association and private, public or municipal corporation, the United States of America, the State of California, districts and all political subdivisions, governmental agencies and mandatories thereof. 
"Premises" means a lot or parcel of real property under one ownership, except that any separate structure under one (1) roof shall be deemed separate premises. Apartment houses, motels, office buildings and structures of like nature may be classified as single premises. 
"Private fire protection service" means water service and facilities for building sprinkler systems, hydrants, hose reels and other facilities installed on private property for fire protection and the water available therefor. 
"Private swimming pool" means any pool or other outside body of water eighteen (18) or more inches in depth at any point, the volume of which is not less than one hundred (100) cubic feet, and is designed for swimming, wading or bathing purposes. 
"Public fire protection service" means the service and facilities of the entire water supply, storage and distribution system of the City, including the fire hydrants affixed thereto, and the water available for fire protection, excepting house service connections and appurtenances thereto. 
"Refrigeration system" means an installation for maintenance by heat removal, of temperatures which are less than sixty (60) degrees Fahrenheit. 
"Service" or "service connection" means the pipe line and appurtenant facilities such as the curb stop, meter and meter box, if any, all used to extend water service from a distribution main to premises. Where customers are divided at the curb or property line to serve several customers, each such branch service shall be deemed a separate service. 
"Street" is any public highway, road, street, avenue, alley, way, easement or right-of-way. 
"System" or "distribution system" means the network of water mains which serve to transmit water from supply wells to individual properties or which serves to interconnect the supply wells. 
"System charge" or "distribution system charge" means a fee for the right to connect to the City water system representing the cost of constructing or reconstructing water mains in the system. 
"Temporary water service" means water service and facilities rendered for construction work and other uses of limited duration, and the water available therefor. 
"Water supply charge" means a fee for the right to connect to the City water system, such fee representing the costs of developing and placing into operation the water supply system including treatment and storage facilities to serve the subject property. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.020 - Application. 
Each prospective consumer shall make an application in writing for the water service desired. Applications shall also be filed for replacement connections. Such applications shall set forth the location of the premises to be served, the purpose for which the service is to be used, the rate under which the applicant desires service, the name and address of the person responsible for the payment of the bills, the name and address of the owner of the premises, the date that service is desired, and shall state that such service is to be used under and subject to the effective rules and regulations of the City from time to time in force. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.025 - Rates and charges 
Rates and charges for furnishing water, including the deposits required for commencing new accounts and connection charges, in the City and adjacent territory, shall be established by resolution of the city council. The rates and charges so established by such resolution may thereafter be changed or modified by a resolution of the city council. 
All rates, fees, and compensation to be charged and collected by the City for permits, main extensions, water fees, inspection fees, and services rendered, and fees for additional construction and plant enlargement shall be reviewed, revised and established biennially by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 330 §1, 2000)  
13.08.030 - Deposit—Required—Amount. 
Each applicant for metered or measured water service shall, for the purpose of establishing his credit, make a cash deposit equal to twice the average monthly bill of consumers of the City whose installations are similar in size and similarly operated; provided, that the deposit for domestic or residence service shall be as designated by resolution of the City. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.040 - Deposit—Returned when. 
After a cash deposit to guarantee payment for metered or measured service has stood unimpaired for twelve (12) months, it shall be returned to the depositor. Upon closing any account, the balance of any deposit remaining after the closing bill for service has been settled shall be returned promptly to the depositor. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.050 - Right of entry of City employees. 
The City shall, at all times, have the right of ingress to and egress from the consumer's premises at all reasonable hours for any and all purposes reasonably connected with the furnishing of water and the exercise of any and all rights secured to it by this code or other City ordinance. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.060 - Additional rules and regulations—Council adoption authority. 
The city council may adopt additional rules and regulations for the distribution and delivery of water to consumers who take water from the City. Such rules and regulations, when approved by the city council by resolution, shall be in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.070 - Connections—Installation, replacement and metering requirements. 
A.  All service connections or reconnections, where the old connection is abandoned at the request of the property owner, shall be metered. 
B.  For each lot which requires a new service connection or revised service connection to a main determined by the City to be in active service, the applicant shall pay to the City a charge for the cost of the service installation or revision equal to the cost of labor (including overhead), equipment and materials, including the meter where applicable. For services two (2) inches in diameter or smaller, such charges may be fixed uniformly by the council from time to time by resolution. 
C.  The charge for replacement of an existing water service connection or meter by one of a larger size shall be the same as for a new service or meter of the size requested, except that when mains and services are being replaced under a City water main replacement program, the charge for increasing the size of service will be the difference in cost between the size requested by the property owner and the size which would normally be installed by the City under its replacement program. 
D.  Where it is necessary to relocate a water service for the convenience of a property owner, or where relocation is required because the construction by or on behalf of the property owner will interfere with the operation or maintenance of the service connection, the charge for such relocation shall be the cost for labor (including overhead), equipment and material. 
E.  When a property owner requests the abandonment of one or more services and the installation of one or more new services, the cost of abandonment and the cost of the new service shall be paid for by the customer as specified in subsection B of this section. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.080 - Permit to connect required—Payment of charges. 
A.  No person shall connect any premises, lot, parcel or structure to the City water system without a permit from the City. No such permit shall be issued by the City unless the applicable charges designated in this chapter and as provided by resolution of the city council have been paid. 
B.  Distribution System Charge. A distribution system charge shall be required for all lots sought to be connected to the City water system. The charge shall be either the minimum charge per lot, or the applicable rate per gross or net acre designated in the resolution of the city council providing such rates, whichever is greater. Area calculation shall be upon the following: 
1.  Gross acreage shall be calculated to include the street right-of-way and shall include one-half (½) of the right-of-way on boundary streets. Areas dedicated or condemned for public street and alley purposes shall be excluded in calculating net acreage. 
2.  Property which has wholly or proportionately paid the distribution system charge, when such fact has been or can be established to the satisfaction of the city administrator need pay only the distribution system charge applicable to the portion of the property for which the charge has not been paid. 
3.  When only a portion of a lot is developed, and the remaining portion is to continue undeveloped or is to be used solely for the growing of agricultural crops, or for public recreation uses not enclosed in a building, the city administrator may require the payment of the distribution system charge applicable only to that portion of the lot developed or to be developed; provided, that the parcel for which such fees are charged shall have an area of not less than twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) square feet or one-fourth of the lot, whichever is greater. When the balance of the lot is developed, the distribution system charge shall be paid regardless of whether or not additional water service is required. The city administrator shall fix the portion of the lot which is to be considered as developed. 
C.  Service connection charges. For each lot which requires a new service connection, or revised service connection, to a main determined by the city administrator to be in active service, the applicant shall pay to the City a charge for the cost of service installation or revision equal to the cost of labor (including overhead), equipment and materials, including the meter where applicable. For services two inches in diameter or smaller, such charges may be fixed uniformly by the council and designated by resolution. 
D.  Payment of fees and issuance of permits pursuant to this section does not authorize the permittee to perform or cause to be performed work specified in this chapter to be performed by the City. 
(Ord. 325 § 4, 1999; Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.090 - Reimbursements. 
Whenever the City requires a person to construct facilities that exceed the standards of the City necessary to serve the property for which the facilities are being constructed as a condition precedent to approval of development, a reimbursement agreement covering that portion of the total cost of construction as verified and approved by the City shall be subject to reimbursement; provided, that the reimbursement agreement is to reflect the area of benefit and the costs to be charged in such area. The City will only collect and make such reimbursement for a period of ten years after completion of construction of such facilities. Administrative costs of collection and disbursement and preparation of the agreement are to be paid by the person requesting the agreement. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.100 - Meters and appliances—Property of City. 
Meters, appliances, apparatus and fixtures of every description installed by the City upon the consumer's premises for the purpose of delivering water to the consumer, shall continue to be the property of the City, and may be repaired, replaced or removed by it at any time. No rent or other charge whatsoever shall be made by the consumer against the City for placing or maintaining the meters, appliances, apparatus or fixtures upon the consumer's premises. The consumer shall exercise reasonable care to prevent the meter, appliances, apparatus and fixtures of the City upon the premises from being injured or destroyed and shall refrain from interfering with the same, and in case any defect thereof shall be discovered, shall immediately notify the City thereof. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.110 - Tampering with meters, appliances, apparatus or fixtures unlawful. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, willfully interfere with in any way with the operation of, willfully damage, or willfully destroy any water meter, appliance, apparatus or fixture of every description installed by the City upon the customer's premises for the purposes of delivering water to the customer or which is otherwise owned or maintained by the City of Huron. 
B.  The prohibitions of this section against tampering with or interfering with the normal operation of water meters, appliances, apparatuses or fixtures do not apply to duly authorized employees of the City of Huron who install, modify, repair, replace and/or remove the same in the regular course of their employment. 
C.  Any person found to be receiving water service at any premises by way of any meter, appliance, apparatus or fixture not installed and authorized to be activated by the City of Huron, or which has been shut off, discontinued or disconnected by the City of Huron shall be presumed to have engaged in the unlawful tampering or willful interference or willful damage or destruction of a meter, appliance, apparatus or fixture installed by the City upon the premises occupied by such person as described by subdivision (A) of this section. This presumption shall be a rebuttable presumption affecting the burden of proof. The presumption shall be deemed sufficient to establish probable cause to believe that the person so found to be receiving water service for any premises is receiving that service as a result of such unlawful tampering, interference, damage or destruction. 
D.  Penalties for Violation. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment, for each offense. 
(Ord. 118 §§ 1—3, 1972) 
(Ord. No. 365, § 1, 3-28-12)  
13.08.120 - Backflow prevention devices required. 
A.  No person shall install or maintain any water-operated equipment or mechanism or use any water-treating chemical or substance which is capable of polluting the City water supply unless the service to the premises upon which such equipment mechanism, chemical or substance is utilized is equipped with an approved double check backflow prevention device as required by this section. 
B.  Backflow prevention devices shall be required, at a location approved by the superintendent of public works, on the service to any premises: 
1.  Containing or having access to an auxiliary water supply; 
2.  Containing any internal cross-connection; or 
3.  Upon which any substance is or may be handled in such fashion as to permit entry into the city water system. This shall include the handling of process water and water originating from the city water supply system which has been subjected to deterioration in sanitary quality; or 
4.  Containing a fire sprinkler system or fire hydrant. 
C.  The specific type of backflow prevention device to be installed on any given service shall be determined by the city administrator in accordance with the following criteria: 
1.  A service to premises containing a fire sprinkler system on the ground floor or below, which service is not equipped with a booster pump, shall be protected with one approved double check valve; provided, that when the supply line serving such sprinkler system exceeds fifty (50) feet in length from the point at which it enters such premises, the check valve shall be equipped with a detector and shall be installed in a vault located in a public right-of-way adjacent to such premises. 
2.  A service to premises containing a fire sprinkler system above the ground floor or a booster pump shall be protected with an approved double check valve on the pump line and an approved double valve on the supply line. The valve protecting the supply line shall be equipped with a detector and shall be installed in a vault located in a public right-of-way adjacent to such premises. 
3.  A service to premises containing a fire hydrant installed on private property at a location fifty (50) feet or more from a public right-of-way shall be protected with one approved double check valve, which valve shall be equipped with a detector and installed in a vault located in a public right-of-way adjacent to such premises. 
4.  A service to premises containing or having access to an auxiliary water supply or other substance which would be objectionable, but not hazardous to health, if introduced into the city water system, shall be protected by an approved double check valve assembly. 
5.  A service to premises such as industrial plants, hospitals or mortuaries, containing or having access to an auxiliary water supply or other substance which is toxic, infectious, or otherwise hazardous to health, shall be protected by an approved reduced pressure principal double check backflow prevention device. 
6.  A service to any sewage treatment plant or sewage pumping station shall be protected by an air-gap separation device. 
D.  Backflow prevention devices required herein shall be installed at the consumer's expense either by the City or by qualified journeyman plumber, certified as competent for such purpose by the Superintendent. Charges for such installation by the City shall be fixed by the city administrator. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.130 - Size of taps and service connections. 
The size of the taps and the service connection installed for any water consumer shall be as the city administrator may designate. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.140 - Connections—Stopcock or valve required. 
Water service shall not be delivered to any premises unless a stopcock or valve is placed in an accessible place between the stopcock of the City and all faucets or taps on the premises. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.150 - Connections—Work to be done by City employees. 
Only duly authorized employees of the City shall connect the consumer piping and apparatus with the City's water mains unless otherwise permitted by the city administrator. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.160 - Multiple consumers on one tap. 
When meter service is delivered from a single tap or service connection to more than one consumer in the same building or separate buildings, the City may, at its option, make its charges and collect its bills from each of such consumers for the service rendered each or from one (1) of the consumers for all the service rendered through such single tap or service connection or from the owner or lessor of such premises. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.170 - Service equipment maintained by consumer. 
The consumer shall, at his own risk and expense, furnish, install and keep in good and safe condition all water pipes, machinery and apparatus which may be required for receiving water from the City at the point of delivery and for applying and utilizing such water. The city shall not be responsible for any loss or damage occasioned or caused by negligence or want of care on the part of the consumer in installing, maintaining, using or operating such water pipes, apparatus, appliances or fixtures. All consumers having equipment requiring a continuous flow of water shall provide a tank from which to feed the same. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.180 - Extending piping to serve other consumers prohibited—Exception. 
No consumer shall make or allow any other person to make any connection to or extension of such consumer's piping for the purpose of supplying any other consumer with water service, except with the express consent obtained first hand and from the City. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.190 - Continuous service—City liability. 
The City, in furnishing water to any user, does not guarantee continuous service, and assumes no liability for any damage or injury arising out of any failure to provide continuous service. The City will use all reasonable efforts to provide water service. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.200 - Lawn sprinkling systems. 
Lawn sprinkling systems shall be properly designed, installed and operated to prevent wastage of water. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.210 - Service to vacant lots for irrigation of trees and plants. 
The City shall deliver water service to lots unoccupied by any building for the irrigation of trees that are planted thereon in advance of construction of the buildings that are to permanently occupy such lots, at a rate (per tree) designated by resolution of the City beginning May 1st and ending November 1st of each year, payable in advance. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.220 - Irrigation—Schedule and hours. 
All irrigation shall be done between the hours of five a.m. and nine p.m. only unless otherwise permitted by the city council. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.230 - Irrigation—Using open hose or faucet prohibited. 
No person shall use water by means of an open hose or open faucet for irrigation purposes. Every hose used for irrigation purposes shall have attached thereto a spray nozzle or sprinkling device. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.240 - Fire hydrants—Use permit required when. 
No person, other than a regular fireman or City employee, shall use water from any fire hydrant without first obtaining a permit from the city administrator. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.250 - Pipes, faucets and fixtures to be kept tight. 
Each consumer of water shall keep all connections, faucets, hydrants, pipes, outlets and plumbing fixtures tight and free from leakage, dripping or waste of water. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.260 - Wasting water prohibited. 
No person shall wilfully waste water supplied by the City water department. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.270 - Charges—Billing and payment. 
A.  Bills for metered service will be rendered as soon as practicable after the reading of the meter. 
B.  Bills for municipal utility services shall be due and payable upon deposit in the United States mail or upon presentation to the customer. 
C.  Bills for municipal utility services shall become overdue and delinquent when payment is not made by the date specified thereon. 
D.  Bills are payable at the City water department office or, at the option of the City, to an authorized collector. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.280 - Charges for turning off water for repairs. 
Any consumer desiring to make repairs to his pipes, who requests the City to turn off the water, shall pay to the City an amount designated by resolution for such service. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.290 - Reconnection charges. 
Whenever the service to any consumer is discontinued for nonpayment of a bill such consumer shall, before such service is again resumed pay an amount designated by resolution as the cost to the City for disconnecting and reconnecting such service. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.08.300 - Lien for delinquent charges and penalties. 
All delinquent charges and penalties that accrue for the system, plant, works, facilities or undertaking for the collection, treatment or disposal of sewage or the obtaining, conserving, treating and supplying of water pursuant to this title may, at the election of the City, constitute a lien upon the real property served (except that no such lien shall be created against any publicly owned property) and such lien, properly recorded pursuant to California Government Code Section 54340 et. seq. shall continue until the charge and all penalties thereon are fully paid or the property is sold therefor. 
(Ord. 283 § 2, 1993)  
Chapter 13.12 - SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM 
Sections: 
 
13.12.010 - Definitions. 
A.  Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this chapter shall be as defined in the American Society of Civil Engineers' Manual of Engineering Practice No. 37, and the latest edition of the book Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage, published by the American Public Health Association. 
B.  The meaning of additional terms as used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
"Applicant" means any person or group of persons who applies for sewer service. 
"Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)" means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
"Business" means all commercial uses, including, but not limited to, offices, merchandising and industrial uses, and residential uses on premises where there are five (5) or more living units or where unrelated persons are housed in the same structure, such as boarding or fraternity houses. 
"City" means the City of Huron, authorized representative acting within the scope of his assigned duties. 
"City council" means the city council of the City of Huron. 
"City sewerage system" means all facilities for collecting, treating and transporting domestic or industrial wastes of any nature, including all such facilities both inside and outside the city limits of Huron owned, operated and controlled by the City. 
"Connected" means the physical joinder of any plumbing or drainage system or fixture contained in structure to a public sewer line. 
"Completion" means acceptance, in writing, by the city administrator for maintenance of an addition to the City sewerage system. 
"Commercial garbage grinder" means a mechanical unit for pulverizing large quantities of waste by a commercial user. 
"Customer" means any person, firm, association, corporation or governmental agency served by the City. 
"Dwelling" or "dwelling unit" means a room or suite of rooms which is occupied by one family for living and sleeping purposes, including a single-family residence, mobile home unit, apartment, townhouse, flat or condominium. 
"Fee schedule" means the fee schedule as adopted from time to time by the city council by resolution. 
"Garbage" means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of foods, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
"Grease," "oil" or "fats" means any material, or like material, that is soluble in petroleum ether. 
"Industrial wastes" means the wastes from industrial processes, including but not limited to, water softening regeneration plants. 
"Infiltration" means the water entering a sewer system, including sewer service connections, from the ground through such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls. Infiltration does not include and is distinguished from inflow. 
"Infiltration/inflow" means the total quantity of water from both infiltration and inflow without distinguishing the source. 
"Inflow" means the water discharged into a sewer system, including service connections, from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar, yard and area drains, foundation drains, cooling water discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross-connections from storm sewers and combined sewers, catchbasins, stormwaters, surface runoff, street washwaters or drainage. Inflow does not include and is distinguished from infiltration. 
"Major facilities sewer charge" means a fee for the right to use the wastewater treatment facilities, said fee to be utilized to recover the cost of treatment facilities, pump or lift stations. 
"Oversize sewer charge" means a fee to be used to pay the additional cost of constructing or reconstructing public sewers larger than eight (8) inches in diameter. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, company, association, society, municipality, private corporation, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity. 
"Properly shredded garbage" means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (½) inch in any dimension. 
"Sewer connection fees" includes the major facilities sewer charge, oversize sewer charge, connection charge which may be applicable to any lot. 
"Slugs" means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of longer duration than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times its average hourly concentration or flow. 
"Surcharge" means the assessment in addition to the service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in strength than the concentration values listed in Section 13.12.140. 
"Suspended solids" means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtration. 
"Unpolluted water or liquids" means any water or liquid containing none of the following: free or emulsified grease or oil; acids or alkalis; substances that may impart taste and odor or color characteristics; toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution. It shall contain not more than five hundred (500) parts per million of dissolved solids, and not more than twenty-five (25) parts per million each of suspended solids or biochemical oxygen demand, or meet the most recent requirement for secondary treatment defined by State Water Resources. Analytical determinations shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage. Any water having contact with potential pathogen sources is considered to be polluted. 
"Unit" means a facility as defined herein; 
a.  "Living unit" shall mean a home, residence, apartment, condominium or other living area. 
b.  "Other units" shall be as defined herein; 
i.  Office: the number of units shall be determined by dividing the gross floor area by one thousand five hundred (1,500). 
ii.  Commercial: the number of units shall be determined by dividing the gross floor area by three thousand (3,000). 
iii.  Industrial: the number of units shall be determined by dividing the gross floor area by ten thousand (10,000). 
iv.  Institutional: the number of units shall be determined by dividing the gross floor area by ten thousand (10,000). 
v.  Where an industrial lot or portion of such lot is used for a warehouse, loft building, storage area or similar facility, the city administrator may fix a lower number of units for such lot or portion thereof based upon the estimated burden such use will impose on the City sewer system, in which event a unit shall consist of each multiple of ten fixture units (as defined in the latest edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code of the City) or fraction thereof, or one-quarter acre or fraction thereof of net land area, whichever is greater. 
vi.  Where a development is for open recreation and sport use, the city administrator may fix a lower number of units for such development, in which event a unit shall consist of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of gross floor area of a building, and one-quarter acre or fraction thereof of net land area of improvements, or one-quarter or fraction thereof of net land area of the development, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. 178 (part), 1981)  
13.12.020 - Hookup to City's sewer system required. 
A.  From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person or business to construct, maintain, use or allow to exist within the City of Huron any privy or any cesspool. 
B.  From and after the effective date of said ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any person or business to construct, maintain, use or allow to exist within the City of Huron any septic tank. Provided, however, that current septic tank systems must be connected to the City's system upon the occurrence of the earliest of the following: 
1.  Five years from the effective date of said ordinance; 
2.  Sale of the property; 
3.  Any substantial construction requiring the issuance of a building permit. 
C.  Domestic plumbing systems that incorporate non-potable water reuse systems, such as graywater reuse systems, shall be exempt from this section provided that they are installed and constructed in accordance with the current provisions of the 2016 California Plumbing Code, Chapter 15 - Alternate Water Sources For Nonpotable Applications governing the construction, alteration, discharge, use, and repair of graywater systems. 
(Ord. 269 §§ 2, 3, 1991) 
( Ord. No. 374 , § 2, 6-20-2018)  
13.12.030 - Connection—City rights—Infiltration/inflow limit. 
A.  The City shall have the exclusive right to make connections with the public sewer of the City and for laying laterals therefrom. The infiltration/inflow limit for all connections to the public sewer of the City shall be a maximum of two hundred (200) gallons per inch diameter per mile. 
B.  Applicant shall perform tests as required by the City to guarantee that inflow/filtration does not exceed two hundred (200) gallons per inch diameter per mile. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.040 - Connection—Permit required. 
No connection shall be made with any public sewer of the City until a permit therefor has been obtained from the city administrator or the administrator's designee. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.050 - Permit—Application. 
Application for permits required by this chapter shall be made to the city administrator or the city administrator's designee by the owner of the premises sought to be drained or his duly authorized agent. The applicant shall state the location of the premises by lot and block or other accurate description, the character of the building with which the connection is desired, and the place where the public sewer is laid with which he desires to make such connection. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.060 - Sewer connection fees. 
A.  No permit shall be issued by the City unless the following charges, when applicable, have been paid: 
1.  Oversize Sewer Charge. An oversize sewer charge shall be required for all lots sought to be connected to the City sewer system. The charge shall be either the minimum charge per lot, or the applicable rate per gross or net acre designated by resolution, whichever is greater. Area calculations shall be based upon the following: 
a.  Gross acreage shall be calculated to include the street right-of-way, and shall include one-half of the right-of-way on boundary streets. Areas dedicated or condemned for public street and alley purposes shall be excluded in calculating net acreage. 
b.  Property which has wholly or proportionately paid the cost of sewer mains, when such fact has been or can be established to the satisfaction of the City, need pay only the oversize sewer charge applicable to the portion of the property for which the charge has not been paid. 
c.  When only a portion of a lot is developed, and the remaining is to continue undeveloped or is to be used solely for the growing of agricultural crops, or for public recreation uses not enclosed in a building, the city administrator may require the payment of the oversize sewer charge applicable only to that portion of the lot developed or to be provided that the parcel for which such fees are charged shall have an area of not less than twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) square feet or one-fourth (¼) of the lot, whichever is greater. When the balance of the lot is developed, the oversize sewer charge shall be paid regardless of whether or not additional sewer service is required. The city administrator shall fix the portion of the lot which is to be considered as developed. 
2.  Connection Charge. 
a.  For each connection to the City sewer system there shall be a charge as set forth by resolution. 
b.  Where connection is to an existing building sewer for which a connection charge has been previously paid, a credit equal to the previous connection classification be made in determining the applicable connection charge. Industrial classifications will be reviewed by the city engineer to determine what credit, if any, is applicable. All such credits will be on a current rate basis. 
B.  When land is subdivided or lots are split, the owner, prior to the time the final map or parcel map is approved, shall pay or cause to be paid all applicable sewer connection fees. 
C.  Payment of charges and issuance of permits pursuant to this section does not authorize the permittee to perform or cause to be performed work specified in this chapter to be performed by the City. 
(Ord. 325 § 5, 1999; Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.070 - Connection—Fee schedule. 
The fee for making connections to the City sewer system and laying laterals therefrom to the property line shall be as set forth by resolution by the city council. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.080 - Payment of sewer charges. 
A.  The amount of any sewer connection charges prescribed under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owing to the City which, until paid, shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of the property for the connection of which the charge was incurred. Any person who makes a connection to the city sewer system without having paid such charges in full shall be liable in an action in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of such charge. The conviction or punishment of any person for connecting to the City sewer system without obtaining a permit shall not relieve such person from paying the charge due and unpaid at the time of such conviction. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.090 - Lien for delinquent charges and penalties. 
All delinquent charges and penalties that accrue for the system, plant, works, facilities or undertaking for the collection, treatment or disposal of sewage or the obtaining, conserving, treating and supplying of water pursuant to this title may, at the election of the City, constitute a lien upon the real property served (except that no such lien shall be created against any publicly owned property) and such lien, properly recorded pursuant to California Government Code Section 54340 et seq. shall continue until the charge and all penalties thereon are fully paid or the property is sold therefore. 
(Ord. 283 § 2, 1993)  
13.12.100 - Reimbursements. 
When a sewer main installed by a person is required to be constructed to a size larger than required solely for such persons application or when sewer mains are installed that benefit property other than the property making contributions to the construction; the persons constructing such sewer mains or oversized sewer mains may request an agreement for reimbursement over a period not to exceed ten years from fees generated by connection of the noncontributing property but in no event shall the total refund exceed one hundred (100) percent of the cost of oversizing or of constructing mains which do not front on contributing property. The City may cause such agreement to be prepaid. The persons requesting such agreement shall provide to the City the cost information required to prepare such an agreement and deposit the amount established by the city council to cover the cost of preparing said agreement. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.110 - Connection—Performance standards. 
Connections made to the public sewers of the City and laterals therefrom shall be made in accordance with those standard specifications of the City as may be adopted from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.120 - Sewer system construction. 
A.  Any person desiring to make an addition to the City sewer system to serve property shall make a request in writing to the City for preliminary investigation into the feasibility of such addition. If the addition as requested is found to be feasible by the City, such addition may be made to the City sewer system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The City shall cause the installation to be inspected, and shall allow the final connection to such system only if it is found that such additions conform in all respects with the standard specifications for sewer facilities of the City, with applicable health laws, and with the lines and grades designated by the City. 
B.  If a right-of-way is needed for an addition to the City sewer system, the person constructing the addition shall obtain such right-of-way for the City, or pay the cost to the City of acquiring such right-of-way. If the City determines that a pump station is necessary to serve the property of the person installing the sewer, such person shall install a pump station meeting specifications approved by the City and shall pay the full cost of such installation. 
C.  When new, enlarged or additional sewer service is required to serve a property, mains shall be installed across the full frontages of the property unless the City determines that mains are not required at that time across the full frontage to serve other properties or because an undeveloped portion of the subject property does not require sewer service. Where a property has more than one (1) frontage on which main installation would be required by this subsection, the city council may require payment of frontage charges in lieu of main installation along such additional frontages. Frontage charges collected pursuant to this subsection shall be deemed as reimbursable pursuant to Section 13.12.100. 
D.  Specifications and plans for the installation of additions to the City sewer system shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer and shall be approved by the city engineer before a permit for doing the work may be issued. 
E.  When a sewer main has been installed in public streets or easements pursuant to the regulations of the City and has been accepted by the City, then the sewer shall become the property of the City and a part of the City sewer system. House branch sewer, including their connection to sewer mains, shall not be considered as city property or become a part of the City sewer system, and their maintenance and repair shall not be provided by the City. 
F.  Although it is the intent of this chapter that arrangements necessary to install sewer mains required to serve property will be the responsibility of the person desiring such service, an exception is necessary to facilitate minor additions to the system. The City may, upon written request of the applicant, take all steps necessary to complete the total installation subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Total of front footage for which lateral sewer charges would be payable of mains existing plus off-site main required is three hundred (300) feet or less; 
2.  Applicant pays the oversize sewer charge, the major facilities sewer charge for his property, and the connection charge for his property as though sewer mains already existed on the property frontage; 
3.  Applicant pays to the City for each foot of main installed to cover the cost of design, surveying, inspection and testing. 
I.  Connections to mains in other than dedicated and surfaced streets or alleys shall not be permitted where service can be rendered from dedicated and surfaced streets or alleys by extension or otherwise. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.130 - Prohibited discharges designated. 
No person shall discharge, deposit or throw, or cause, allow or permit to be discharged into any public sewer or plumbing fixture connected to the sewer, any of the following described materials: 
A.  Any solids, liquids or gases which, by themselves or by interaction with other substances, may cause fire or explosion hazards or in any other way be injurious to persons, property or the operation of the wastewater works; 
B.  Any noxious or malodorous solids, liquids or gases which, either singly or by interaction with other substances, are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or preventing entry into sewers for their maintenance and repair; 
C.  Any solids, greases, slurries or viscous material of such character or in such quantity that, in the opinion of the city engineer, may cause an obstruction to the flow in the sewer or otherwise interfere with the proper functioning of the wastewater works; 
D.  Any toxic substances, chemical elements or compounds in quantities sufficient to impair the operation or efficiency of the wastewater works, or that will pass through the wastewater plant and cause the effluent thereof to exceed Regional Water Quality Control Board requirements for the receiving farm land; 
E.  Any garbage, except properly ground with a mechanical garbage grinder; 
F.  Any sand, earth, cement, broken glass, cinders, feathers, straw, metal, rags; tar, wood or meat-processing plant wastes such as animal skins, intestines, fleshings and paunch materials retained on a screen having eight (8) meshes per inch each way, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstructions to the flow in sewers or other interference with proper operation or maintenance of the sewage system; 
G.  Any septic tank or cesspool waste; 
H.  Any radioactive wastes. In the event of an accidental spill of radioactive material into any public sewer, the person responsible shall: 
1.  Immediately notify the wastewater plant superintendent, and 
2.  Render such technical or other assistance to the City within his power, to prevent the wastewater works from becoming contaminated with radioactivity; 
I.  Any slug discharges. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.140 - Discharge restrictions—Limitations on certain substances—Pretreatment requirements. 
The admission into the public sanitary sewers of any waters or wastes having pollutant characteristics in excess of the "effluent limitation guidelines" published pursuant to Sections 301(b) and 304(b) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, or any of the limits set forth in Sections 13.12.140 through 13.12.180 shall be subject to the review and approval of the City and, where necessary in the opinion of the City, the owner shall provide, at his own expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce the strength below the most restrictive limits before admission to the public sewers. Plans and specifications for pretreatment works shall be prepared by a registered engineer and must be submitted to the City for approval. 
BOD (Biochemical oxygen demand) of 250 mg/l; 
Chlorides, 125 mg/l; 
Copper concentration, 0.7 mg/l; 
Cyanide concentration, 1.0 mg/l; 
Elemental boron, 2.9 mg/l; 
Grease content of 3; 
Hexavalent chromium concentration, 1.0 mg/l; 
Hydrogen ion concentration or pH rating less than 5.0 or more than 9.0; 
Iron concentration, 3.0 mg/l; 
Nickel concentration, 1.0 mg/l; 
Phenols or cresols concentration, 1.0 mg/l; 
Suspended solids content of 300/mg/l; 
Temperature — maximum 150° Fahrenheit; 
Total dissolved solids (TDS), 1000 mg/l; 
Zinc concentration, 5.0 mg/l. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.150 - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided by the user when, in the opinion of the City, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes, sand and/or other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the City, and shall be so located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Whenever the City finds that the user fails to adequately maintain such interceptor in a manner sufficient to conform to discharge requirements, the City may require the installation of a holding tank to accommodate overflow. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.160 - Slugs—Equalized discharge requirements. 
No person shall cause the discharge of slugs of water or wastes. Each person producing discharge of a slug into the public sewers shall construct and maintain at his own expense a suitable storage and flow-control facility to insure equalization of discharge over a twenty-four (24) hour period. This facility shall have a capacity of at least eighty (80) percent of the total normal volume of a twenty-four (24) hour production period, and the outlet to the sewer shall be equipped with a rate discharge controller or other approved device, the regulation of which shall be directed by the City. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.170 - Swimming pool water and other inflow prohibited—Exception. 
It is unlawful to discharge into the City sewer system any water defined as inflow, and to do so will be grounds for discontinuance of service. Swimming pool water shall not be drained or pumped into the sanitary sewer system except with prior approval, and acceptance of conditions imposed by the City. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.180 - Industrial waste discharge—Special agreements permitted when. 
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any person whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be admitted to the wastewater treatment works, either before or after pretreatment; provided, that there is no impairment of the functioning of the wastewater treatment plant by reason of the admission of such wastes, and no extra costs are incurred by the City without recompense by the person. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.190 - Charges for service—Levied—Purpose. 
There shall be levied a monthly charge for each sewer service connection in the City, which shall be chargeable to the person actually using such sewer connection for the use thereof, which charge is for the purpose of defraying the costs of all phases of the City sewer system, including modification, repair, operation and maintenance of the sewer system. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.200 - Charges for service—Designated. 
The monthly sewer service charge under this chapter shall be for actual use of the sewer system. When a building is occupied by more than one (1) tenant using a common sewer service, the charge shall be made to the owner of the building or to such person who makes application for the service. Monthly sewer service charges under this article are fixed by resolution by the city council. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.210 - Industrial waste discharge—Monitoring requirements. 
Each industrial user whose monthly sewer use charges are determined in accordance with the formula set forth by resolution shall, at his cost and expense, cause to be installed a sampler and a flow meter. Such equipment shall be installed in order that proper charges shall be assessed against the industrial discharger. The type, design and location of such equipment shall be approved by the City prior to installation. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.220 - Enforcement—City administrator authority. 
The city administrator or authorized representative shall enforce all ordinances of the City and all statutes of the State pertaining or relating to sewage and other tasks related to sewage control. The city administrator or authorized representatives are hereby authorized to make arrests for violations thereof in the manner provided by California Penal Code Section 836.5. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.230 - Enforcement—City administrator authority—Additional provisions. 
A.  The city administrator is charged with the duty of enforcing this chapter. The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to any building, structure or property connected to the City sewer system, whether the same is owned, operated or controlled by a private party or by a public or quasi-public agency, corporation or association, other than the City. 
B.  In addition to such other penalties as may be prescribed for a violation of this chapter, whenever the city administrator finds that a discharge of sewage has been taking place in violation of any prohibitions or limitations prescribed herein or any effluent limitations or pretreatment standards promulgated in accordance herewith, he may require the user to submit for his approval a detailed time schedule of specific actions which the user shall take in order to prevent or correct such violation. Any failure to comply with such on approved time schedule shall likewise be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
C.  Any person aggrieved by any decision or determination, made by the city administrator, interpreting or implementing the provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to charges required to be paid, may file with the city administrator, a written request for reconsideration within ten (10) days of such decision, action or determination, setting forth in detail the facts supporting the request for reconsideration. If the ruling made by the city administrator on such request for reconsideration is not satisfactory to the person requesting the same, he may, within ten (10) days after written notification of the city administrator's ruling, appeal same to the council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk. The appeal shall be heard by the council within thirty (30) days from the date of filing. After hearing the appeal of such person and giving due consideration thereto, council shall make its determination and notify the aggrieved party of such determination within ten (10) days of the hearing. The appeal shall be based on the appellants' written request to the city administrator and the city administrator's ruling thereon. The ruling by the city council shall be final. The city administrator's decision, action or determination shall remain in full force and effect during such periods of reconsideration and/or appeal. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.240 - Rights of inspection. 
The officers, employees and inspectors of the city engineer, the public works department and building and inspection shall have the right to enter upon the premises of any person at reasonable hours to inspect and to determine whether this chapter is being violated. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.250 - Violation—Correction notice required. 
Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall be served by the City or authorized representative with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The time limit shall not be less than two (2) nor more than seven (7) working days. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. All persons shall be held strictly responsible for any and all acts of agents or employees done under the provisions of this chapter. Upon being notified by the City of any defect arising in any sewer or of any violation of this chapter, the person or persons having charge of said work shall immediately correct the same. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.260 - Enforcement—Disconnection authorized when—Reconnection conditions. 
As an alternative method of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the City shall have the power to disconnect the user of subdivision sewerage system from the sewer mains of the City. Upon disconnection, the City shall estimate the cost of disconnection from and reconnection to the system, and such user shall deposit the cost, as estimated, of disconnection and reconnection before such user is reconnected to the system. The City shall refund any part of the deposit remaining after payment of all costs of disconnection and reconnection. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.270 - Continuing certain uses deemed public nuisance when—Abatement. 
Continued habitation of any building or continued operation of any industrial facility in violation of this chapter, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. The City may cause proceedings to be brought for the abatement of the occupancy of the building or industrial facility during the period of such violation. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.280 - Occupation of disconnected premises deemed public nuisance—Abatement— Reconnection costs. 
During the period of such disconnection, habitation of such premises by human beings shall constitute a public nuisance, whereupon the City shall cause proceedings to be brought for the abatement for the occupancy of said premises by human beings during the period of such disconnection. In such event, and as a condition of reconnection, there is to be paid to the City a reasonable attorney's fee and cost of suit arising in said action. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.290 - Disconnection as means of enforcement only. 
The City declares that the foregoing procedures set forth in Sections 13.12.250 through 13.12.280 are established as a means of enforcement of the terms and conditions of this chapter and not as a penalty. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.300 - Violation—Damage liability. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the City by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.310 - Tampering with or damaging sewerage works prohibited. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the City sewerage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to the penalties provided by law. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
13.12.320 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Violation of discharge requirements by any user shall result in monetary fine assessments equivalent to the actual cost for labor, material and supplies necessary to correct the discharge violation. 
B.  Service charges specified in this chapter and set by resolution by the city council are due and payable upon receipt of appropriate billings, and if not paid within thirty (30) days after the first day of the ensuing month after such debt was incurred, a penalty fee of ten (10) percent shall be assessed for each month of such delinquency. 
(Ord. 179 (part), 1981)  
CHAPTER 13.15 - GRAYWATER SYSTEMS 
Sections: 
 
13.15.010 - Purpose. 
A.  Graywater systems promote the efficient use of water and are encouraged to assist in onsite landscape irrigation. All graywater systems shall conform to Chapter 15, of the 2016 California Plumbing Code. 
B.  Graywater systems may include tanks, filters, pumps and piping for subsurface landscape irrigation through mulch basins, disposal trenches or subsurface drip irrigation fields. 
( Ord. No. 374 , § 3, 6-20-2018)  
13.15.020 - Definitions. 
A.  The meaning of additional terms as used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
City" means the City of Huron, authorized representative acting within the scope of his assigned duties. 
"Graywater" means untreated wastewater that has not been contaminated by toilet waste or unhealthy bodily wastes. Graywater includes wastewater from bathtubs, showers, bathroom washbasins, clothes washing machines, and laundry tubs, but does not include wastewater from kitchen sinks or dishwashers. 
( Ord. No. 374 , § 3, 6-20-2018)  
13.15.030 - Application. 
A.  The contents in this chapter shall apply to existing and new development in the City. 
B.  The implementation of a graywater system at an existing site shall be done in accordance with Chapter 15 of the 2016 California Plumbing Code and subsequent updates. 
C.  All new development in the City shall include a building drain or drains for clothes washers, lavatories, showers, and bathtubs, segregated from drains for all other plumbing fixtures, and connected a minimum of three feet from the limits of the foundation, to allow for future installation of a distributed graywater system. The point of connection between the graywater piping and other waste piping shall be accessible and provided with signage that is satisfactory to the City's building department. 
D.  The following exceptions apply: 
1.  Sites with landscape areas not exceeding five hundred (500) square feet. 
2.  Additions and alternations to an existing building that use the existing drain. 
( Ord. No. 374 , § 3, 6-20-2018)  
13.15.040 - Graywater uses. 
A.  Graywater shall only be used for subsurface irrigation. An exception is allowed for ground surface discharge in a mulch basin as long as the discharge point(s) remain covered with at least two inches of mulch, rock or soil. 
B.  Graywater may be used to irrigate fruit trees, ornamental trees, shrubs, groundcovers and lawns. Graywater shall not be used in vegetable gardens where the food is a root crop or touches the ground surface. 
C.  Graywater systems shall be designed to allow no contact of the graywater with humans and domestic pets. 
D.  The graywater shall be contained on the site where it is generated. 
( Ord. No. 374 , § 3, 6-20-2018)  
13.15.050 - Permitting. 
A.  A plumbing permit is required prior to the erection, construction, reconstruction, installation, relocation or alteration of any graywater system. The following information is required in order to approve the plans and issue a permit for a graywater system: 
1.  A set of plans and specifications showing the graywater system. The graywater system shall be designed in accordance with the requirements in Chapter 15 of the 2016 California Plumbing Code. 
B.  The following exceptions apply: 
1.  Simple System: Graywater discharge is two hundred fifty (250) gallons or less per day. 
2.  Stand Alone: System is not connected to any source of potable water or other irrigation systems 
( Ord. No. 374 , § 3, 6-20-2018)  
13.15.060 - Backflow prevention. 
A.  The contents of Chapter 13.16 are applicable to sites implementing graywater systems. 
B.  A reduced pressure (RP) backflow preventer shall be provided at the point of connection to the public water system. 
C.  An airgap (AG) shall be provided if potable water is used to supplement graywater for irrigation. 
( Ord. No. 374 , § 3, 6-20-2018)  
13.15.070 - Maintenance. 
A.  The required maintenance and inspection of graywater systems shall be the responsibility of the property owner. 
( Ord. No. 374 , § 3, 6-20-2018)  
13.15.080 - Right of inspection. 
A.  The officers, employees and inspectors of the city engineer, the public works department and building and inspection shall have the right to enter upon the premises of any person at reasonable hours to inspect and to determine whether this chapter is being violated. 
( Ord. No. 374 , § 3, 6-20-2018)  
13.15.090 - Violations—Correction notice. 
Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall be served by the City or authorized representative with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The time limit shall not be less than two nor more than seven working days. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. All persons shall be held strictly responsible for any and all acts of agents or employees done under the provisions of this chapter. Upon being notified by the City of any defect arising in any sewer or of any violation of this chapter, the person or persons having charge of said work shall immediately correct the same. 
( Ord. No. 374 , § 3, 6-20-2018)  
13.15.100 - Enforcement. 
A.  As an alternative method of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the City shall have the power to turn off the water service to any violating user. The City will not resume service until proof of correction of the violation is provided. 
B.  Upon disconnection, the City shall estimate the cost of disconnection from and reconnection to the system, and such user shall deposit the cost, as estimated, of disconnection and reconnection before such user is reconnected to the system. 
( Ord. No. 374 , § 3, 6-20-2018)  
Chapter 13.16 - CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM 
Sections: 
 
13.16.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
"Applicant" means the person making an application for a service connection and/or water services. 
"Building" means any structure used for human habitation or a place of business, recreation, or other purpose, which building contains water facilities. 
"City inspection" means the inspector acting for the City. 
"Contractor" means an individual, firm, corporation, partnership or association duly licensed by the State to perform the type of work to be done pursuant to the permit and shall mean the owner or his agent. 
"Cost" means the cost of labor, materials, transportation, supervision, engineering and all other necessary overhead expenses. 
"Cross-connection" is an unprotected actual or potential connection between a potable water system used to supply water for drinking purposes and any source or system containing unapproved water or a substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe, wholesome, and potable. By-pass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or change-over devices, or other devices through which backflow could occur, shall be considered to be cross-connections. 
"Distribution main" means the water lines in streets, highways, alleys and easements used for public and private fire protection or for the general distribution of water for irrigation, industrial and municipal purposes. 
"Engineer" means the engineer appointed by, and acting for, the City. The engineer shall be a registered civil engineer. 
"Owner" means the person owning the fee, or the person in whose name the legal title to the property appears, by deed duly recorded in the office of the county recorder or the person in possession of the property or building under claim of, or exercising acts of, ownership over such property or building for himself or as executor, administrator, guardian, or trustee of the owner. 
"Permit" means any written authorization required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or any other rule, regulation or law of the City for the installation of any water works. 
"Premises" shall mean a lot or parcel of real property under one ownership, except that any separate structure under one roof shall be deemed a separate premises. Apartment house, motels, office buildings, and structures of a like nature may be classified as a single premises. 
"Private fire protection service" means the water services and facilities for buildings sprinkler systems, hydrants, hose reels, and other facilities installed on private property for fire protection and the water available therefor. 
"Public fire protection service" means the services and facilities of the entire water supply, storage and distribution system of the City, including the fire hydrants affixed thereto and the water available for fire protection, excepting house service connections and appurtenances thereto. 
"Regular water service" means the water services and facilities rendered for normal domestic, commercial and industrial purposes on a permanent basis and the water available therefor. 
"Service" or "service connection" means the pipeline and appurtenant facilities, such as the curb stop, meter, and meter box, if any, all used to extend water services from the distribution main to the premises. Where pipelines are divided at the curb or property line to serve several customers, each such branch service shall be deemed a separate service. 
"Street" means any public highway, road, street, avenue, alley, way, easement or right-of-way. 
"Temporary water service" means the water services and facilities rendered for construction work and other uses of limited duration and the water available therefor. 
"Water department" means the council performing functions related to the municipal water service, together with the city superintendent and other duly authorized representatives. 
"Water user" is any person obtaining water from a public water supply. 
(Ord. 313 § 1, 1995)  
13.16.020 - Cross-connections. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public water supply system from contamination due to potential and actual cross-connections. This shall be accomplished by the establishment of a cross-connection control program as required by State regulations. The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted pursuant to Title 17, Sections 7583 through 7605, inclusive, of the California Code of Regulations, entitled "Regulations Relating to Cross-Connections." 
B.  Responsibility. The water department shall be responsible for implementing and enforcing the cross-connection control program. An appropriate backflow prevention assembly shall be installed by and at the expense of the water user at each user connection where required to prevent backflow from the water user's premises to the domestic water system. It shall be the water user's responsibility to comply with the water department's requirements. 
C.  Cross-Connection Protection Requirements. The type of protection that shall be provided to prevent backflow into the public water supply system shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard, actual or potential, that exists on the water user's premises. Unprotected cross-connections with the public water supply are prohibited. The type of backflow prevention assembly that may be required (listed in decreasing level of protection) includes: air-gap separation (AG), reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly (RP), and a double check valve assembly (DC). The water user may choose a higher level of protection that required by the water department. The minimum type of backflow protection required to protect the approved water supply at the user's water connection to premises with varying degrees of hazard are listed in Table 1 of Section 7604, Title 17, of the California Code of Regulations. Situations which are not covered in Table 1 shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis and the appropriate backflow protection shall be determined by the water department or health agency. 
D.  Backflow Prevention Assemblies. Only the backflow prevention assemblies which have been approved by the water department shall be acceptable for installation by a water user. A list of approved backflow prevention assemblies will be provided upon request to any affected customer. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in a manner prescribed in Section 7603, Title 17, of the California Code of Regulations. Location of the assemblies shall be as close as practical to the user's connection. The water department shall have the final authority in determining the required location of a backflow prevention assembly. 
Testing of backflow assemblies shall be conducted only by qualified testers and testing will be the responsibility of the water user. Backflow prevention assemblies must be tested at least annually and immediately after installation, relocation or repair. More frequent testing may be required if deemed necessary by the water department. No assembly shall be placed back in service unless it is functioning as designed. These assemblies shall be serviced, overhauled or replaced whenever they are found to be defective and all costs of testing, repair and maintenance shall be borne by the water user. Approval must be obtained from the water department prior to removing, relocation or replacing a backflow prevention assembly. 
E.  Administration. The cross-connection control program shall be administered by the water department. The water department will establish and maintain a list of approved backflow prevention assemblies as well as a list of approved backflow prevention assembly testers. The water department shall conduct necessary surveys of water user premises to evaluate the degree of potential health hazards. The water department shall notify user when an assembly needs to be tested. The notice shall contain the date when the test must be completed. 
F.  Water Service Termination. When the water department encounters water uses that represent a clear and immediate hazard to the potable water supply that cannot be immediately abated, the procedure for terminating water service shall be instituted. Conditions or water uses that create a basis for water service termination shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Refusal to install or to test a backflow prevention assembly, or to repair or replace a faulty backflow prevention assembly; 
2.  Direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a sewer line; 
3.  Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a system or equipment containing contaminants; 
4.  Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and an auxiliary water system. 
For condition 1, the water department will terminate service to a water user's premises after notification has been sent. If no action is taken immediately, the water service shall be terminated. 
For conditions 2, 3 or 4, the water department shall take the following steps: 
1.  Make reasonable effort to advise the water user of intent to terminate water service; 
2.  Terminate water service and lock service valve. The water service shall remain inactive until correction of violations has been approved by the water department. 
(Ord. 313 § 2, 1995)  
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapters:  
Chapter 15.04 - BUILDING CODE 
Sections: 
 
15.04.010 - Adopted. 
That certain document on file in the office of the city clerk of the City of Huron, being marked and designated as "Fresno County Building Code Title 15 as amended July 19, 1984," and including the Uniform Building Code, Uniform Mechanical Code, Uniform Electrical Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, Uniform Sign Code, and schedules of charges, be and the same is adopted as the building code of the City of Huron regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of buildings or structures in the City of Huron, providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, and providing penalties for the violation thereof. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of such building code on file in the office of the city clerk are referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. 218 § 1, 1986)  
15.04.020 - Certificate of occupancy for construction. 
The City of Huron establishes and requires a certificate of occupancy of any type of construction within the City of Huron. 
(Ord. 276, 1992)  
Chapter 15.08 - MOVING OF BUILDINGS 
Sections: 
 
15.08.010 - Permit required. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or the servant, employee or agent of any such person, firm or corporation to remove any building now situated in the City of Huron or to be hereafter constructed in the City of Huron, from the foundation on which the building is constructed unless the person or persons moving the building shall first have obtained from the city council of the City of Huron a permit to so move the building, upon the terms and conditions hereinafter set forth authorizing the moving of the building. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation or the servant, employee or agent of any such person, firm or corporation to move any building into the City of Huron, unless such person, firm or corporation shall have first obtained from the city council of the City of Huron a permit upon the terms and conditions hereinafter set forth authorizing the moving of the building into the City of Huron. 
(Ord. 28 §§ 1, 2, 1952)  
15.08.020 - Permit application. 
Such application for a permit as set out in Section 15.08.010 shall be in writing and on a form approved by the city council of the City of Huron by resolution and shall be forthwith filed with the clerk of the City of Huron. Upon the filing of such application the clerk shall present the same to a committee of three (3) members appointed by the mayor from the city council. It shall be the duty of the clerk immediately upon receiving an application for a permit as herein provided to post in three (3) public places within the City of Huron a notice of the application for a permit; the notice shall state the name and address of the applicant, the character of the building to be moved and the location to or from where the same is to be moved and the legal description of such location. 
(Ord. 28 § 3, 1952)  
15.08.030 - Permit issuance and denial. 
The committee of the city council appointed by the mayor shall have the power to hear evidence both for and against the issuance of such permit and shall consider the evidence adduced both for and against the granting of such permit and shall have the power to forthwith grant or deny the permit or to demand further evidence from the applicant or the committee may demand that the applicant appear before the city council at its next regular meeting or special meeting called by the mayor for the purpose of a further hearing on the permit, and in the event that the committee refers the matter to the city council, as hereinabove provided, then the final granting or denying of the permit shall be in the sole discretion of the city council. 
(Ord. 28 § 4, 1952)  
15.08.040 - Inspection of building—Performance bond. 
The committee of the city council appointed by the mayor, as herein provided, shall in passing upon any application for a permit as herein provided inspect or cause to be inspected the building proposed to be moved into the City of Huron and shall also inspect or cause to be inspected the location to where the building is to be moved, and shall demand of the applicant for the permit, prior to issuing any permit a specific performance bond, either cash or surety company, in such amount as the committee of the city council shall deem necessary and proper, guaranteeing to the City of Huron that the applicant will faithfully perform within a given time all the terms and conditions that the committee of the city council may require for the granting of such permit. The committee may in its discretion place any terms and conditions upon the applicant for the permit and in all cases the committee shall demand of the applicant that he make such improvements and repairs on the building to be moved to the location as set forth in the permit as in the discretion of the committee may be necessary to make the proposed building to be moved thereto comply with the value and quality of the surrounding buildings in the neighborhood and the committee shall demand of the applicant a bond as hereinbefore provided in a sum not less than in the opinion of the committee will be sufficient to bring the building up to the specifications as hereinabove set out. 
(Ord. 28 § 5, 1952)  
15.08.050 - Filing of bond. 
The bond provided hereinabove shall be filed with the clerk of the City of Huron in such an amount as required by the committee or city council and the bond may be a cash bond or a surety company bond. All cash bonds received under this chapter by the city clerk shall be placed on deposit in the general fund of the City of Huron until such time as the bonds are exonerated or forfeited by action of the city council, and all surety company bonds shall be retained on file with the clerk. 
Upon the performance of all the terms and conditions, as set forth by the committee or the city council, by any applicant for a permit under this chapter within the time specified for the performance thereof, the applicant shall apply to the city council for exoneration of the bond placed on file with the clerk by the applicant, and the city council of the City of Huron shall exonerate the bond if in the satisfaction of the city council all the terms and conditions have been properly performed by the applicant within the time specified in the permit. In the event the bond is a cash bond placed on file with the clerk and deposited in the general fund as herein provided, the clerk shall be authorized to draw a warrant on the general fund for the amount of the bond. In the event that any applicant hereunder fails to comply with the terms and conditions set forth by the committee or the city council within the time specified therefor, the city council shall have the right to forfeit the bond placed on file by the applicant and any proceeds from any bond so forfeited shall forthwith accrue to the City of Huron and be placed by the clerk in the general fund. 
(Ord. 28 § 6, 1952)  
15.08.060 - Building defined. 
A "building," as used in this chapter shall be defined as any wooden, metal, brick, tent or awning structure. 
(Ord. 28 § 7, 1952)  
15.08.070 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation or the agent, servant or employee of any such person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be liable to a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) and to imprisonment for not more than sixty (60) days or to both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 28 § 8, 1952)  
Chapter 15.12 - BUILDING NUMBERING 
Sections: 
 
15.12.010 - Bases for address numbering. 
A.  Addressing Area. The City addressing area shall encompass all property within the corporate City limits. 
B.  The City of Huron will utilize the five (5) digit numbering system created by Fresno County. 
C.  Numbering. Numbers shall increase as they progress away from the base lines. On streets running north-south, even numbers shall be on the left side and odd numbers on the right side as the numbers increase away from the base line. 
D.  Numbers on Streets. All address numbers shall be street numbers and shall designate the locations on public streets only. Address numbers shall not refer to any private way. 
(Ord. 204 § 1, 1984)  
15.12.020 - City manager to determine numbers and rules. 
A.  The city manager or designated officer shall designate the appropriate and respective address numbers for properties and buildings in the City addressing area. 
B.  The city manager may promulgate rules and regulations for the address numbering of properties and buildings. The rules and regulations shall establish and perpetuate a system of numbering which will logically identify properties with a minimum of conflict and best serve the purpose of such numbering in regard to those public agencies and the public who use them. 
(Ord. 204 § 2, 1984)  
15.12.030 - Address numbers. 
A.  Identifying Properties. All properties within the City addressing area shall be identified by address numbers designated by the city manager. 
B.  Legal Description. The identification of properties or buildings by address numbers shall not effect any legal description of any such property. 
C.  Structure Identification. Each principal building upon property which has been assigned an address number shall be identified by the number(s) assigned to the street frontage on which the front entrance of the structure is located. Address numbers shall be placed on the street front of the building, at each principal entrance, in addition on each curb thereto with each number to be placed at the entrance to which the number refers. 
D.  Numbers Shall be Posted. Each principal building or each front entrance and curb to such building shall bear numerals indicating the address number assigned to that property at a location on the building designated by the city manager or his authorized representative. Numerals shall be posted in a contrasting color from the mounting surface which shall be visible from the street on which the property is located and shall not be obscured from the street by shrubs, trees, buildings or any object at any time. 
E.  Size of Numbers. Posted numerals shall not be less than four (4) inches high and shall have a minimum stroke width of one-half (½) of an inch if illuminated. 
(Ord. 204 § 3, 1984)  
15.12.040 - Address number placing and maintenance. 
A.  No person exercising or having ownership, custody or control of any building or property shall fail, neglect or refuse to place or maintain address numbers in the manner provided in this chapter, within fifteen (15) days from the mailing of a notice from the city manager to the person designating the number or the numbers to be placed and the place they are required to be located. 
B.  All address numbers other than those provided for in this chapter and designated by the city manager and address numbers defaced so as to not be plainly seen and identified from the street shall be removed from every building by the owners, occupants, lessees, tenants or subtenants thereof within fifteen (15) days of the mailing of a notice from the city manager designating the assigned number or numbers to be used. 
(Ord. 204 § 4, 1984)  
15.12.050 - Adoption of address books and map. 
Those certain books entitled "Property Addressing Books," on file in the Department of Planning of the City of Huron are adopted and incorporated herein by reference and made a part thereof. These books shall indicate the official system of the City of Huron numbering properties and principal buildings. The city manager shall enter all designated numbers therein. The map entitled "City of Huron Official Addressing System" shall designate the City addressing area. The books herein adopted and as subsequently amended shall be prima facie evidence of the existence of the legality of numbers designated thereon. 
(Ord. 204 § 5, 1984)  
Chapter 15.16 - OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS 
Chapters: 
 
15.16.010 - Compliance with provisions required. 
It shall be unlawful to erect, construct or maintain any outdoor advertising structure or sign of any nature, except as hereinafter provided, upon any building, lot or parcel of land inside the limits of the City of Huron. 
(Ord. 78 § 1, 1959)  
15.16.020 - Exceptions. 
The foregoing prohibition shall not apply to advertising which is incidental and subordinate to a lawful use of the premises on which it is located, including signs advertising services rendered or goods sold on the premises on which it is located. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the erection, construction or maintenance of directional, warning or information structures or signs required or authorized by law or by federal, State or municipal authority. 
(Ord. 78 §§ 2, 4, 1959)  
15.16.030 - Erection, construction and maintenance restrictions. 
It shall constitute a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct or maintain any outdoor advertising structure or sign of any nature indicating the trade name, merchandise or service of any person or corporation who pays a consideration for the privilege of placing, maintaining or using any portion of the sign or painted advertising, to the owner or occupant of the premises on which it is located; provided, however, that the prohibition contained in this section shall not prohibit the erection, construction or maintenance of signs not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area. 
(Ord. 78 § 3, 1959)  
15.16.040 - Existing signs required to comply. 
Within one (1) year from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter all advertising signs and displays which are in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be removed, or, where possible, made to comply with the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. 78 § 5, 1959)  
15.16.050 - Violation—Public nuisance. 
The erection, construction or maintenance of any advertising sign or display in conflict with the provisions of this chapter is declared by the city council of the City of Huron to constitute a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 78 § 7, 1959)  
15.16.060 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating or failing, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months. 
(Ord. 78 § 6, 1959)  
Chapter 15.20 - MOBILEHOME PARKS 
Sections: 
 
15.20.010 - Responsibility. 
The City of Huron shall not be the responsible jurisdiction for the Health and Safety Code Division 13 Part 2.1 in related administrative codes. 
(Ord. 347 § 1, 2007: Ord. 203 § 1, 1984)  
15.20.020 - Delegation of enforcement responsibilities. 
The State of California, the Department of Housing and Community Development will be the enforcement agency, along with the assistance of the Fresno County health department and the City of Huron of the regulations in regarding Health and Safety Code Division 13 Part 2.1 relating to mobilehome parks in the City of Huron. 
(Ord. 347 § 2, 2007: Ord. 203 § 2, 1984)  
15.20.030 - Qualified personnel. 
The State of California through the Department of Housing and Community Development will maintain sufficient qualified personnel to enforce the provisions of this chapter consistent with the State enforcement program. 
(Ord. 347 § 3, 2007: Ord. 203 § 3, 1984)  
15.20.040 - Fee schedule. 
The fee for an annual permit to operate a mobilehome park, travel trailer park, recreational vehicle park, incidental camping areas, tents, camps or any combination thereof shall be paid annually to the enforcement agency as provided by the following schedule: 
Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and two dollars ($2.00) per lot or camping party, for the maximum number of camping parties authorized, to be paid to the enforcement area agency, and the State fees are determined by the number of lots or camping parties authorized as follows: 
Operating Fees 	Number of Lots 
or Camping Parties 	State Fee 
$25.00 	2-49 	$ 75.00 
25.00 	50-99 	125.00 
25.00 	100-499 	225.00 
25.00 	500 or more 	350.00 
 
(Ord. 203 § 4, 1984)  
15.20.050 - State of California program and objectives. 
The City of Huron will administer the State program and objectives as contained in the Health and Safety Code Division 13 Part 2.1 and are related. The administrative regulations in regards to the following existing mobilehome park within our jurisdiction: 
Huron Trailer Court 	36534 "M" Street 
 
The occupancy status of this park is twenty-one (21) coaches. The local objectives in assuming the responsibility for administering a mobilehome park is to provide for a quality living environment and to ensure that State of California Health and Safety Codes are enforced. Compliance will start six (6) months after State approval. 
(Ord. 203 § 5, 1984)  
15.20.060 - Operating permits. 
All operating permits issued shall be forwarded to the administrative office of the division of code and standard within fifteen (15) days after issuance. 
(Ord. 203 § 7, 1984)  
Chapter 15.24 - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 
Sections:  
Article 1. - Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Methods 
 
15.24.010 - Statutory authorization. 
The Legislature of the State of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560 and 65800 conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the City of Huron does adopt the following floodplain management regulations. 
(Ord. 332 § 1 (part), 2001)  
15.24.020 - Findings of fact. 
A.  The flood hazard areas of the City of Huron are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contribute to the flood loss. 
(Ord. 332 § 1 (part), 2001)  
15.24.030 - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas of provisions designed to: 
A.  Protect human life and health; 
B.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
C.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
D.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
E.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
F.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage; 
G.  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
H.  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. 332 § 1 (part), 2001)  
15.24.040 - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions to: 
A.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
B.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
C.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
D.  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
E.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. 332 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Article 2. - Definitions 
 
15.24.050 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
"Accessory use" means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
"Alluvial fan" means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by floodflows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration. 
"Apex" means the point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front. 
"Appeal" means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
"Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
"Area of special flood hazard." See "Special flood hazard area." 
"Area of special flood-related erosion hazard" means the land within a community which is most likely to be subject to severe flood-related erosion losses. The area may be designated as Zone E on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). 
"Area of special mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazard" means the area subject to severe mudslides (i.e., mudflows). The area is designated as Zone M on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). 
"Base flood" means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter. 
"Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides. 
"Breakaway walls" means any type of walls, whether solid or lattice, and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other suitable building material, which is not part of the structural support of the building and which is designed to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action without causing any damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they are used or any buildings to which they might be carried by flood waters. A breakaway wall shall have a safe design loading resistance of not less than ten and no more than twenty (20) pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls must be certified by a registered engineer or architect and shall meet the following conditions: 
A.  Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and 
B.  The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously in the event of the base flood. 
"Building." See "Structure." 
"Coastal high hazard area" means an area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. It is an area subject to high velocity waters, including coastal and tidal inundation or tsunamis. The area is designated on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as Zone V1-V30, VE, or V. 
"Development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
"Encroachment" means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
"Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) to be completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
"Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
"Flood, flooding or floodwater" means 
A.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and 
B.  The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. 
"Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway. 
"Flood Hazard Boundary Map" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards. 
"Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
"Flood Insurance Study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
"Flood-related erosion" means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical level or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusually and unforeseeable event which results in flooding. 
"Flood-related erosion area" or "flood-related erosion prone area" means a land area adjoining the shore of a lake or other body of water, which due to the composition of the shoreline or bank and high water levels or wind-driven currents, is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage. 
"Flood-related erosion area management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood-related erosion damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood-related erosion control works and floodplain management regulations. 
"Floodplain or flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See "Flooding." 
"Floodplain administrator" means the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
"Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
"Floodplain management regulations" means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
"Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents (Refer to FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, and TB 7-93 for guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing). 
"Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as "regulatory floodway." 
"Floodway fringe" means that area of the floodplain on either side of the regulatory floodway where encroachment may be permitted. 
"Fraud and victimization" as related to Article 6, Variances, of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the Huron city council will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty (50) to one hundred (100) years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
"Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
"Governing body" means the local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of citizenry. 
"Hardship" as related to Article 6, Variances, of this chapter means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The Huron city council requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
"Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
"Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
"Levee" means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
"Levee system" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
"Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see "Basement" definition). 
1.  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided it conforms to applicable nonelevation design requirements, including, but not limited to: 
a.  The wet floodproofing standard in Section 5.24.180(C)(3) of this chapter. 
b.  The anchoring standards in Section 5.24.180(A) of this chapter. 
c.  The construction materials and methods standards in Section 5.24.180(B) of this chapter; and 
d.  The standards for utilities in Section 5.24.190 of this chapter. 
2.  For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see "Basement" definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas. 
"Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
"Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
"Market value" shall be determined by estimating the cost to replace the structure in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation which has accrued since the structure was constructed. The cost of replacement of the structure shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by reference to a building cost estimating guide recognized by the building construction industry. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking into account the age and physical deterioration of the structure and functional obsolescence as approved by the floodplain administrator, but shall not include economic or other forms of external obsolescence. Use of replacement costs or accrued depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized building cost estimating guides may be considered only if such factors are included in a report prepared by an independent professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation of the differences. 
"Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
"Mudslide" describes a condition where there is a river, flow or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside, usually as a result of a dual condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on the ground, preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain. 
"Mudslide (i.e., mudflow) prone area" means an area with land surfaces and slopes of unconsolidated material where the history, geology and climate indicate a potential for mudflow. 
"New construction," for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
"New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community. 
"Obstruction" includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
"One-Hundred-Year Flood or 100-Year Flood." See "Base flood." 
"Primary frontal dune" means a continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and overtopping from high tides and waves during major coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct change from a relatively mild slope. 
"Public safety and nuisance" as related to Article 6, Variances, of this chapter means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community, neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake or river, bay, stream, canal or basin. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
"Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
"Remedy a violation" means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
"Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
"Sand dunes" means naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach. 
"Sheet flow area." See "Area of shallow flooding." 
"Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V. 
"Start of construction" includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the permit. The "actual start" means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
"Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
"Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
"Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary assure safe living conditions; or 
2.  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
"V zone." See "Coastal high hazard area." 
"Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
"Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
"Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
"Watercourse" means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. 332 § 2 (part), 2001)  
Article 3. - General Provisions 
 
15.24.060 - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of Huron. 
(Ord. 332 § 3 (part), 2001)  
15.24.070 - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated July 19, 2001 and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), dated July 19, 2001, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the Huron city council by the floodplain administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at Huron City Hall, 36311 S. Lassen Avenue, Huron, California. 
(Ord. 332 § 3 (part), 2001)  
15.24.080 - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the term of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the Huron city council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. 332 § 3 (part), 2001)  
15.24.090 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. 332 § 3 (part), 2001  
15.24.100 - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
A.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
B.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
C.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. 332 § 3 (part), 2001)  
15.24.110 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Huron city council, any officer or employee thereof, the State of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. 332 § 3 (part), 2001)  
15.24.120 - Severability. 
This chapter and the various parts thereof are declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any portion thereof, other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. 332 § 3 (part), 2001)  
Article 4. - Administration 
 
15.24.130 - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 15.24.070. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
A.  Site plan, including but not limited to: 
1.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and twenty (20) foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site; and 
2.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; and 
3.  If available, the base flood elevation from the Flood Insurance Study and/or Flood Insurance Rate Map; and 
4.  If applicable, the location of the regulatory floodway; and 
B.  Foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
1.  Proposed elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; and; 
2.  For a crawlspace foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 5.24.170 (C)(3) of this chapter and FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93; and 
3.  For foundations placed on fill, the location and height of fill, and compaction requirements (compacted to ninety five (95) percent using the Standard Proctor Test method); and 
C.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in Section 15.24.170(C)(3) of this chapter and FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93; and 
D.  All appropriate certifications listed in Section 15.24.150(D) of this chapter; and 
E.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(Ord. 332 § 4 (part), 2001)  
15.24.140 - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
The city manager is appointed to administer, implement and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions. 
(Ord. 332 § 4 (part), 2001)  
15.24.150 - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine that: 
1.  Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
2.  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; 
3.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and 
4.  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point. 
B.  Review, Use and Development of Any Other Base Flood Data. 
1.  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.24.070, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Article 5. Any such information shall be submitted to the Huron city council for adoption; or 
2.  If no base flood elevation data is available from a federal or state agency or other source, then a base flood elevation shall be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication, "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas—A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations," dated July 1995, in order to administer Article 5: 
a.  Simplified method. 
i.  100-year or base flood discharge shall be obtained using the appropriate regression equation found in a U.S. Geological Survey publication, or the discharge-drainage area method; and 
ii.  Base flood elevation shall be obtained using the Quick-2 computer program developed by FEMA; or 
b.  Detailed method. 
i.  100-year or base flood discharge shall be obtained using the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' HEC-HMS computer program; and 
ii.  Base flood elevation shall be obtained using the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' HEC-RAS computer program. 
C.  Notification of Other Agencies. In alteration or relocation of a watercourse: 
1.  Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation; 
2.  Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and 
3.  Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
D.  Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following: 
1.  Certification required by Section 15.24.170(C)(1) and 15.24.200 (lowest floor elevations); 
2.  Certification required by Section 15.24.170(C)(2) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures); 
3.  Certification required by Section 15.24.170(C)(3) (wet floodproofing standard); 
4.  Certification of elevation required by Section 15.24.190(B) (subdivision standards); 
5.  Certification required by Section 15.24.220(A) (floodway encroachments); 
6.  Information required by Section 15.24.230(F) (coastal construction standards); and 
7.  Reports required by Section 15.24.240(C) (mudflow standards). 
E.  Map Determinations. Make interpretations where needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard. Where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, grade and base flood elevations shall be used to determine the boundaries of the special flood hazard area. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Article 6. 
F.  Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 15.24.080. 
(Ord. 332 § 4 (part), 2001)  
15.24.160 - Appeals. 
The city council of the City of Huron shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. 332 § 4 (part), 2001)  
Article 5. - Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction 
 
15.24.170 - Standards of construction. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required: 
A.  Anchoring. 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
2.  All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 15.24.200. 
B.  Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed: 
1.  With flood resistant materials as specified in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 2-93, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
2.  Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
3.  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and 
4.  If within zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
C.  Elevation and Floodproofing. (See Section 15.24.050, Definitions, for "basement," "lowest floor," "new construction," "substantial damage" and "substantial improvement.") 
1.  Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement: 
a.  In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified. (The State of California recommends that in AO zones without velocity the lowest floor be elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height exceeding the depth specified in feet on the FIRM by at least two feet, or elevated at least four feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.) 
b.  In an A zone, elevated to or above the base flood elevation, said base flood elevation shall be determined by one of the methods in Section 5.24.150(B) of this chapter. (The State of California recommends the lowest floor be elevated at least two feet above the base flood elevation.) 
c.  In all other zones, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. (The State of California recommends the lowest floor be elevated at least two feet above the base flood elevation.) 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
2.  Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated to conform with subsection C(1) of this section or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities: 
a.  Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under subsection C(1) of this section so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
c.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection C(2) are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
3.  All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement shall follow the guidelines in FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93 and TB 7-93, and must exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; or 
b.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect. 
4.  Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 15.24.200. 
(Ord. 332 § 5 (part), 2001)  
15.24.180 - Standards for utilities. 
A.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
1.  Infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; and 
2.  Discharge from the systems into floodwaters. 
B.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. 332 § 5 (part), 2001)  
15.24.190 - Standards for subdivisions. 
A.  All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood. 
B.  All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the final first floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator. 
C.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
D.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
E.  All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. 332 § 5 (part), 2001)  
15.24.200 - Standards for manufactured homes. 
A.  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map, on sites located: 
1.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
2.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
3.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
4.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation (the State of California recommends at least two feet above the base flood elevation) and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
B.  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on sites located within zones V1-30, V and VE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map will meet the requirements of subsection A of this section and Section 5.24.220. 
C.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH, AE, V1-30, V and VE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection A of this section will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the: 
1.  Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation (the State of California recommends at least two feet above the base flood elevation); or 
2.  Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. 332 § 5 (part), 2001)  
15.24.210 - Standards for recreational vehicles. 
A.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map will either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, and be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
2.  Meet the permit requirements of Article 4 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 5.24.200(A). 
B.  Recreation vehicles placed on sites within zones V1-30, V and VE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map will meet the requirements of subsection A of this section and Section 5.24.230 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 332 § 5 (part), 2001)  
15.24.220 - Floodways. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.24.070 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
A.  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement and other new development unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in [the base] flood elevation during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
B.  If subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
(Ord. 332 § 5 (part), 2001)  
15.24.230 - Coastal high hazard areas. 
Within coastal high hazard areas as established under Section 5.24.070, the following standards shall apply: 
A.  All new construction and substantial improvement shall be elevated on adequately anchored pilings or columns and securely anchored to such pilings or columns so that the lowest horizontal portion of the structural members of the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated to or above the base flood level. The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by applicable state or local building standards. 
B.  All new construction and other development shall be located on the landward side of the reach of mean high tide. 
C.  All new construction and substantial improvement shall have the space below the lowest floor free of obstructions or constructed with breakaway walls as defined in Article 2 of this chapter. Such enclosed space shall not be used for human habitation and will be usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage. 
D.  Fill shall not be used for structural support of buildings. 
E.  Manmade alteration of sand dunes which would increase potential flood damage is prohibited. 
F.  The floodplain administrator shall obtain and maintain the following records: 
1.  Certification by a registered engineer or architect that a proposed structure complies with subsection A of this section; and 
2.  The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the bottom of the lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings or columns) of all new and substantially improved structures, and whether such structures contain a basement. 
(Ord. 332 § 5 (part), 2001)  
15.24.240 - Mudslide (i.e., mudflow) prone areas. 
A.  The floodplain administrator shall review permits for proposed construction of other development to determine if it is proposed within a mudslide area. 
B.  Permits shall be reviewed to determine that the proposed site and improvement will be reasonably safe from mudslide hazards. Factors to be considered in making this determination include but are not limited to: 
1.  The type and quality of soils; 
2.  Evidence of ground water or surface water problems; 
3.  Depth and quality of any fill; 
4.  Overall slope of the site; and 
5.  Weight that any proposed development will impose on the slope. 
C.  Within areas which may have mudslide hazards, the floodplain administrator shall require that: 
1.  A site investigation and further review be made by persons qualified in geology and soils engineering; 
2.  The proposed grading, excavation, new construction and substantial improvement be adequately designed and protected against mudslide damages; 
3.  The proposed grading, excavation, new construction and substantial improvement not aggravate the existing hazard by creating either on-site or off-site disturbances; and 
4.  Drainage, planting, watering and maintenance not endanger slope stability. 
(Ord. 332 § 5 (part), 2001)  
5.24.250 - Flood-related erosion-prone areas. 
A.  The floodplain administrator shall require permits for proposed construction and other development within all flood-related erosion-prone areas as known to the community. 
B.  Permit applications shall be reviewed to determine whether the proposed site alterations and improvements will be reasonably safe from flood-related erosion and will not cause flood-related erosion hazards or otherwise aggravate the existing hazard. 
C.  If a proposed improvement is found to be in the path of flood-related erosion or would increase the erosion hazard, such improvement shall be relocated or adequate protective measures shall be taken to avoid aggravating the existing erosion hazard. 
D.  Within zone E of the Flood Insurance Rate Map, a setback is required for all new development from the ocean, lake, bay, riverfront or other body of water to create a safety buffer consisting of a natural vegetative or contour strip. This buffer shall be designated according to the flood-related erosion hazard and erosion rate, in relation to the anticipated "useful life" of structures, and depending upon the geologic, hydrologic, topographic, and climatic characteristics of the land. The buffer may be used for suitable open space purposes, such as for agricultural, forestry, outdoor recreation and wildlife habitat areas, and for other activities using temporary and portable structures only. 
(Ord. 332 § 5 (part), 2001)  
Article 6. - Variance Procedure 
 
15.24.260 - Nature of variances. 
The variance criteria set forth in this article are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners. 
It is the duty of the Huron city council to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. (The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.) 
(Ord. 332 § 6 (part), 2001)  
15.24.270 - Appeal board. 
A.  In passing upon requests for variances, the Huron city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter and the: 
1.  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
2.  Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3.  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property; 
4.  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
5.  Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
6.  Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
7.  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
8.  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
9.  Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
10.  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and 
11.  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water system, and streets and bridges. 
B.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that: 
1.  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25) for one hundred dollars ($100) of insurance coverage; and 
2.  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. (It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the Fresno County recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.) 
C.  The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. 332 § 6 (part), 2001)  
15.24.280 - Conditions for variances. 
A.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Articles 4 and 5 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
B.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" (as defined in Section 15.24.050 of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
C.  Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
D.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the "minimum necessary" considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the Huron city council need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the Huron city council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance. 
E.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
1.  Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional "hardship" (as defined in Section 15.24.050 of this chapter) to the applicant; and 
3.  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense; create a nuisance (see "public safety or nuisance" as defined in Section 15.24.050), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in Section 15.24.050) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
F.  Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of subsections A through E of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance. 
G.  Upon consideration of the factors of Section 15.24.270(A) and the purposes of this chapter, the Huron city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 332 § 6 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 15.28 - UNDERGROUND WIRING CODE 
Sections: 
 
15.28.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions: 
"Commission" means the Public Utilities Commission of the State. 
"Underground utility district" or "district" means that area in the City within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited, as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 15.28.030. 
"Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures" means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, cross-arms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above ground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated services. 
"Utility" includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. 
(Ord. 327 § 1 (part), 1999)  
15.28.020 - Public hearing. 
The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures, within a designated area of the City, and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated services. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned, by mail, of the time and place of such hearings at least ten days prior to the date thereof. Each hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 327 § 1 (part), 1999)  
15.28.030 - District designation. 
If, after any such public hearing the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal in underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished, and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having the due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
(Ord. 327 § 1 (part), 1999)  
15.28.040 - Removal of overhead structures. 
Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 15.28.030, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution. Except as such overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 15.28.090, and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 327 § 1 (part), 1999)  
15.28.050 - Exception—Emergency. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed ten days without the authorization of the director of public works in order to provide emergency service. The director of public works may grant special permission, on such terms as the director of public works deems appropriate in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination, as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, or use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. 
(Ord. 327 § 1 (part), 1999)  
15.28.060 - Exception—Generally. 
This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 15.28.030, shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities: 
A.  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer; 
B.  Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting; 
C.  Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited; 
D.  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts; 
E.  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture, and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building, or to an adjacent building, without crossing any public street; 
F.  Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures used by a utility for furnishing communication services; 
G.  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes, meter cabinets and concealed ducts; 
H.  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(Ord. 327 § 1 (part), 1999)  
15.28.070 - Notice to property owners and utility companies. 
A.  Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 15.28.030, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property, within the district created by said resolution, of the adoption thereof. 
B.  The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desires to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises, so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utilities at a new location, subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. 
C.  Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 15.28.030, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment role and to the affected utilities. 
(Ord. 327 § 1 (part), 1999)  
15.28.080 - Responsibility of utility companies. 
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 15.28.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. 
(Ord. 327 § 1 (part), 1999)  
15.28.090 - Responsibility of property owners. 
A.  Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district, shall perform construction and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 15.28.030 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served, all in accordance with applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. 
B.  In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting such property does not comply with the provisions of subsection A of this section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 15.28.030, the director of public works shall post written notice on the property being served, and thirty (30) days thereafter shall have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. 
(Ord. 327 § 1 (part), 1999)  
15.28.100 - Responsibility of the City. 
The City shall remove, at its own expense, all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed under this chapter, in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution, enacted pursuant to Section 15.28.030. 
(Ord. 327 § 1 (part), 1999)  
15.28.110 - Extension of time. 
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 15.28.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, or restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience or any other circumstances beyond control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(Ord. 327 § 1 (part), 1999)  
15.28.120 - Violation—Infraction. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter, including any or all other amendments, revisions or supplements, is guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction, shall be punished accordingly, as set forth in Section 1.16.010 of this code. If any violation is continued, each day's violation is deemed a separate infraction. 
(Ord. 327 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Title 16 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 16.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.04.010 - Purpose. 
This title shall be known as and may be cited as the "Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Huron" deemed necessary in order to protect the public health, safety and general welfare, including the public interest; the conservation, stabilization and protection of property values, and to assure provision for necessary utilities, public roads and other public conveniences in subdivided areas. 
(Ord. 194 § 101, 1983)  
16.04.020 - Authority to regulate. 
Pursuant to the authority conferred by Title 7, Division 2 of the California Government Code cited as the Subdivision Map Act and in addition to any other regulations provided by law, the regulations contained in this title are established herewith and shall apply to all subdivisions or parts of subdivisions wholly or partly within the City, and to the preparation, filing and approval of maps. 
(Ord. 194 § 102, 1983)  
16.04.030 - Governing provisions. 
The design, improvement and survey data for subdivisions, the form and content of tentative, final and parcel maps, and the procedure to be followed in securing official approval shall be governed by the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and by the additional provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 194 § 103, 1983)  
16.04.040 - Relation to general plan. 
A.  A subdivision map or map of other division of land shall conform to the principles and standards of the general plan, and the elements thereof, with respect to population densities and distribution, locations and sizes of public areas, and rights of way and improvement of streets and ways. 
B.  A subdivision map shall conform with the zoning ordinance of the City of Huron with respect to uses of land, lot sizes and dimensions, space for off-street parking and loading, and other applicable regulations. 
C.  A subdivision map shall conform with other specific plans for streets, public areas and projects, and the future development thereof. 
(Ord. 194 § 104, 1983)  
16.04.050 - Environmental impact. 
No tentative map or tentative parcel map submitted to the City pursuant to the provisions of this title shall either be considered as filed or reviewed and acted upon by the planning commission or city council until the requirements of the City's California Environmental Quality Act Guidelines have been met. 
(Ord. 194 § 105, 1983)  
16.04.060 - Conformance to zoning ordinance. 
Subdivision maps shall conform to the zoning ordinance of the City with respect to uses of land, lot sizes and dimensions, and other applicable regulations provided, however, that where this title imposes higher standards, the requirements of this title shall prevail. When a proposed use or development of land requires a zoning reclassification, conditional use permit or variance, the application shall be considered prior to, or concurrently with the tentative map or the tentative parcel map. 
(Ord. 194 § 106, 1983)  
16.04.070 - Applicability. 
A.  The provisions of this title shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a subdivision created and recorded prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, unless those lots are hereafter proposed for further subdivision. It is not intended by this title to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances or with private restrictions placed upon the property be it by deed, covenant or other private agreements, or with restrictive covenants running with the land. Only those improvement standards, applicable at the time a tentative subdivision or parcel map is approved, shall be imposed. 
B.  The provisions of this title shall not be applicable to: 
1.  The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar space within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings, mobilehome parks or trailer parks; 
2.  The financing or leasing of any parcel of land, or any portion thereof, in conjunction with the construction of commercial or industrial buildings, on a single parcel, unless the project is not subject to review under other local agency ordinances regulating design and improvement; 
3.  The financing or leasing of existing separate commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel; 
4.  Mineral, oil or gas leases; 
5.  Land dedication for cemetery purposes under the Health and Safety Code of the State of California; 
6.  Activities of the State Energy Resources Development and Conservation Commission established pursuant to Division 15 (commencing with Section 25000) of the Public Resources Code; 
7.  Administrative appeals within a state or local agency or to a state or local agency; 
8.  A lot line adjustment between two (2) or more existing adjacent parcels, where the land taken from one (1) parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created, provided the lot line adjustment is approved by the planning commission following the filing by the divider of an application therefore furnished by the City and the payment of an application processing fee in a sum as may be established by council resolution; 
9.  Boundary line or exchange agreements to which the State Lands Commission or a local agency holding a trust grant of tide and submerged lands is party; 
10.  Short-term leases (terminable by either party on not more than thirty (30) days notice in writing) of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation defined as such by Section 230 of the Public Utilities Code unless a showing is made in individual cases, under substantial evidences, that public policy necessitates the application of such regulations to such short-term leases in such individual cases. 
(Ord. 194 § 107, 1983)  
16.04.080 - Merger of contiguous parcels. 
A.  Two (2) or more contiguous parcels or units of land which have been created under the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or City ordinance enacted pursuant thereto or were not subject to such provisions at the time of their creation shall not merge by virtue of the fact that such contiguous parcels or units are held by the same owner, and no further proceedings under the Subdivision Map Act or this title shall be required for the purpose of sale, lease or financing of such contiguous parcels or units, or any item; except that if any one of such contiguous parcels or units held by the same owner does not conform to standards for minimum parcel size to permit use or development under the provisions of the zoning ordinance or other City ordinance and at least one of such contiguous parcels or units is not developed with a building for which a permit has been issued by the city building official or which was built prior to the time such permits were required by the City then such parcels shall be merged only to the extent necessary to form one (1) or more units which conform to the lot area, width and depth requirements as set by the City zoning ordinance for the purposes of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. 
B.  Any parcels or units of land merged prior to December 2, 1964 shall be deemed unmerged and separate parcels except where merger is necessary to form one (1) or more units which conform to the area, and lot width and depth requirements as set by the City zoning ordinance. 
C.  Whenever it has been determined that real property has merged pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act or this title, the secretary of the planning commission shall cause to be filed for record with the county recorder a notice of such merger specifying the names of the record owners and particularly describing the real property, provided, that at least thirty (30) days prior to the recording of the notice, the owner of the parcels or units to be affected by the merger shall be advised in writing of the intention to record the notice and specifying a time, date and place at which the owner may present evidence to the planning commission why such notice should not be recorded. 
(Ord. 194 § 108, 1983)  
16.04.090 - Separate maps—When required. 
A separate map shall be prepared for each subdivision where land is separated from other land in a parcel or holding by division other than a street, highway, approved private road, alley, railroad right-of-way, flood control right-of-way, canal or public utility right-of-way. 
(Ord. 194 § 109, 1983)  
16.04.100 - Control of design and improvement. 
Control of design and improvement of subdivisions is vested with the city council. 
(Ord. 194 § 110, 1983)  
16.04.110 - Map approval—Generally. 
Jurisdiction to approve tentative and final subdivision maps and tentative parcel maps within the City is vested with the city council. Authority to approve parcel maps conforming to approved tentative parcel maps is delegated to the city clerk. 
Where a development project consists of a subdivision pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act, the time limits established shall apply to the approval or disapproval of the tentative map, or the parcel map for which a tentative map is not required. 
(Ord. 194 § 111, 1983)  
16.04.120 - Detachment upon annexation or development. 
A.  Prior to the filing of a final map to subdivide any portion of annexation territory the area to be subdivided for development purposes shall be detached from Westlands Water District. 
B.  At any time territory is annexed to the City for residential or commercial development it shall be detached from Westlands Water District prior to development. 
C.  Any lands or parcels annexed to the City that remain in the Westlands Water District shall be detached therefrom prior to any development on a part or all thereof. Prior to any development shall mean before any building permit is issued. 
(Ord. 222 § 1, 1986)  
16.04.130 - Advisory agency. 
The planning commission is designated as the advisory agency to the city council on all matters related to the subdivision of land. 
(Ord. 194 § 112, 1983)  
16.04.140 - Delegation of powers and duties. 
Whenever, by the provisions of this title, a power of authority is given to, or where a duty is imposed upon any public officer, it may be exercised or performed by any deputy or departmental employee authorized by him pursuant to law unless it is expressly provided that it shall be exercised in person. 
(Ord. 194 § 113, 1983)  
Chapter 16.08 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.08.010 - Definitions. 
The definitions and meanings of words and phrases, which are defined in the Subdivision Map Act, are used in this title as defined in this chapter, unless from the context hereof it clearly appears that a different meaning is intended. The word "may" indicates an action which is permissive. The word "shall" indicates an action which is mandatory. All words in the singular shall include the plural, and plural, the singular. Each gender shall include the other. Each tense shall include the other tenses. 
"Abut" means to be contiguous to and in actual contact along a common line. 
"Access road" means a road which connects a subdivision to a public road. 
"Alley" means any dedicated way intended for vehicular service to the rear or the side of property served by a public road. 
"Approved" means approved by the city council or by the department having jurisdiction on such matters, unless otherwise specified. 
"Approved private road" means a strip of land approved by the city council for road purposes, which has not been dedicated or accepted as a public road and which connects a parcel of land with a public road. 
"Arterial," "local collector," "collector," and "local streets" mean roads designated as such in the circulation element of the general plan of the City, adopted by the city council. 
"Building official" means the building official for the City, duly appointed by the city council. 
"Building permit" means a permit granted for the construction, alteration, etc., of buildings pursuant to the Building Code of the City of Huron. 
"City" means the City of Huron. 
"City engineer" means the city engineer for the City, duly appointed by the city council. 
"City planner" means the city planner of the City, duly appointed by the city council. 
"Clerk" means the city clerk for the City, duly appointed by the city council. 
"Commission" means the City planning commission. 
"Community apartment" means an undivided interest in common in the land coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of an apartment unit which is part of a community apartment project. 
"Condominium" means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on such real property, such as an apartment, office or store. 
"Corner lot" means a lot situated at the intersection of two (2) or more streets, having an angle of intersection of not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
"Council" means the city council. 
"County recorder" means the county recorder of the County of Fresno. 
"Cul-de-sac" means a road which terminates in a permanent turn-around and which by design is not intended to continue beyond its terminal point. 
"Dead end road (stub road)" means a road which is terminated at the boundary line of the subdivision but which will be required to be extended at a later date to provide access to abutting land. 
"Dedicated road" means a right-of-way dedicated to the City for road purposes, and legally accepted as such by the City. 
"Design" means: 
1.  Street alignments, grades and widths; 
2.  Drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities including alignments and grades thereof; 
3.  Location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way; 
4.  Fire roads and firebreaks; 
5.  Lot size and configuration; 
6.  Traffic access; 
7.  Grading; 
8.  Land to be dedicated for park or recreation purposes; 
9.  Such other specific requirements in the plan and configuration of the entire subdivision as may be necessary or convenient to insure conformity to or implementation of the general plan or adopted specific plans. 
"Dividing strip" means a separation between opposite directional flows of traffic. It may also serve to separate a road or highway from the parallel frontage road which provides access to property. 
"Double frontage lot (or through lot)" means a lot having frontage on two (2) roads and having the right of access to both of those roads, but excluding corner lots. 
"Easement for public road" means a right-of-way offered to the City for road purposes by a division of land. Upon acceptance by the City, it is deemed a City road. 
"Existing lot or building site" means a designated lot or contiguous lots on a lawfully established subdivision map or record of survey so existing upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or a whole parcel of land under separate ownership so existing upon the effective date of said ordinance or such a lot or separate parcel of land thereafter lawfully created. 
"Expressway" means a highway for through traffic with full or partial control of access and generally with intersections at grade. 
"Final map" is the official map which is recorded by the county recorder indicating the divisions of land within the subdivision. It shall conform with the requirements of Chapters 16.20 and 16.24. 
"Freeway" means a highway for through traffic with full control of access and generally with grade separation at intersections. 
"Frontage" means that portion of a parcel of property which abuts on a public or approved private road. 
"Frontage road" (service road or outer highway) means those roads which parallel freeways, expressways, highways or other major streets, providing for access to abutting property or for circulation, and which are separated from the highway or street by a dividing strip. 
"General plan" means the long range, comprehensive general plan for the orderly development of the City, adopted by the planning commission and the city council, which may include any of the elements listed in the Government Code of the State. 
"Improvement plans" means the plans, profiles, cross sections, and specifications of all proposed improvements, including the information required by Chapter 16.28. 
"Improvement" refers to such street work and utilities to be installed, or agreed to be installed, by the subdivider of the land to be used for public or private streets, highways and easements as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final map or parcel map. 
"Improvement" also refers to such other specific improvements or types of improvements, the installation of which either by the subdivider, by public agencies, by private utilities, by any other entity approved by the city council, or by a combination thereof, is necessary or convenient to insure conformity to or implementation of the general plan, or any approved specific plan. 
"Improvement standards" means the same as "standard specifications." 
"Limited access strip" means a line or strip of land the right to cross which, by the public and adjoining property owners, has been conveyed or dedicated to some authorized public agency. 
"Local road" means any public road that is used or is intended to be used for the principal purpose of serving as access to abutting property. 
"Lot" means: 
1.  A parcel of real property with a separate and distinct number or other designation shown on a subdivision map recorded in the office of the county recorder; or 
2.  A parcel of real property delineated on an approved record of survey map or parcel map as filed in the office of the county recorder and, if required by the zoning ordinance, abutting at least one public road or approved private road. 
Lot, Reversed Corner. "Reversed corner lot" means a corner lot, the street side line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot upon which it rears. 
"Major street" means a street which, because of its design or location with respect to other streets and other sources of traffic, is used or is planned to be used, to carry heavy volumes of traffic through an urban area or between urban areas, which normally would require a street with four (4) or more lanes. 
"Map act" means the Subdivision Map Act as set forth in Title 7, Division 2, of the Government Code of the State of California. 
"Master plan" means the same as general plan. 
"Nonaccess line" means a line delineated on a subdivision map, or described in a deed, which is for the purpose of prohibiting access. 
"Outlot" means a lot designated alphabetically on the subdivision map for specific use or nonuse. 
"Parcel map" means a map prepared for acceptance by the City and the county recorder in accordance with an approved tentative parcel map as provided for in Chapter 16.24 and State laws. 
"Person" means and includes any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, receiver, syndicate, or any group or combination acting as a unit, and plural as well as the singular number. 
"Plan line" means a precise location for a future street right-of-way as shown on a specific plan. 
"Primary street" means a street which, because of its design or location with respect to other streets and other sources of traffic, is used or is planned to be used to carry moderately heavy volumes of traffic, which normally would require a four (4) lane undivided street. 
"Private road" means the same as approved private road. 
"Public road" means any State highway, County or City street, avenue, highway or road which is within the maintained road system of the public agency having jurisdiction thereof or to be included within the maintained road system by agreement between said agencies and the subdivider. 
"Remainder parcels" means that portion of a subdivision designated by the subdivider on the tentative map or tentative parcel map, which is not being subdivided for the purpose of sale, lease or financing. 
"Reserve strips" means wherever, in this chapter, strips are required or allowed either parallel with or at the end of streets, the same shall be offered for dedication for public street purposes at such time as the City or County shall accept dedication or acquire title to sufficient additional right-of-way from property outside of said subdivision so as to provide the ultimate right-of-way designated on the map, or certificate of dedication thereon and the terms of said dedication may provide that until such additional right-of-way is acquired, said reserve strip shall be reserved for the use of the subdivider and the successive owners of the respective lots in the subdivision which are adjacent to said reserve strip, except that no structure not ordinarily placed on public streets may be erected on such reserve strip· 
"Residential street" means a street which is used or planned primarily for access to abutting residential properties. 
"Restricted access strip" means a strip of land not less than one (1) foot in width for the purpose of regulating access to part width and dead-end roads until such time as such roads may be completed or extended. 
"Secondary street" means a street which is used or planned to be used to carry a volume of traffic less than a primary street, greater than a residential street, and which normally would require a lane street with four (4) lane capacity at important intersections. 
"Secretary of the planning commission" means the secretary of the planning commission of the City, duly appointed by the city council, and includes staff designated or assigned to the view of subdivision maps. 
Setback Line, Front Yard. "Front yard setback line" means the line which defines the depth of the required front yard. Said setback line shall parallel with the right-of-way line or highway setback line when one has been established. 
Setback Line, Rear Yard or Side Yard. "Rear yard or side yard setback line" means the line which defines the width or depth of the required rear or side yard. Said setback line shall be parallel with the property line, removed therefrom by the perpendicular distance prescribed for the yard in the zoning district. 
"Specific plan (precise plan)" means a plan for a specific area designated by the council, including all detailed regulations, conditions, programs and proposed legislation which shall be necessary or convenient for the systematic implementation of each element of the general plan. 
"Standard specifications" means the design and improvement requirements established by the city council applicable at the time of approval of a tentative subdivision map or tentative parcel map and as set forth in the City standard specifications manual or any amendments thereto. 
"Stub road" (dead-end road) means a road which is terminated at the boundary line of the subdivision but which will be required to be extended at a later date to provide access to abutting land. 
"Subdivider" means a person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who proposes to divide, divides or causes to be divided, real property into a subdivision for himself or for others, except that employees and consultants of such persons or entities, acting in such capacity are not subdividers. 
"Subdivision" means the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future except for leases of agricultural land for agricultural purposes. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easements or railroad rights-of-way. "Subdivision" includes a condominium project, as defined in Section 1350 of the Civil Code, a community apartment project, as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code, or the conversion of five (5) or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative, as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code. As used in this section, "agricultural purposes" means the cultivation of food or fiber or the grazing or pasturing of livestock. 
Any conveyance of land to a governmental agency, public entity, public utility or subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such public utility for rights-of-way shall not be considered a division of land for purposes of computing the number of parcels. 
"Supplementary standards" means the supplementary improvement standards adopted in accordance with Chapter 16.28. 
"Temporary turn around" means a paved area for turning vehicles at the end of a dead-end road, which is constructed either within the dedication right-of-way or upon a temporary easement, to be obliterated when said road is extended. 
"Tentative map" refers to a map made for the purpose of showing the design and improvement of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around it and need not be based upon an accurate or detailed final survey of the property. It is the map which is required to be presented to the secretary of the planning commission in order to officially commence the process of dividing land according to the requirements of this chapter. It shall conform with the requirements of Chapter 16.16. 
"Tentative parcel map" means the tentative map for a division of land defined in Chapter 16.24 which is required to be presented to the secretary of the planning commission in order to officially commence the process of dividing land according to the requirements of this chapter and shall conform with the requirements of Chapter 16.16. 
"Through lot" means a lot having frontage on two (2) parallel, or nearly parallel streets. 
"Use permit" means a permit for the use of land or buildings, issued pursuant to the zoning ordinance of the City. 
"Watercourse" means a strip of land over which water flows, having a definite bed, bank and channel wherein the water need not flow continually but usually flows in a particular direction. 
"Zoning district" means the district established by the zoning ordinance. 
Wherever a word or phrase used in the subdivision ordinance is not defined in the Map Act or in this chapter, and unless it appears otherwise from the context in which such work or phrase is used, it shall be construed harmonious with the definition or construction of such work or phrase as may be used in the zoning ordinance in effect at the time. 
(Ord. 194 §§ 201, 202, 1983)  
Chapter 16.12 - SUBDIVISION MAPS GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
16.12.010 - Examination and field check. 
Pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, the city engineer shall make such detailed examination of tentative and final maps and tentative parcel maps and parcel maps and such field checks, if any, as may be necessary to enable him or her to make the required certifications. 
(Ord. 194 § 301, 1983)  
16.12.020 - Rejection. 
The city council may deny a tentative or final map or a tentative parcel map if the proposed use is prohibited by any ordinance, statute, law or other regulation; and shall deny a map if it makes any of the following findings: 
A.  That the proposed subdivision is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans; 
B.  That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans; 
C.  That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development; 
D.  That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development; 
E.  That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat; 
F.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems; 
G.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public-at-large, for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the city council may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements for access or for use will be provided and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. 
(Ord. 194 § 302, 1983)  
16.12.030 - Filing—Requirements fulfilled. 
No map shall be considered as filed with the City until all of the fees and charges required by the City as pertains to the subdivision of land have been paid, the requirements of the City's California Environmental Quality Act Guidelines have been completed, and all applicable requirements of this title have been fulfilled or an application for an exception or for appropriate zoning has been filed for concurrent consideration. 
A final map or parcel map shall not be considered as filed until all fees, bonds and deposits then due have been made, all corrections have been made as required by the city engineer to the maps and improvement plans, if any, and the property has been annexed to the City and to any service areas or districts other than the City which are to provide necessary services. 
(Ord. 194 § 303, 1983)  
16.12.040 - Preliminary maps—Filing optional. 
A.  Prior to the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map, a subdivider may submit preliminary maps, plans and other information concerning a proposed or contemplated development to the secretary of the planning commission. Within thirty (30) days the secretary of the planning commission shall hold a conference with the subdivider and make recommendations as shall seem proper. The secretary of the planning commission shall recommend consultation by the subdivider with the appropriate public or private agencies. 
B.  All such recommendations are preliminary only and shall not be binding upon the City in any manner. 
C.  This is an optional procedure which may be elected by the subdivider and is not required by the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 194 § 401, 1983)  
Chapter 16.16 - TENTATIVE MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.16.010 - Filing required. 
A.  Any person desiring to subdivide land in the County shall first submit to the secretary of the planning commission ten (10) copies of the tentative map and the subdivider's statement. 
B.  Optional alternative tentative maps may be filed at the same time. Each filing or each alternative tentative map shall constitute a separate action. A filing fee as set forth in Chapter 16.32 shall be required for each tentative map filed. In the event that a new tentative map is filed or an approved tentative map is revised and subsequently approved by the City, the most recently approved tentative map shall constitute the only recognized tentative map in the consideration of the final map. 
(Ord. 194 § 501, 1983)  
16.16.020 - Checking for conformity with provisions. 
Prior to the filing of a tentative map, the subdivider shall submit the tentative map and the subdivider's statement, and any other information that the subdivider deems necessary to sufficiently describe the proposed development to the secretary of the planning commission for examination as to conformity with the provisions of this title. Where discrepancies exist, the secretary of the planning commission may return the map to the subdivider for correction, revision, or submission of a petition for exception. The tentative map shall be accepted for filing when it is in full compliance with the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 194 § 502, 1983)  
16.16.030 - Revised and alternate tentative map. 
Revised and alternate tentative maps shall contain thereon the word "Revised" or "Alternate" after the tentative tract number. 
(Ord. 194 § 503, 1983)  
16.16.040 - Form. 
The tentative map shall be clear and legible. The size of the sheet shall be eighteen (18) inches by twenty-six (26) inches. 
(Ord. 194 § 504, 1983)  
16.16.050 - Scale. 
A.  Tentative maps shall be to a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet; except that subdivisions with lots of two and one-half (2½) acres or greater may use a scale one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet. 
B.  The city engineer may require a scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet if complexity of detail so warrants. The maps shall be clearly and legibly reproduced. 
(Ord. 194 § 505, 1983)  
16.16.060 - Contents. 
The tentative map shall show and contain the following information: 
A.  The tract number (and tract name, if any); 
B.  Date of preparation, north point and scale; 
C.  Name, address and telephone number of the subdivider; the record owner, and the person or persons preparing the map; 
D.  A sufficient legal description of the land to define the boundaries of the proposed tract; 
E.  A site location map where necessary to locate the tract; 
F.  Approximate ties to section corner or other known point; 
G.  The boundary lines of the subdivision to be shown as required on the final map; 
H.  The approximate layout, dimensions and numbers of lots; 
I.  The approximate acreage of the subdivision; 
J.  Ownership division lines of abutting properties as shown on the latest assessor's parcel map and tract number (and name, if any) of adjoining subdivision; 
K.  Identification of lots in the proposed subdivision as to the existing proposed use. If property is to be used for more than one (1) purpose, the area, lot or lots proposed for each type of use shall be shown. Identification of proposed public uses, if any; 
L.  The approximate location of trees and the location and outline to scale of buildings and structures (wooded areas and orchards may be indicated as such without locating each individual tree) and a description of their proposed disposition. 
M.  The locations, names and existing right-of-way widths of all adjoining highways, roads and alleys. The centerline and gutterline elevations of the adjoining streets shall be shown at every change in grade; 
N.  The location, widths and approximate gradients of all highways, roads and alleys proposed within the tract; 
O.  Each road shown by its actual name or by a temporary name or letter for purposes of identification until the proper name of such road is determined; 
P.  The approximate radii of all curves; 
Q.  Location of marginal or dividing strips, if any; 
R.  The widths and approximate locations of all existing or proposed easements or rights-of-way within the subdivision or along its boundaries, whether public or private, for roads, railroads, drainage, stormwater, irrigation canals, sewers or public utility purposes; 
S.  Accurate contours shall be shown, drawn to intervals prescribed in the City standards adopted by the city council. Said contours shall be extended into adjacent property a sufficient distance to establish proper topographical relationships; 
T.  Approximate location of all areas subject to inundation or storm water, overflow and the locations, widths and direction of flow of all watercourses; 
U.  The proposed surface water drainage flow; 
V.  Elevation of existing sewer lines at points of proposed connection; 
W.  The source of water supply and the lot to be used for the community water supply, if any; 
X.  Proposed phasing of development. 
(Ord. 194 § 506, 1983)  
16.16.070 - Subdivider's statement. 
A subdivider's statement shall accompany the tentative map on a form provided by the secretary of the planning commission, and shall contain the following: 
A.  The total acreage of the tract, the total number of lots in the tract, and the minimum lot size (in square feet when less than an acre); 
B.  The existing and proposed use of the property; 
C.  The existing and proposed zoning on the property; 
D.  Existing structures on the property; 
E.  Existing easements on the property; 
F.  Statement regarding improvements with reasons for any modifications or exceptions to the provisions of this title; 
G.  Statement regarding type of street trees to be planted, with intervals of spacing; 
H.  Proposed drainage, flood control measures, and method of stormwater disposal; 
I.  Provisions for proposed fire hydrants, the proposed source of water supply, and the location and nature of sewerage disposal facilities; 
J.  Statement regarding other public utilities and services; 
K.  Statement regarding restrictive covenants; 
L.  Statement regarding whether the subdivider intends to file multiple final maps on the tentative maps; 
M.  Name, address, phone number and signature of the subdivider, owner, agent and engineer; 
N.  Certification by the owner that he or she is the owner of the property on the map as proposed for subdivision, has examined the map, and consents to its submission; 
O.  Deed restrictions, covenants or conditions, if any, which it may be proposed to impose on the property; 
P.  A soil report, as required by Section 16.20.040. 
(Ord. 194 § 507, 1983)  
16.16.080 - Tract number. 
A.  Before filing a tentative map, the subdivider or his or her authorized agent shall obtain from the Fresno County recorder the assignment of a number for the tract to be subdivided. These numbers shall be assigned in consecutive order. 
B.  When a tract number has been assigned, the subdivider shall plat the same upon each sheet of the tentative and final map of the subdivision, and the number shall not thereafter be changed or altered in any manner upon the tentative and final map of the subdivision unless and until a new number has been assigned in the manner provided above. 
(Ord. 194 § 508, 1983)  
16.16.090 - Distribution of copies. 
Copies of the map shall be transmitted to the following: 
A.  Planning commission (two (2) copies); 
B.  City council; 
C.  Affected regulatory agencies; and 
D.  Affected school districts, as provided in Section 16.16.100. 
(Ord. 194 § 509, 1983)  
16.16.100 - School district review. 
A.  Within ten (10) days of the filing of a tentative map, the secretary of the commission shall send a notice of the filing of the tentative map to the governing board of any elementary, high school, or unified school district within the boundaries of which the subdivision is proposed to be located. 
B.  Such notice shall contain information about the location of the proposed subdivision, the number of units, density and any other information which would be relevant to the affected school district. 
C.  The governing board of the school district may review the notice and may send a written report thereon to the City. If a written report is made by the governing board of the school district, the report shall indicate the impact of the proposed subdivision on the affected school district and shall make such recommendations as the governing board of the school district deems appropriate. If a written report is made by the governing board of the school district, such report shall be returned within twenty (20) working days of the date on which the notice was mailed to the school district for comment. 
D.  In the event that the governing board of a school district fails to respond within the twenty (20) day period, such failure to respond shall be deemed its approval of the proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. 194 § 510, 1983)  
16.16.110 - Agency review. 
Upon receipt of a filed copy of such tentative map, each review agency shall examine the map to ascertain if the subdivision proposed thereon conforms to the requirements coming within the authority scope of that agency and within fourteen (14) days after receipt thereof make a written report to the secretary of the planning commission. 
(Ord. 194 § 511, 1983)  
16.16.120 - Committee review. 
The city administrator, planning director, superintendent of public works, city building official, city engineer and chief of police shall be deemed to and are empowered to act as the subdivision review committee. The committee shall meet and shall formulate recommendations and requirements on the design and improvements of subdivisions. The subdivision review committee shall report its recommendation in writing to the planning commission and city council and to the subdivider at least three (3) days prior to any hearing or action on a tentative map by the planning commission or city council. 
(Ord. 194 § 512, 1983)  
16.16.130 - Planning commission hearing and recommendation. 
A.  Within fifty (50) days of the filing of a tentative map or forty-five (45) days after the certification of an environmental impact report (EIR) on the final map, with the secretary of the planning commission, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on said tentative map and, following the public hearing, take action by written resolution to recommend to the city council to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative map. 
B.  Notice of the time and place of any public hearing on a tentative map, including a general explanation of the tentative map and the area affected by it, shall be given by the planning commission or its secretary at least ten (10) calendar days before the hearing in the following manner: 
1.  The notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, published in the City of Huron and circulated in the City of Huron. 
2.  The notice shall be given by mail or delivery to all persons, including businesses, corporations or other public or private entities, shown on the latest equalized assessment roll as owning real property within three hundred (300) feet of the property which is the subject of the tentative map. 
3.  The notice shall be given by mail or delivery to all persons, including businesses, corporations or other public or private entities, who have in writing, requested said notice from the secretary of the planning commission, or whose property rights, in the judgement of the planning commission or its secretary, may be substantially affected, deprived or interfered with, as a result of a decision on a tentative map. 
C.  The following rules shall govern the conduct of public hearings held pursuant to this section. 
1.  Public hearings provided for in this section shall be held at the time and place for which such hearings were set and notices thereof given. 
2.  Any such hearing may be continued by the majority of the members present at any hearing who may fix the time and place to which such hearing may be continued, even in the absence of a quorum, in which case the presiding officer at such hearing shall publicly announce prior to the conclusion of the hearing, the time and place to which the hearing is to be continued, and no further notice shall be required. In the absence of all of the members of the commission, at the time and place which such hearing was set, it shall be deemed continued to the next regular meeting of the commission, and no further notice shall be required. 
3.  A majority in number of the total voting membership of the commission shall constitute a legal quorum for the purposes of conducting a hearing. 
4.  The recommendation of the commission on a tentative map shall be by a resolution of the commission, carried by the affirmative votes of not less than a majority of its total membership. A tie vote shall be considered a technical denial. 
5.  The commission shall have the authority to establish any reasonable rules of procedure for the conduct of such hearings. The commission may require any person who is to testify before it to be placed under oath, in which case the member presiding at such hearing shall be empowered to administer such oath. 
6.  The commission shall cause a written summary of all pertinent testimony heard at such public hearing, together with a record of the names and addresses of all persons testifying, to be prepared and filed with the papers relating to such matter. 
(Ord. 194 § 513, 1983)  
16.16.140 - Scope of consideration and report by commission. 
The commission, in its report to the city council, shall review the subdivision design and the map, and shall recommend the kind, nature and extent of the improvements and dedications to be required, and easements to be furnished by the subdivider. 
(Ord. 194 § 514, 1983)  
16.16.150 - City council hearing, decision and report. 
A.  The city council, at its regular meeting following receipt of the planning commission's report on a tentative map, shall fix the meeting date at which it will hold a public hearing on the tentative map. The public hearing shall be held, and a decision of the council to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the tentative map shall be made within thirty (30) days of receipt of the report of the planning commission. 
B.  Notice of the time and place of the city council hearing shall be given in the same manner as set forth in Section 16.16.130. 
C.  The decision of the city council on a tentative map shall be by written resolution, a copy of which shall be transmitted to the subdivider and the planning commission not later than ten (10) days following such decisions. 
(Ord. 194 § 515, 1983)  
16.16.160 - Hearing by council where no action taken by commission. 
If no action is taken by the commission within the maximum time allowed for the filing of its report, or any extension thereof, the council may upon its own motion consider said map at a hearing within ten (10) days, or at its next succeeding regular meeting. 
(Ord. 194 § 516, 1983)  
16.16.170 - Automatic approval—City council. 
If no action is taken by the city council to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative map within the time limits specified in Section 16.20.010, any authorized extension thereof, the tentative maps as filed, shall be deemed to be approved, insofar as it complies with the Subdivision Map Act and all City ordinances, and it shall be the duty of the city clerk to certify such approval. 
(Ord. 194 § 517, 1983)  
16.16.180 - Date of approval—Tentative map. 
The date of approval of the tentative map shall be deemed to be the date of adoption of the resolution of the council declaring approval or conditional approval of the tentative map; provided, that if the council shall fail to act on the tentative map and the approval thereof is certified by the clerk, the date of such approval shall be deemed to be upon the last day of the maximum period of time as would be allowed for action by the council as provided in this title. The date of such approval of the tentative map shall be certified by the clerk on the face of the tentative map. 
(Ord. 194 § 518, 1983)  
16.16.190 - Proceedings termination. 
A.  An approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall expire twenty-four (24) months after its approval or conditional approval, or after such additional period of time not to exceed an additional twelve (12) months. 
B.  The period of time specified in subsection A of this section shall not include any period of time during which a development moratorium, imposed after approval of the tentative map, is in existence; provided, however, that the length of the moratorium does not exceed five (5) years. 
Once a moratorium is terminated, the map shall be valid for the same period of time as was left to run on the map at the time that the moratorium was imposed. However, if the remaining time is less than one hundred twenty (120) days, the map shall be valid for one hundred twenty (120) days following the termination of the moratorium. 
C.  The period of time specified in subsection A of this section shall not include any period of time during which a lawsuit has been filed and is pending in a court of competent jurisdiction involving the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map if a stay of the time period is approved by the city council pursuant to this section. Within ten (10) days of the service of the initial petition or complaint in the lawsuit upon the City, the subdivider may apply to the City for a stay pursuant to the City adopted procedures. Within forty (40) days after receiving the application, the City may either stay the time period for up to five (5) years or deny the requested stay. 
D.  The expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall terminate all proceedings and no final map or parcel map of all or any portion of the real property included within the tentative map shall be filed with the city council pursuant to Section 66457 of the Subdivision Map Act without first processing a new tentative map. 
E.  Upon application of the subdivider filed prior to the expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map, the time at which the map expires may be extended by the city council or by the planning commission authorized to approve or conditionally approve tentative maps for a period or periods not exceeding a total of three (3) years. If the planning commission denies a subdivider's application for extension, the subdivider may appeal to the city council within fifteen (15) days after the planning commission has denied the extension. 
F.  For purposes of this section, a development moratorium shall include a water or sewer moratorium, as well as other actions of public agencies which regulate land use, development or the provision of services to the land, other than the public agency with the authority to approve or conditionally approve the tentative map, which thereafter prevents, prohibits or delays the approval of a final or parcel map. 
(Ord. 194 § 519, 1983)  
16.16.200 - Multiple final maps. 
Multiple final maps relating to an approved or conditionally approved tentative map may be filed prior to the expiration of the tentative map if: (a) the subdivider, at the time the tentative map is filed, informs the advisory agency of the local agency, of the subdivider's intention to file multiple final maps on such tentative map; or (b) after filing of the tentative map, the local agency and the subdivider concur in the filing of multiple final maps. In providing such notice, the subdivider shall not be required to define the number or configuration of the proposed multiple final maps. The filing of a final map on a portion of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall not invalidate any part of such tentative map. The right of the subdivider to file multiple final maps shall not limit the authority of the local agency to impose reasonable conditions relating to the filing of multiple final maps. 
(Ord. 194 § 520, 1983)  
16.16.210 - Extension of time limit. 
The time limit for acting and reporting on tentative maps as specified in Section 16.20.010 may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the planning commission or city council, as the case may be. 
(Ord. 194 § 521, 1983)  
Chapter 16.20 - FINAL MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.20.010 - Filing—Time limit. 
A.  Within twenty-four (24) months after the date of approval, or conditional approval, of the tentative map by the city council, or any extension thereof, the subdivider may cause the subdivision or any part thereof to be accurately surveyed and a final map to be prepared and filed. The final map shall conform to the tentative map, as approved, and shall comply with all provisions of this title. 
B.  The final map shall be submitted with the city clerk not less than sixty (60) days prior to the date by which the map must be recorded in order to permit the actions by the city engineer, the city council, and the county recorder as required. 
(Ord. 194 § 601, 1983)  
16.20.020 - Termination or extension of proceedings. 
A.  Failure to record a final map within twenty-four (24) months from the date of approval or conditional approval of the tentative map or within any extension of time thereof granted by the city council, shall terminate all proceedings. Before a final map may thereafter be recorded, a new tentative map shall be submitted. 
B.  Upon application by the subdivider, filed with the city clerk prior to the expiration date of the tentative approval, an extension of not more than twelve (12) months may be granted by the city council. 
(Ord. 194 § 602, 1983)  
16.20.030 - Filing—Procedure. 
A.  When Filed. The final map may be filed when it is completed and all required improvement plans and certificates except the approval certificate of the city council has been signed and acknowledged where necessary. (A final map shall not be considered as filed until the city engineer has reviewed and certified the map in accordance with procedures specified in Section 16.16.120.) 
B.  With Whom Filed. The filing shall be with the city council. 
C.  Documents Filed. 
1.  The original final map and seven (7) copies shall be filed. 
2.  Evidence of title, acceptable to the county recorder, shall be secured from a title company indicating that, as shown by the public records, the parties whose signatures appear on the map and consent to the recordation of the map are all the parties having a record title interest in the land being subdivided and whose signatures are required by the Subdivision Map Act. 
3.  Memorandum for the city engineer containing the following data shall accompany the map: 
a.  The total area of the tract submitted; 
b.  The total area in roads and the total lineal length of roads; 
c.  The total area in lots; 
d.  The total number of lots; 
e.  The area in parks, school sites or other lands offered for dedication or reserved for future public or quasi-public uses; 
f.  The proposed use of the lots; and 
g.  Total areas for each of the proposed uses. 
4.  Two (2) copies of the protective covenants, if any, that are to be recorded shall accompany the map. 
5.  Improvement plans shall be submitted showing all of the improvements required herein, and all others proposed to be installed by the subdivider, in, on, over or under any road, way, right-of-way, easement or parcel of land dedicated by the map. 
6.  All notes, sheets and drawings showing traverse closure and the computation of all distances, angles, and courses shown on the final map and ties to existing and proposed monuments, and adjacent subdivisions shall accompany the map when required by the city engineer. 
7.  All fees as hereinafter specified shall be paid. 
8.  A statement from the county tax collector shall be secured showing that there are no liens against the subdivision or any part thereof for unpaid taxes or special assessments collected as taxes, except taxes or special assessments not yet payable. 
9.  A statement shall be secured from the county auditor-controller giving his or her estimate of the amount of taxes and assessments which are a lien but which are not payable. 
10.  All necessary agreements or contracts, bonds and deposits as required by this title shall accompany the final map. 
(Ord. 194 § 603, 1983)  
16.20.040 - Preliminary soil report and geologic reports. 
A.  A preliminary soil report shall be prepared by a civil engineer who is registered by the State, based upon test borings or excavations unless waived as hereinafter provided. Said borings or excavations shall be taken at specific locations determined by the city engineer or at random locations if no specific locations are established. Not less than one (1) test shall be made for every forty (40) lots or ten (10) acres whichever represents the lesser area, and in no case shall there be less than two (2) borings for each subdivision. The city engineer may require additional tests when he or she determines the soil conditions within the subdivision are so varied that additional tests will be needed. If the city engineer has knowledge of the soil qualities of the subdivision, he or she may waive some or all of the borings. The borings shall be at least ten (10) feet in depth. The depth of borings shall be adjusted to represent soil profiles after any proposed lot grading and shall take into consideration the soil composition after excavations, fills and embankments have been completed. The preliminary soil report shall contain the following information: 
1.  The maximum amount of excavation and fill to be expected; 
2.  The location of foundations in relation to excavations and fills; 
3.  The expansive qualities of the soils encountered where foundations are to be placed thereon and shall state the percentage of swell of a soil section taken from a representative undisturbed core sample under a load of six hundred twenty-five (625) pounds per square foot, laterally restrained and compacted to ninety (90) percent of maximum density with moisture content below the shrinkage limit. The percentage of expansion shall be recorded after twenty-four (24) hours. If the swell of the sample exceeds three (3) percent, it shall be presumed that the soil involved is critically expansive and a soil investigation as required in subsection B of this section will be required; 
4.  Recommended bearing values for the soils; 
5.  Whether other soil problems exist which, if not corrected, could lead to structural defects; and 
6.  Copies of the test boring analysis. (Water well drilling logs shall not be substituted.) 
B.  Soil Investigations. If the preliminary soil report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils, or other soils or fills would be of such depth that foundations will not rest on original ground, a soil investigation shall be prepared for each lot in the subdivision by a civil engineer who is registered by the State to include: 
1.  The physical properties of subsurface formations; 
2.  The composition of subsurface soil and rock and groundwater conditions; 
3.  The stability of anticipated cut or fill slopes; 
4.  The general type of site grading; and 
5.  Recommendations on corrective actions which are likely to prevent structural damage to each dwelling to be constructed. These recommendations may include the requirement that the corrective work must be under the supervision of a registered civil engineer. 
The soil investigation shall be reviewed by the city engineer who shall approve the investigation if he or she determines that the recommended action is likely to present structural damage to each dwelling to be constructed. 
C.  Waiver of Soil Report. The city engineer may waive the preliminary soil report if he or she has knowledge of the soil qualities within the subdivision. 
D.  Approval Where Soil Problems Exist. The city council may approve the subdivision or portion thereof where soil problems exist if it determines that the recommended action is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure to be constructed, and as a condition to the issuance of any building permit, may require that the approved, recommended action be incorporated in the construction of each structure. 
E.  Notice of Soil or Geologic Report. When a soil report, a geologic report, or soil and geologic report have been prepared specifically for the subdivision, such fact shall be noted on the final map, together with the date of such report or reports, the name of the engineer making the soil report and geologist making the geologic report and a statement indicating that the reports are on file for public inspection with the city clerk. 
(Ord. 194 § 604, 1983)  
16.20.050 - Preparation—Licensed personnel. 
The final map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. All data, profiles and other engineering drawings submitted with the final map shall be prepared and signed by a registered civil engineer. 
(Ord. 194 § 605, 1983)  
16.20.060 - Title of map. 
The title of each final map shall consist of a tract number conspicuously placed at the top of the sheet followed by the words "In the City of Huron." 
(Ord. 194 § 606, 1983)  
16.20.070 - Property description. 
Below the title shall appear a description of all the property being subdivided, by reference to such map or maps of the property shown thereon as previously recorded or filed in the county recorder's office or previously filed with the county recorder pursuant to a final judgement in any action in partition, or previously filed in the office of the county recorder under authority of Chapter 3, Part 2 of Division 4 of the Business and Professional Code, or by reference to the plat of any United States Survey. 
Each reference, in such description, to any tract or subdivision shall be spelled out and worded identically with the original records and must show a complete reference to the book and page of records of the county recorder. The description shall also include reference to any abandonment with the date, book and page of records of the county recorder. 
(Ord. 194 § 607, 1983)  
16.20.080 - Form of the final map. 
The final map shall conform to all of the following provisions: 
A.  It shall be clearly and legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by process guaranteeing permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester base film (provided, that if ink is used on polyester base film, ink surface shall be coated with a substance to assure permanent legibility), including certificates and acknowledgements which may also be legibly stamped upon the map with opaque ink. 
B.  The size of each sheet shall be eighteen (18) by twenty-six (26) inches. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entire blank margin of one (1) inch. 
(Ord. 194 § 608, 1983)  
16.20.090 - Preparation—Scale—Numbering. 
A.  The scale of the map shall be one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet or a decimal fraction or a multiple of one hundred (100) feet. 
B.  Each sheet shall be numbered, the relation of one (1) sheet to another clearly shown, and the total number of sheets used shall be set forth on each sheet. 
C.  The exterior boundary of the land included within the subdivision shall be indicated by a one-sixteenth ( 1/16 ) inch bold line. 
D.  The tract number, scale and north point shall be shown on each sheet. 
E.  The map shall show the definite location of the original parcel or parcels, and particularly its relation to surrounding surveys. 
(Ord. 194 § 609, 1983)  
16.20.100 - Certificates and acknowledgements. 
Certificates and acknowledgements as are required by this title and the Subdivision Map Act shall appear on the title sheet of the final map, unless their omission is permitted in the manner provided by the Subdivision Map Act. 
When a soil report has been prepared, this fact shall be noted on the final map as specified in Section 66434(f) of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 194 § 610, 1983)  
16.20.110 - Lots and parcels designated. 
A lot shall be shown in its entirety on one (1) sheet: 
A.  Designation. The final map shall particularly define, delineate and designate all lots intended to be reserved for private purposes, all parcels offered for dedication for any purpose, and any private roads, with all dimensions, boundaries and courses clearly shown and defined in every case. Parcels offered for dedication other than for roads, alleys, pedestrian walkways, water lots or easements shall be designated by number. 
B.  Lot Numbers. The lots shall be numbered consecutively beginning with the numeral "1," and shall continue without omission or duplication throughout the entire tract, except that, the city engineer may require that lot numbering for adjoining tracts having similar names begin with the number following the number of the last lot of the previously recorded adjoining subdivision. 
C.  Area Designation. Each lot containing an area of one (1) acre or more shall have designated thereon the net acreage of such lot shown not less accurately than to the nearest one-hundredth ( 1/100 ) of an acre. 
D.  The location of a designated remainder parcel shall be indicated, but need not be indicated as a matter of survey but only by deed reference to the existing boundaries of such remainder if such remainder has a gross area of five (5) acres or more. 
(Ord. 194 § 611, 1983)  
16.20.120 - Bearings—Length of lines—Curve data. 
A.  The bearing and length of each lot line, block and boundary line shall be shown on the final map; provided, that when bearings or lengths of lot lines in any series of lots are the same, such bearings or lengths may be omitted from each interior parallel lot line of such series. Each required bearing and length shall be shown in full and no ditto mark or other designation of repetition shall be used. 
B.  The length, the radius, the total central angle of each curve, and the central angle and length of each segment within each lot shall be shown thereon. 
C.  The distances and bearings on the side lines of lots which are cut by easements shall be so arrowed or shown as to indicate clearly the actual length of each lot line. 
(Ord. 194 § 612, 1983)  
16.20.130 - Highways, roads and public use areas. 
A.  Data Required. 
1.  For each highway and road, the following shall be shown: 
a.  Width of existing right-of-way; 
b.  Width of portion to be dedicated, if any; 
c.  Centerline with right-of-way width on each side; and 
d.  Centerline data, as follows: 
i.  Distance between centerlines of streets and points of tangency, 
ii.  Length of each tangent, 
iii.  Radius, 
iv.  Central angle, 
v.  Length of each curve. 
2.  For each alley and pedestrian walkway, the following shall be shown: 
a.  Total right-of-way width; and 
b.  Bearings and distances as needed. 
3.  For each water lot and other parcel offered for public or private use, the following shall be shown: 
a.  The intended use; and 
b.  Dimensions of parcel (with bearings and distances as needed). 
B.  Nonaccess Line. Nonaccess lines shall be shown on the final map. The certificate shall indicate therein where direct access rights are being relinquished. 
C.  Road Names. Each road shown on the final map shall have a name. The road name shall be subject to approval by the city council. 
Where a road within the subdivision coincides with an alignment for which the city council has previously designated a street name, the same street name shall be shown on the final map. 
Each road which is to be dedicated, which is a continuation of, or approximately the continuation of any existing dedicated road or way, shall be given the same name as such existing road. 
The words "avenue," "boulevard," "place" or other designation of any road or way shall be spelled out in full on the final map, and have a proper indication of north, south, east or west as a prefix thereto. 
D.  Dedication. If a highway, road, alley, pedestrian walkway, water lot or other parcel intended for public use is being dedicated by a final map, it shall be properly designated on the map and set out in the owner's certificate of dedication on the map. 
E.  Private Roads. The same data shall be shown for private roads to define their boundaries as is required for public roads in subsection A of this section, and also sufficient mathematical data to show clearly the portion of each lot within such road. Private roads shall be designated by name and shall have inserted within the limits thereof the words "Not a Public Road," and shall be shown on the map by heavy dashed lines. 
F.  Private Roads—Dedication. If a road is approved by the city council as a private road, it shall be dedicated for the private use of the lot owners which it is intended to serve. Where the approved private road shall be intended to serve a lot or lots, each consisting of less than twenty (20) acres, that road shall be offered for dedication for public use but rejected at the time of the approval of the final map. 
(Ord. 194 § 613, 1983)  
16.20.140 - Easements. 
A.  Location, Width and Ties. The final map shall show the width, the sidelines or centerlines, and sufficient ties to definitely locate each easement to which the lots in the subdivision are subject. If the location of such easement cannot be definitely determined, a statement shall be placed on the map acknowledging the existence of such easement. 
B.  Designation, Votes and Figures. Each easement shown for any canal, ditch, storm drain, sewer or utility shall be designated by a fine dashed line and clearly labeled and identified with all notes and figures pertaining thereto subordinates in form and appearance to those relating to the subdivision itself. If the easement is of record, the record reference shall be shown. 
C.  Dedication. If an easement is being dedicated by a final map, it shall be properly set out in the owner's certificate of dedication on the map. 
(Ord. 194 § 614, 1983)  
16.20.150 - County or city boundary lines. 
Each county or city boundary lines crossing or adjoining the subdivision shall be shown upon the final map and such line shall be clearly designated and tied in. No lot shall be divided by a County, City, school or special district boundary line. 
(Ord. 194 § 615, 1983)  
16.20.160 - Survey monuments. 
The final map shall show the location and type of all monuments placed in accordance with Section 16.20.220. 
(Ord. 194 § 616, 1983)  
16.20.170 - Land subject to inundation. 
A.  Floodwater. If any portion of the land within the subdivision shown on any final map is subject to inundation or flood hazard by stormwaters, such fact and portion shall be clearly shown by a prominent note on each sheet of such final map. 
B.  Overflow or Ponding. If any portion of such land is or will be subject to periodic sheet overflow, or ponding of local or foreign stormwater, the city engineer, after consulting with the design engineers, shall so inform the State Real Estate Commissioner. 
C.  Natural Watercourses. The location of any watercourse, channel, stream or creek which functions as a drainageway shall be shown on the final map. In the event said watercourse, channel, stream or creek is to be relocated, only the new location need be shown on the final map. 
(Ord. 194 § 617, 1983)  
16.20.180 - Adjacent subdivisions. 
The final map shall show the tract number (and name, if any) of abutting subdivisions. 
(Ord. 194 § 618, 1983)  
16.20.190 - Subdivision shown in phases. 
The recordation of the final map and the construction of subdivision improvements may be performed in two (2) or more phases; provided, that each phase must have a separate tract number; and further provided, that the subdivider, at the time the tentative map was filed with the secretary of the planning commission, indicated on the subdivider's statement that is required pursuant to Section 16.16.070, his or her intention to file multiple final maps. No bonds, deposits, payments or other security need be furnished for the deferred phase or phases until the final map for the deferred phase or phases is submitted to the city council for approval. Final maps for all phases shall be filed with the council within the time limits set forth in this chapter for the filing of a final map. 
(Ord. 194 § 619, 1983)  
16.20.200 - Passage of title. 
Title to dedicated property shall pass upon its acceptance by the city council and recordation of the final map. The responsibility for maintenance of improvements shall not pass to the City until the improvements have been accepted by the city council pursuant to Section 941 of the Streets and Highway Code of the State. 
(Ord. 194 § 620, 1983)  
16.20.210 - Offers of dedication—Rejection. 
If at the time the final map is approved, any streets, paths, alleys, rights-of-way for local transit facilities such as bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing pads and similar items, which directly benefit the residents of a subdivision, or storm drainage easements are rejected, the offer of dedication shall remain open and the council may by resolution at any later date, and without further action by the subdivider, rescind its action and accept and open the streets, paths, alleys, rights-of-way for local transit facilities such as bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing pads and similar items, which directly benefit the residents of a subdivision, or storm drainage easements for public use, which acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
(Ord. 194 § 621, 1983)  
16.20.220 - Offers of dedication—Termination and abandonment. 
A.  Offers of dedication, which are covered by Section 16.20.210, may be terminated and abandoned in the same manner as prescribed for the abandonment or vacation of streets by Part 3 (commencing with Section 8300) of Division 9 of the Streets and Highways Code. 
B.  Except as provided in Sections 66499.16, 66499.17 and 66499.18 of the Subdivision Map Act, if a resubdivision or reversion to acreage of the tract is subsequently filed for approval, any offer of dedication previously rejected shall be deemed to be terminated upon the approval of the map by the council. 
(Ord. 194 § 622, 1983)  
16.20.230 - Survey procedures. 
A.  Accuracy. The procedure and practice of all survey work done on any subdivision, in the preparation of a final map, shall conform to the accepted standards of the engineering profession. The accuracy of all boundary surveys done in connection with any subdivision shall have a precision of one in ten thousand (1:10,000). 
B.  Existing Centerlines. In the event the city engineer, the State Highway Engineer, or the county director of public works has established the centerline of any street or alley in or adjoining a subdivision, the final map shall show such centerline and the monuments which determine its position. If determined by ties, that fact shall be stated upon the final map. 
C.  Existing Monuments. Each final map shall fully and clearly show and identify such monuments or other evidence determining the boundaries of the subdivision as were found on the ground, together with sufficient corners of adjoining subdivisions, by lot and block number, tract name and place of record, or by section, township and range, or other proper designation as may be necessary to locate precisely the limits of the subdivision and to permit the survey to be retraced. 
D.  New Monuments. 
1.  The location, size and depth of all monuments placed in making the survey shall be shown and, if any were reset by ties, that fact shall be shown. The monuments on the exterior boundary of the subdivision, except those within construction zones, shall be placed prior to the approval of the final map. All interior monuments shall be set subsequent to the completion of the subdivision improvements, and security shall be presented by the subdivider as provided for in Section 66496 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
2.  Notice of setting final monuments shall be given and payment to the engineer or surveyor for setting of final monuments shall be made as provided by Section 66497 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
3.  Monuments shall be placed and shall be of the type specified by the City's improvement standards. 
4.  The city engineer may allow the use of off-set monuments, properly tied to reference monuments, when necessary due to terrain, waterways, or other monuments other than those specified in subdivisions 1 and 2 of this subsection. 
E.  Monuments—Replacement. Before street improvements are accepted, all existing monuments disturbed by the placement of any improvements shall be reset. 
F.  Bench Marks. Bench marks shall be set at locations required by the city engineer. The datum for the area within the City shall be based upon datum established by the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey Sea Level Datum 1929, as amended. 
G.  Standard Plaque—Numbering and Location Information. Identification of monuments and bench marks shall be through the use of standard plaque. 
Descriptions of all monuments and bench marks shall be furnished to the city engineer for inclusion in his or her records. 
H.  California Coordinate System. All surveys required by this chapter, or necessary to the subdivision of land, shall conform to the California Coordinate System when required, each final map shall show the California coordinate of every monument, and all California coordinates shall be used and shown on all traverse closure sheets, and other notes and ties which are required by Section 16.20.030. 
I.  Mathematical Accuracy. The blocks and lots of each final map or approved map of record shall have a mathematical accuracy of closure to one in ten thousand (1:10,000). 
(Ord. 194 § 623, 1983)  
16.20.240 - Review by city engineer. 
A.  Upon receipt of the final map, the city clerk shall refer five (5) copies of the map, accompanied by the memorandum for the city engineer and one (1) copy of the protective covenants, to the city engineer for review and report. 
B.  The city engineer shall refer all easements for public utilities, including anchorage easements, to the proper public utility for review and recommendation. 
C.  The city engineer shall check and determine the correctness of surveying data, plans, profiles and specifications of improvements, certificates of dedication, acceptances of dedication and acknowledgements, and such other matters as require checking to insure compliance with this title. 
D.  If the final map and all accompanying materials are in the correct form prescribed by this title, and the matters shown thereon are sufficient, their correctness shall be certified on the map by the city engineer by his or her signature within twenty (20) days of receipt. 
E.  The city engineer shall thereupon transmit said map together with other materials to the city clerk for presentation to the city council. 
(Ord. 194 § 624, 1983)  
16.20.250 - City council—Decision. 
A.  Approval of Map. 
1.  The city council shall, at the meeting at which it receives the map, or at its next regular meeting after the meeting at which it receives the map, approve the map if it is in conformity with all the requirements of this title, and the Subdivision Map Act applicable at the time of approval or conditional approval of the tentative map and any rulings made thereunder, or if it does not so conform, disapprove the map. 
2.  Approval by the city council shall at that time include, but shall not be limited to, the acceptance or rejection of any or all offers of any roads or easements, requirements that the subdivider agree to improve the roads and easements. If at the time the final map is approved, any streets, paths, alleys or storm drainage easements are rejected, the offer of dedication shall remain open, and the city council may by resolution at any later date, and without further action by the subdivider rescind its action and accept and open the streets, paths, alleys or storm drainage easements for public use, which acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
3.  Upon approval of the map by the city council by resolution, the city clerk shall deliver the map duly certified to the county recorder for recordation. 
B.  Disapproval of Map. 
1.  If the city council determines either that the map is not in conformity with the requirements of this title, or the approved tentative map, or the proposed improvements do not meet City improvement standards, the city council shall by resolution disapprove such final map, specifying its reason or reasons therefore, and the city clerk shall, in writing, advise the subdivider of such disapproval and said reason or reasons. 
2.  The subdivider may file a new final map with the city clerk, altered to conform to all the requirements of this title. 
(Ord. 194 § 625, 1983)  
Chapter 16.24 - PARCEL MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.24.010 - General provisions and applicability. 
A.  Governing Provisions. The design, improvement and survey data for divisions of land requiring parcel maps and/or tentative parcel maps, and the procedure to be followed in securing official approval for said maps, shall be governed by the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and by the provision of this title. 
B.  Applicability. A parcel map shall be filed and recorded for any subdivision for which a tentative and final map is not required by the Subdivision Map Act, except where the requirement for a parcel map is waived as provided by Section 16.24.030, and except for subdivisions created by short term leases (terminable by either party on not more than thirty (30) days notice in writing) of a portion of an operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation defined as such by Section 230 of the Public Utilities Code or for land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity or public utility, or to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such public utility for rights-of-way; provided, however, that upon a showing made to the planning commission based upon substantial evidence that public policy necessitates such a map, this exception shall not apply. 
(Ord. 194 § 701, 1983)  
16.24.020 - Tentative parcel maps. 
A.  Filing. The provisions of Chapter 16.16 shall govern the filing of tentative parcel maps. 
B.  Application Form. Application for the approval of a tentative parcel map shall be made upon the form provided by the secretary of the planning commission. The application shall contain the following information: 
1.  A legal description of the whole parcel proposed to be divided; 
2.  Existing use of the parcel to be divided; 
3.  The proposed use of the parcels to be created; 
4.  The existing and proposed zoning on the parcel to be divided; 
5.  The source of domestic water supply and the proposed method of sewage disposal; 
6.  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant and owners; 
7.  Certification by the owner that he or she is the owner of the property on the map as proposed for subdivision, has examined the map and consents to its submission; 
8.  A preliminary title report describing the status of all interests in the parcel to be divided shall be attached thereto. 
(Ord. 194 § 702, 1983)  
16.24.030 - Waiver of parcel map. 
A.  Application. A subdivider may, at the time of filing of a tentative parcel map, file a request for waiver of the requirement for a parcel map. Such a request shall be filed with the secretary of the planning commission in the form of an application therefore furnished by the City. 
B.  Finding Required. The city council shall waive the requirement for the filing of a parcel map if, after consideration of the tentative parcel map, information submitted therewith, the report of the planning commission, and any such investigation as the commission may determine necessary for the purposes of making its decision, it finds that all of the following conditions have been met: 
1.  That the subdivider has complied with the provisions of Section 16.24.020(B); 
2.  That adequate monuments exist in the field which appear of record in the office of the county recorder to permit the retracement of boundaries for each parcel to be created; 
3.  That no dedications of right-of-way or easements are offered or required; 
4.  That all onsite and offsite improvements as required for parcel maps by Section 16.24.050 have been completed; 
5.  That the proposed division of land complies with requirements as to area, design, floodwater drainage control, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection and other requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter. 
C.  Waiver Certificates. The instrument evidencing the city council's waiving the requirement for a parcel map shall be known as a waiver certificate which shall be prepared by the subdivider and shall consist of the following form, matters and attachments: 
1.  A description of the boundary of the property proposed to be subdivided; 
2.  A property plat map prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black; 
3.  The location of all division lines and the exterior boundary of the land included within the subdivision shall be indicated by distinctive lines and clearly so designated; 
4.  The map shall be signed and sealed by the registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor; 
5.  A certificate shall be signed and acknowledged by the parties having record title interest, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the waiver certificate; 
6.  The size of each sheet shall be eight and one-half (8½) by eleven (11) or thirteen (13) inches. An entirely blank margin of two (2) inches shall be left at the top of each sheet. 
D.  Filing of Waiver Certificate. 
1.  The waiver certificate shall be submitted to the city clerk for his or her examination prior to filing, together with all necessary fees for the recordation of the waiver certificate and evidence that all fees as hereinafter required have been paid. The city clerk shall examine the certificate of waiver, and if he or she finds the same to be substantially in the form required by this chapter, and in conformity with the conditions imposed by the city council in connection with the approval of the tentative parcel map, he or she shall accept the same for filing and shall then transmit the same to the city engineer, except where the requirement for a parcel map is waived by local ordinance, a tentative map may be required. 
2.  Within twenty (20) days after receiving the waiver certificate or with such additional time as may be reasonably necessary, the city engineer shall determine whether the waiver certificate is technically correct and conforms with the approved tentative parcel map. If approved, he or she shall so certify upon the waiver certificate. 
3.  After affixing his or her signature upon the waiver certificate, the city engineer shall deliver the certificate to the city clerk who shall present the certificate to the county recorder for filing. When the certificate is presented to the county recorder and is accepted by him or her, he or she shall file and index the same in the official records of the County. 
E.  Waiver of the parcel map shall not preclude the payment of fees as provided by Section 16.40.010. Said fees shall be calculated in the same manner as though a parcel map had been required and shall be paid prior to the filing of the waiver certificate with the city clerk. 
(Ord. 194 § 703, 1983)  
16.24.040 - Parcel maps. 
A.  Map Validity. No subdivision that is governed by the provisions of this title shall be deemed valid until and unless it conforms to the applicable provisions of this title and has been so certified by the city clerk and referred to and filed with the county recorder. 
B.  Proceedings Termination. 
1.  An approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map shall expire twenty-four (24) months after its approval or conditional approval, or after such additional period of time not to exceed an additional twelve (12) months. 
2.  The expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map shall terminate all proceedings and no parcel map of all or any portion of the real property included within such tentative parcel map shall be filed with the city council pursuant to Section 66457 of the subdivision map act without first processing a new tentative parcel map. 
3.  Upon application of the subdivider, filed prior to the expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map, the time at which the map expires may be extended for a period not exceeding a total of three (3) years. 
C.  Parcel Map Withdrawal. 
1.  In the event the applicant wishes to terminate his or her application prior to the recordation of the parcel map, he or she shall transmit his or her request in writing to the secretary of the planning commission. Where an agreement to construct improvements has been executed, the city council may release the applicant from his or her agreement to improve and release to him or her any surety bond or cash deposit which he or she may have posted upon completion of necessary abandonment proceedings; 
2.  In the event the parcel map has been recorded with the county recorder, a revised parcel map may be prepared in the manner prescribed in this chapter for an original parcel map, and the revised parcel map shall supersede any previous parcel map. 
D.  Parcel Map—Form and Content. The subdivider shall file five (5) copies of the parcel map with the city clerk not less than sixty (60) days prior to the date on which the map must be recorded. The format and content of the final map shall be as prescribed in the following provisions and the Subdivision Map Act. 
1.  The parcel map shall be prepared by or under direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed surveyor. 
2.  It shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester base film. Certificates, affidavits and acknowledgements may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on polyester base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility. 
3.  The size of each sheet shall be eighteen (18) by twenty-six (26) inches. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one (1) inch. 
4.  The scale of the map shall be: one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet; except that subdivisions with lots of two and one-half (2½) acres or greater may use a scale of one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet, or the city engineer may require one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet if complexity of detail so warrants. 
5.  When the parcel map consists of more than two (2) sheets, a key map drawn to a scale of one (1) inch equals one thousand (1,000) feet shall be placed on sheet number one (1) indicating the relationship among all sheets. The particular number of each sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown. 
6.  The title of each parcel map shall consist of a parcel map number conspicuously placed on the sheet followed by the words "consisting of ... sheets" (showing the number thereof) followed by the words "In the City of Huron". There shall appear a description of all the property being subdivided, by reference to such map or maps of the property shown thereon as previously recorded or filed with the county recorder pursuant to a final judgement in any action in partition, or previously filed in the office of the county recorder under authority of Chapter 3, Part 2 of Division 4 of the Business and Professions Code, or by reference to the plat of any United State Survey. Each reference, in such description, to any tract or subdivision shall be spelled out and worded identically with the original records thereof and must show a complete reference to the book and page of records of the county recorder. The description shall also include reference to any abandonment with the date, book and page of records of the county recorder. 
7.  All survey and mathematical information and data necessary to locate all monuments and to locate and retrace any and all interior and exterior boundary lines appearing thereon shall be shown, including bearings and distances of straight lines, and radii and arc length or chord bearings and length of all curves, and such information as may be necessary to determine the location of the centers of curves and ties to existing monuments used to establish the subdivision boundaries. 
8.  Each street shall be named. 
9.  The exterior boundary of the land included within the subdivision shall be indicated by distinctive symbols and clearly so designated. The map shall show the definite location of the subdivision, and particularly its relation to surrounding surveys. The location of a designated remainder parcel shall be indicated, but need not be indicated as a matter of survey but only by deed reference to the existing boundaries of such remainder if such remainder has a gross area of five (5) acres or more. 
10.  A lot shall be shown in its entirety on one (1) sheet. The parcel map shall particularly define, delineate and designate all parcels intended to be reserved for private purposes, all parcels offered for dedication for any purpose, and any private roads, with all dimensions, boundaries and courses clearly shown and defined in every case. Parcels offered for dedication other than for roads, alleys, pedestrian walkways, water lots or easements shall be designated. The parcels shall be numbered consecutively and shall continue without omission or duplication throughout the entire subdivision. Each parcel containing an area of one (1) acre or more, excluding public easements of record, shall have designated thereon the net acreage of such lot shown not less accurately than to the nearest one-hundredth ( 1/100 ) of an acre. 
11.  The map shall conform to any additional survey and map requirements of local ordinances. 
12.  When a soils report, geologic report or soils and geologic report has been prepared specifically for the subdivision, each report shall be kept on file for public inspection by the City or County having jurisdiction. 
13.  Whenever a certificate or acknowledgment is made by separate instrument, there shall appear on the final map a reference to the separately recorded document. This reference shall be completed by the county recorder. 
14.  A certificate, signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title interest in the real property subdivided, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the final map is required, except as follows: 
a.  Neither a lien for State, County, municipal or local taxes, nor for special assessments, nor a trust interest under bond indentures, nor mechanics' liens constitute a record title interest in land for the purpose of this title. 
b.  The signature of either the holder of beneficial interests under trust deeds or the trustee under such trust deeds, but not both, may be omitted. The signature of either shall constitute a full and complete subordination of the lien of the deed of trust to the map and any interest created by the map. 
c.  Signatures of parties owning the following types of interests may be omitted if their names and the nature of their respective interests are stated on the final map: 
i.  Rights-of-way, easements or other interests which cannot ripen into a fee, except those owned by a public entity, public utility, or subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such public utility for rights-of-way. If, however, the city council or planning commission determines that division and development of the property in the manner set forth on the approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map will not unreasonably interfere with the free and complete exercise of the public entity or public utility right-of-way or easement, the signature of such public entity or public utility may be omitted. Where such determination is made, the subdivider shall send, by certified mail, a sketch of the proposed final map, together with a copy of this section, to any public entity or public utility which has previously acquired a right-of-way easement. 
If the public entity or utility objects to either: (i) recording the final map without its signature; or (ii) the determination of the city council or planning commission that the division and development of the property will not unreasonably interfere with the full and complete exercise of its right-of-way or easement, it shall so notify the subdivider and the city council or planning commission within thirty (30) days after receipt of the materials from the subdivider. 
If the public entity or utility objects to recording the final map without its signature, the public entity or utility so objecting may affix its signature to the final map within thirty (30) days of filing its objection with the city council or planning commission. 
If the public entity or utility either does not file an objection with the city council or planning commission; or fails to affix its signature within thirty (30) days of filing its objection, to recording the map without its signature, the city may record the final map without such signature. 
If the public entity or utility files an objection to the determination of the city council or planning commission that the division and development of the property will not unreasonably interfere with the exercise of its right-of-way or easement, the city council or planning commission shall set the matter for public hearing to be held not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days of receipt of the objection. At such hearing, the public entity or public utility shall present evidence in support of its position that the division and development of the property will unreasonably interfere with the free and complete exercise of the objector's right-of-way or easement. 
If the city council or planning commission finds, following such hearing, that the development and division will in fact unreasonably interfere with the free and complete exercise of the objector's right-of-way easement, it shall set forth those conditions whereby such unreasonable interference will be eliminated and upon compliance with such conditions by the subdivider, the final map may be recorded with or without the signature of the objector. If the city council or planning commission finds that the development and division will in fact not unreasonably interfere with the free and complete exercise of the objector's right-of-way or easement, the final map may be recorded without the signature of the objector, notwithstanding its objections thereto. 
Failure of the public entity or public utility to file an objection pursuant to this section shall in no way affect its rights under a right-of-way easement. 
ii.  Rights-of-way, easements or reversions, which by reason of changed conditions, long disuse or laches appear to be no longer of practical use or value and signatures are impossible or impractical to obtain. A statement of the circumstances preventing the procurement of the signatures shall also be stated on the map. 
iii.  Interests in or rights to minerals, including but not limited to oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances. 
d.  Real property originally patented by the United States or by the State of California, which original patent reserved interest to either or both of such entities, may be included in the final map without the consent of the United States or the State of California thereto or to dedications made thereon. 
15.  A certificate for the city clerk shall be required where dedications are offered and shall certify the action of the city council to accept or reject the proposed dedications. 
16.  Evidence of title, acceptable to the county recorder, shall be secured from a title company indicating that, as shown by public records, the parties whose signatures appear on the map and consent to the recordation of the map are all the parties having a record title interest in the land being subdivided whose signatures are required by the Subdivision Map Act. 
E.  Survey Data Requirements for Parcel Maps. 
1.  The survey data requirements for parcel maps shall be the same as the requirements prescribed for final subdivision maps in this title. 
2.  A parcel map may be compiled from available record or filed data when sufficient survey information exists on filed maps and when the location of any boundary of the parcel map either by monuments or possessory lines is certain. If there is not sufficient survey information on filed maps and when the location of the boundary of the parcel map is uncertain, a field survey shall be made. 
F.  Examination of Parcel Map—City Clerk. The city clerk shall examine the parcel map, and if he or she finds the same to be substantially in the form required by this title, and in conformity with conditions imposed by the city council in connection with the approval of the tentative parcel map, he or she shall accept the same for filing and shall then transmit the same to the city engineer. 
G.  Examination of Parcel Map—City Engineer. The city engineer shall examine the parcel map and it shall be certified by him or her if he or she shall find that such map is substantially the same as the approved tentative parcel map and that the map is technically correct and in proper form as required by this title and the Subdivision Map Act. Review of the parcel map shall be completed by the city engineer within twenty (20) days after receiving the map or within such additional time as may be reasonably necessary. 
H.  Verification of Improvements. If the subdivider states that the required improvements, if there be any, or any part of them have been completed, they shall be inspected by the city engineer, or any other City officer designated for such purposes by the council, and if the same have been completed in conformity with the requirements of the city council and applicable provisions of this title, he or she shall certify such fact on the parcel map or attach a certificate thereto so showing. If any of the improvements have not been properly completed, he or she shall attach his or her report thereof to the map. 
I.  Completion of Improvements or Agreement Therefore. 
1.  Requirements for the construction of offsite and onsite improvements shall be noticed by certificate on the parcel map, or by separate instrument and shall be recorded on, concurrently with, or prior to the parcel map being filed for record. 
2.  Fulfillment of such construction requirements shall not be required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval for development of the parcel is issued by the City or until such time as the construction of such improvements is required pursuant to an agreement between the subdivider and the City, except that in the absence of such an agreement, the City may require fulfillment of such construction requirements within a reasonable time following approval of the parcel map and prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of a parcel upon a finding by the city council that fulfillment of the construction requirements is necessary for reasons of: (1) the public health and safety; or (2) the required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area. Such findings and requirement shall be made at the time of approval of the tentative parcel map, and the requirement shall be made a condition of approval thereof. 
3.  Agreements as to the time for the construction of required improvements as provided above may be entered into by mutual agreement of City and the subdivider. Such agreements shall be approved by the city council at the time of approval of the tentative parcel map. 
4.  Conditions of approval requiring improvements by a time specific and agreements as to the time for the construction of required improvements shall be accompanied by security to guarantee performance as provided in Chapter 16.48. 
J.  Consistency with Local Plans. The City shall not approve a tentative map, or a parcel map for which a tentative parcel map was not required, unless the city council finds that the proposed subdivision, together with the provisions for its design and improvement, is consistent with the general plan required by Article 5 (commencing with Section 65300) of Chapter 3 of Division 1 of the Subdivision Map Act or any specific plan adopted pursuant to Article 8 (commencing with Section 65450) of Chapter 3 of Division 1 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
A proposed subdivision shall be consistent with a general plan or a specific plan if the City has officially adopted such a plan and the proposed subdivision or land use is compatible with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in such a plan. 
K.  Map Denial. The City shall deny approval of a tentative parcel map or a parcel map for which a tentative parcel map was not required when it makes any of the following findings: 
1.  That the proposed map is not consistent with applicable general or specific plans; 
2.  That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans; 
3.  That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development; 
4.  That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development; 
5.  That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat; 
6.  That the design of the subdivision or type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems; 
7.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. The city council may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements, for access or for use, will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This subsection shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction and no authority is granted to the city council to determine that the public at large has acquired easements for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision. 
The city council will not deny approval of a final parcel map if it has previously approved a tentative parcel map for the proposed subdivision and if it finds that the final parcel map is in substantial compliance with the previously approved tentative parcel map. 
L.  Final Certification. When the city clerk finds that the parcel map is substantially in the form required by this chapter, as in conformity with the conditions imposed by the council in connection with the approval of the tentative parcel map, that, where required, the agreement and security respecting improvements have been approved and filed, and that all certificates of approval herein required have been made, he or she shall endorse on such map the final certification thereof. 
M.  Acceptance of Dedications. 
1.  If at the time the final map is approved, any streets, paths, alleys, public utility easements, right-of-way for local transit facilities such as bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing pads and similar items, which directly benefit the residents of a subdivision, or storm drainage easements are rejected, subject to Section 771.010 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the offer of dedication shall remain open and the city council may by resolution at any later date, and without further action by the subdivider, rescind its action and accept and open the streets, paths, alleys, rights-of-way for local transit facilities such as bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing pads and similar items, which directly benefit the residents of a subdivision, or storm drainage easements for public use, which acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
2.  In the case of any subdivision fronting upon the ocean coastline or bay shoreline, the offer of dedication of public access route or routes from public highways to land below the ordinary high watermark shall be accepted within three (3) years after the approval of the final map; in the case of any subdivision fronting upon any public waterway, river or stream, the offer of dedication of public access route or routes from public highways to the bank of the waterway, river or stream and the public easement along a portion of the bank of the waterway, river or stream shall be accepted within three (3) years after the approval of the final map; in the case of any subdivision fronting upon any lake or reservoir which is owned in part or entirely by any public agency, including the State, the offer of dedication of public access route or routes from public highways to any water of such lake or reservoir shall be accepted within five (5) years after the approval of the final map; all other offers of dedication may be accepted at any time. 
3.  Offers of dedication which are covered by subdivision A may be terminated and abandoned in the same manner as prescribed for the summary vacation of streets by Part 3 (commencing with Section 8300) of Division 9 of the Streets and Highways Code. 
4.  Offers of dedication which are not accepted within the time limits specified in subsection M(2) of this section shall be deemed abandoned. 
5.  If a resubdivision or reversion to acreage of the tract is subsequently filed for approval, any offer of dedication previously rejected shall be deemed to be terminated upon the approval of the map by the city council. 
N.  Security. The security furnished by the subdivider may be released in whole or in part in the following manner: 
1.  Security given for faithful performance of any act or agreement may be released upon the performance of the act or final completion and acceptance of the required work or the city council may provide for the partial release of the security upon the partial performance of the act or the acceptance of the work as it progresses, under rules established by the city council. 
2.  Security securing the payment to the contractor, his or her subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment may, after passage of the time within which claims of lien are required to be recorded pursuant to Article 3 (commencing with Section 3114) of Chapter 2 of Title 15 of Part 4 of Division 3 of the Civil Code and after acceptance of the work; be reduced to an amount not less than the total claimed by all claimants for whom claims of lien have been recorded and notice thereof given in writing to the city council, and if no such claims have been recorded, the security may be released in full. 
Such release shall not apply to any required guarantee and warranty period nor to the amount of the security deemed necessary by the City for such guarantee and warranty period nor to costs and reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable attorneys' fees. 
The city council may authorize any of its public officers or employees to authorize release or reduction of the security in accordance with such rules as it may prescribe. 
O.  Recordation of Parcel Maps. Upon final certification and acceptance or rejection of dedications, the city clerk shall deliver the map to the county recorder for recordation. 
Whenever separate documents are to be recorded concurrently with the final parcel map pursuant to Section 66435.1 or 66445 of the Subdivision Map Act, the county recorder shall complete the cross-reference to such concurrently recorded separate documents. 
(Ord. 194 § 704, 1983)  
16.24.050 - Design and improvements. 
All divisions of land shall be designed and improvements thereon constructed and dedications therefrom required as in the case of subdivisions as provided in Chapter 16.04. 
(Ord. 194 § 705, 1983)  
16.24.060 - Fees. 
Fees required for the filing, or as a condition of the recordation of a final parcel map, are governed by the provisions of Chapter 16.32. 
(Ord. 194 § 706, 1983)  
Chapter 16.28 - DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS 
Sections: 
 
16.28.010 - Conformance. 
Design and improvements shall conform to this title and the improvement standards. Design shall also provide for adequate traffic circulation and should promote the extension of aesthetic values. 
(Ord. 194 § 801, 1983)  
16.28.020 - Road design—Layout. 
Road layout shall conform as follows: 
A.  Street right-of-way widths shall be in accordance with the City's standard specifications. 
B.  Streets which are extensions of existing streets shall continue the centerline of the existing street, as far as practicable, either in the same direction or by adjustment curves. 
C.  All opposing streets entering upon any given street shall have their centerlines directly opposite each other separated by at least one hundred twenty-five (125) feet. 
(Ord. 194 § 802, 1983)  
16.28.030 - Road design—Intersections. 
The centerlines of streets shall intersect one another as nearly at right angles as practicable, shall not be excessively curved, and shall conform to the requirements for sign distance provided in the standard specifications. 
(Ord. 194 § 803, 1983)  
16.28.040 - Road design—Restricted access strips. 
Access from abutting land, not part of a subdivision, shall not be permitted to a dedicated part-width and or dead-end road over a restricted access strip. 
A.  Restricted access strips shall be provided along and at the end of part-width and dead-end roads to separate them from abutting land not part of the subdivision. 
B.  Said restricted access strip shall be not less than one (1) foot in width and shall be offered for dedication to the City for road purposes. 
C.  Said restricted access strip shall be shown on the map and identified as a "Restricted Access Strip . . ." (Insert, in alphabetical order, the appropriate letter designation.) 
(Ord. 194 § 804, 1983)  
16.28.050 - Road design—Part width. 
The design of the subdivision shall be so that full width local roads will be provided unless this requirement is waived in accordance with provisions of this code. In no case shall a local street which provides for less than one (1) parking lane and two (2) travel lanes be provided. 
(Ord. 194 § 805, 1983)  
16.28.060 - Road design—Stub roads. 
Stub roads shall be provided where necessary to give access to or permit a satisfactory future development of adjoining land. The road shall extend to the boundary line of the property, or within one (1) foot thereof where a restricted access strip is dedicated. 
Stub roads which are abutted by more than one (1) lot on either side shall be terminated by a temporary turn-around. The turn-around shall conform to the standard specifications. A stub road may be approved by the city council without a temporary turn-around when the road is less than one hundred fifty (150) feet in length, or its length equals the dimensions of the corner lot along the road, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. 194 § 806, 1983)  
16.28.070 - Road design—Cul-de-sac. 
Cul-de-sac roads shall be terminated by a permanent turn-around as provided in the improvement standards. Cul-de-sac roads shall not exceed three hundred (300) feet in length, measured from the centerline of the intersecting road to the end of the turn-around, in which case the maximum length may be five hundred (500) feet. 
(Ord. 194 § 807, 1983)  
16.28.080 - Road design—Frontage roads. 
Where lots in a subdivision front on any highway shown on the circulation element of the general plan, the city council may require the dedication and improvement of a frontage road for access to those lots. 
Frontage road intersections which open onto any highway shown on the general plan, shall be through the bulb type intersection as provided in the standard specifications. 
(Ord. 194 § 808, 1983)  
16.28.090 - Road design—Access roads. 
When a subdivision does not abut upon a public road, an access road may be required by the city council to connect the subdivision with a public road. When required, the access road shall meet all requirements of this title. 
(Ord. 194 § 809, 1983)  
16.28.100 - Future roads—State highway. 
If a parcel of land to be subdivided includes a portion of the right-of-way for a State highway, the right-of-way of which has been certified by the California State Highway Commission, the subdivider shall either dedicate or withhold from subdivision all the area included in the right-of-way. 
(Ord. 194 § 810, 1983)  
16.28.110 - Future roads—Dedication. 
Whenever the commission or the city council has determined that a particular local road is not at this time warranted, but is anticipated to be necessary in the future to serve local neighborhood traffic needs, the city council may require that the location, width and extent of such road be shown on the final map and offered for dedication for road purposes. 
(Ord. 194 § 811, 1983)  
16.28.120 - Road design—Grade separation. 
Whenever it is proposed to subdivide property abutting an approach to an existing or specific plan line grade separation, the subdivision shall be so arranged than any lot abutting such approach shall have suitable access elsewhere, and that the street layout adequately provides for and conforms to such approach. 
(Ord. 194 § 812, 1983)  
16.28.130 - Road design—Alleys. 
A.  Where Required. An alley, with adequate ingress and egress provided for truck traffic, may be required at the rear or side of lots where the property is to be used for multiple residential, commercial or industrial use. 
B.  Intersections. Intersecting alleys shall not be permitted. 
C.  Width. Alleys, when required, shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width. 
(Ord. 194 § 813, 1983)  
16.28.140 - Easements—Locations. 
A.  Sewer, Gas and Water. Sewer, gas and water mains shall not be on rear or side lot easements unless street location is found to be impracticable or uneconomical and unless specifically approved by the city council. 
B.  Storm Drains and Flood Control. Easements for storm drains and flood control shall be provided within the subdivision when deemed necessary by the city council. 
C.  Public Utilities. Easement for underground electrical and telephone facilities shall be provided as requested by the affected utility. 
(Ord. 194 § 814, 1983)  
16.28.150 - Easements—Width. 
All easements within a subdivision shall be not less than sixteen (16) feet in width, being not less than eight (8) feet on each side of abutting properties. However, easements of a lesser width may be approved by the city council when it has been determined that the purpose of any easement may be accomplished by the use of a lesser width. 
(Ord. 194 § 815, 1983)  
16.28.160 - Lot design—Area and frontage. 
A.  The area and dimensions of lots shall be in conformity with the zoning regulations for the zoning district in which the proposed subdivision is located. A larger minimum lot area may be required when necessitated by topographical and geological consideration. 
B.  All lots shall have frontage on at least one (1) public or approved private road as required by the appropriate zoning district. The width of such frontage shall not be less than that prescribed by the zoning regulations for the zoning district in which the proposed subdivision is located. 
(Ord. 194 § 816, 1983)  
16.28.170 - Grading plan. 
A grading plan shall be prepared prior to the acceptance and approval of the final subdivision map. The grading plan shall depict the depth and extent of all excavations and embankments which constitute changes in original grade from that shown on the approved tentative subdivision map. All grades shall conform to the datum used in the City's benchmark system. 
(Ord. 194 § 817, 1983)  
16.28.180 - Lot design—Side line. 
The side line of all lots, so far as possible, shall be at right angles to the road which the lot faces, or radial or approximately radial if the road is curved. 
(Ord. 194 § 818, 1983)  
16.28.190 - Lot design—Boundary lines. 
No lot shall be divided by the boundary line of a county, school or special district. 
(Ord. 194 § 819, 1983)  
16.28.200 - Lot design—Double frontage lots. 
Double frontage lots, other than corner lots, which abut two (2) roads and have a depth less than two hundred forty (240) feet will not be approved except where necessitated by topographical or other physical conditions or where ingress and egress to and from one (1) of the roads is prohibited by a law or where direct access rights have been or will be waived. 
(Ord. 194 § 820, 1983)  
16.28.210 - Block design—Length. 
Blocks shall not exceed one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet in length between road centerlines, except where topographical or other conditions require longer blocks. 
(Ord. 194 § 821, 1983)  
16.28.220 - Watercourses. 
Where a subdivision or any part thereof is traversed by any watercourse, channel, stream, creek or canal, the subdivider shall, subject to riparian rights, indicate the physical limits thereof. 
(Ord. 194 § 822, 1983)  
16.28.230 - Land subject to inundation. 
A.  Land subject to flooding and land deemed by the city engineer to be uninhabitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for such other uses as may endanger health, life or property, or aggravate the flood hazard; and shall be shown on the map as subject to inundation or otherwise uninhabitable. 
B.  Such land may be filled or otherwise improved in a manner and to a degree approved by the city engineer so it is no longer subject to the restrictions of this section. The required improvements shall be completed or agreed to be completed by secured agreement pursuant to Section 16.28.390, prior to the approval of the final map. 
C.  Lands included within areas designated by the Federal Flood Insurance Administration as flood-prone areas or shown on maps supplied by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, or the U.S. Corps of Engineers as being within flood-prone areas shall not be divided until a plan provided by the subdivider is approved by the city engineer showing how all development within the subdivision will be flood-proofed in a manner which will not adversely affect surrounding properties. 
(Ord. 194 § 823, 1983)  
16.28.240 - Dedications. 
All land shown and designated on the final map for any public use shall be offered for dedication. 
(Ord. 194 § 824, 1983)  
16.28.250 - Improvements—Required. 
As a condition precedent to acceptance and approval of the final map or parcel map, the subdivider shall make, or agree to make, the minimum improvements as set out in Sections 16.28.260 and 16.28.270 in accordance with the standard specifications. Additional improvements may be required if deemed by the city council to be necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs. Such improvements shall conform to the standard specifications. 
(Ord. 194 § 825, 1983)  
16.28.260 - Improvements—Streets. 
A.  Public Roads or Private Roads. All roads dedicated for public use or approved private roads shall be improved in accordance with the standard specifications. 
B.  Previously Dedicated Rights-of-Way. The city council may require the subdivider to improve previously dedicated roads, public ways or easements to the degree required by subsection A of this section. When so required by the city council, improvements shall conform to the standard specifications. 
(Ord. 194 § 826, 1983)  
16.28.270 - Improvements—Sidewalks. 
Sidewalks shall be installed in accordance with the standard specifications. 
(Ord. 194 § 827, 1983)  
16.28.280 - Improvements—Walls. 
When the rear or side of any lot abuts an expressway, arterial or collector street shown on the general plan, and access to such highway has been relinquished, a wall may be required to be erected along the abutting lot line in accordance with the standard specifications. 
(Ord. 194 § 828, 1983)  
16.28.290 - Improvements—Sewerage. 
Sanitary sewer lines and appurtenances shall be installed and connections made to the existing system in accordance with requirements established by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 194 § 829, 1983)  
16.28.300 - Improvements—Water. 
A.  All lots within an approved subdivision shall be served by connection to the City water system. The method of connection with the water system, and design of the water system within the subdivision shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
B.  Whenever a well and tank site is to be located within a subdivision in conjunction with the City water system, the well site and its access right-of-way shall be shown on the tentative and final maps and be designated for such use. When the well site or other system facilities are to be located outside the subdivision boundaries, easements shall be conveyed to the City prior to the recordation of the final map. 
(Ord. 194 § 830, 1983)  
16.28.310 - Improvements—Fire hydrants. 
Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with the standard specifications. 
(Ord. 194 § 831, 1983)  
16.28.320 - Improvements—Drainage. 
The subdivider shall install drainage facilities to adequately remove surface and storm waters from the subdivision. When so required, installation shall conform to the standard specifications. 
(Ord. 194 § 832, 1983)  
16.28.330 - Improvements—Abandoned wells and pipelines. 
Any abandoned well, existing well, or any irrigation pipelines which are abandoned, or to be abandoned shall be removed, destroyed or completely filled by the subdivider, within the tract, in a manner approved by the city engineer as part of the subdivision improvements. 
(Ord. 194 § 833, 1983)  
16.28.340 - Improvements—Traffic and road signs. 
Necessary street name signs, warning signs, regulatory signs, markers, barricades and other safety and public convenience facilities shall be installed in accordance with the improvement standards and specifications established therefore by the City. The subdivider may deposit with the City sufficient sums for the furnishing and installation of certain of the above facilities. 
(Ord. 194 § 834, 1983)  
16.28.350 - Improvements—Out of tract. 
All improvements lying outside of the tract, and necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs, shall conform to the improvement standards. 
(Ord. 194 § 835, 1983)  
16.28.360 - Improvements—Street lights. 
Street lights shall be installed in accordance with the standard specifications. 
(Ord. 194 § 836, 1983)  
16.28.370 - Improvements—Utilities. 
All utilities shall be placed underground, in accordance with the requirements of the utility concerned, in either City street easements or appropriate utility easements. When utilities are installed in City street easements, they shall be laid subject to the standard specifications. 
(Ord. 194 § 837, 1983)  
16.28.380 - Improvements—Bikeways. 
All bikeways dedicated for public use or approved private use shall be improved in accordance with the standard specifications. 
(Ord. 194 § 838, 1983)  
16.28.390 - Improvement procedures—Agreements. 
A.  Where the required improvements are not completed before a final map is approved or where the installation of improvements has been mutually agreed upon or required to be installed by a time specific as a condition precedent to the approval of a parcel map, the subdivider shall enter into an agreement with the city council prior to the approval of the final map or parcel map to either complete the work or initiate and consummate proceedings under an appropriate special assessment act for the financing and improvement thereof. Such agreement shall provide for the following: 
1.  Time limit for completion of required improvements; 
2.  Procedures for making changes or alterations that become necessary during the performance of the work; 
3.  A requirement for maintenance for a period of one (1) year after the completion and acceptance thereof against any defective work or labor done, or defective materials furnished for those portions of the work which contain earth excavations or embankments in excess of eight (8) feet; 
4.  A requirement for maintenance for a period of one (1) year after the completion and acceptance thereof against any defective work or labor done, or defective materials furnished in the performance of the agreement with the council or the performance of the act. 
B.  At the request of the subdivider, the city council may renew this agreement at the expiration of this time. Such agreement shall provide for the release of the required improvement security when the conditions of the agreement are completed. 
C.  To assure the City that this work will be completed, improvement security shall be provided subject to Section 16.40.010. 
D.  Assessment District Method. Where a special assessment district is formed for the purpose of financing and constructing the designated improvements, the original improvement security may be reduced in an amount not to exceed ninety (90) percent of the contract amount thereof at such time as the contract for the work is executed. 
(Ord. 194 § 839, 1983)  
16.28.400 - Improvement procedures—Plan submittal. 
A.  Where improvements are proposed or are required by the provisions of this title, improvement plans shall be submitted to the city engineer for his or her review and approval. The improvement plans shall be prepared and signed by a registered civil engineer. 
B.  During construction of the improvements, this civil engineer shall be available for consultation on the general supervision of the various phases of the construction operation. He or she shall also be responsible for providing construction engineering and surveying to enable the work covered by the improvement plans to be completed. 
(Ord. 194 § 840, 1983)  
16.28.410 - Improvement procedures—Installations. 
All underground utilities required by the final map approval to be installed below the surface improvement in public roads or alleys or easements shall be constructed prior to the installation of any surface improvements. 
(Ord. 194 § 841, 1983)  
16.28.420 - Improvement procedures—Inspections and acceptance. 
All required improvements shall be constructed under the inspection of the city engineer and shall be subject to approval and acceptance by resolution of the city council. The cost of all inspections shall be paid by the subdivider as provided in Section 16.40.020. 
(Ord. 194 § 842, 1983)  
16.28.430 - Private improvements—Maintenance of private roads. 
Prior to the recordation of the final map of a subdivision containing any improved private roads, the subdivider shall have provided for their maintenance the formation of a permanent road district formed in the manner set forth by Section 1020 of the Streets and Highways Code. The city council may waive this requirement when it finds such permanent road district would not be in the public interest, in which event the city council may impose such other provisions for maintenance which it deems appropriate. 
(Ord. 194 § 843, 1983)  
16.28.440 - Provision for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities. 
The design of a subdivision for which a tentative map is required pursuant to this title shall provide, to the extent feasible, for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision. 
Examples of passive or natural heating opportunities in subdivision design, include design of lot size and configuration to permit orientation of a structure in an east-west alignment for southern exposure. 
Examples of passive or natural cooling opportunities in subdivision design include design of lot size and configuration to permit orientation of a structure to take advantage of shade or prevailing breezes. 
In providing for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the design of a subdivision, consideration shall be given to local climate, to contour, to configuration of the parcel to be divided, and to other design improvement requirements, and such provision shall not result in reducing allowable densities or the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or structure under applicable planning and zoning in force at the time the tentative map is filed. 
The requirements of this section do not apply to condominium projects which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing building when no new structures are added. 
For the purposes of this section, "feasible" means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social and technological factors. 
(Ord. 194 § 844, 1983)  
Chapter 16.32 - DEDICATIONS, RESERVATIONS AND REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
16.32.010 - Pedestrian walkways and bikeways. 
Pedestrian walkways or bikeways may be required where needed for: 
A.  Access to schools, playgrounds or parks, shopping centers, or other public areas; 
B.  Traffic safety; 
C.  Access through unusually long blocks; 
Dedications for bicycle paths may only be required for subdivisions which have two hundred (200) lots or more on the final map. 
(Ord. 194 § 901, 1983)  
16.32.020 - Park and recreation fees. 
A.  This section is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Section 66477 of the Subdivision Map Act of the State of California. The park and recreational facilities for which dedication of land and/or payment of a fee is required by this section are in accordance with the land use element of the general plan of the City of Huron adopted by the City of Huron on June 30, 1981. 
B.  As a condition of approval of a final map, parcel map or parcel map waiver certificate, the subdivider shall dedicate land or pay a fee in lieu of dedicating the land, and pay a parks and recreational facilities fee as prescribed in Chapter 3.02 of the Huron Municipal Code for park or recreational purposes at the time and according to the standards contained in this chapter and in Chapter 3.02. 
C.  General Standard. It is found and determined that the public interest, convenience, health, welfare and safety require that four acres of property for each one thousand (1,000) persons residing within this City be devoted for dedication of land. 
D.  Standards and Formula for Dedication of Land. 
1.  Where a park or recreational facility has been designated in the open space, recreation and conservation element or another element of the general plan of the City and is to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall dedicate land for a local park sufficient in size and topography to serve the residents of the subdivision. 
2.  The amount of land to be provided shall be determined pursuant to the following standards and formula: 
Density Formula 
1 D.U. per acre or more ..... 	0.60% 
1 D.U. per ½ to 1 acre ..... 	1.20% 
1 D.U. per 10,000 sq. ft. to ½ acre ..... 	1.73% 
1 D.U. per 9,000 to 9,999 sq. ft. ..... 	2.70% 
1 D.U. per 8,000 to 8,999 sq. ft. ..... 	3.01% 
1 D.U. per 7,000 to 7,999 sq. ft. ..... 	3.40% 
1 D.U. per 6,000 to 6,999 sq. ft. ..... 	3.90% 
10 to 19 D.U.'s per acre ..... 	5.79% 
20 to 29 D.U.'s per acre ..... 	9.30% 
 
E.  The development impact fee for parks and recreational facilities is prescribed in Chapter 3.02 of the Huron Municipal Code. The development impact fee does not include the cost of land which is required to be dedicated or a fee paid in lieu of dedication according to Section 16.32.020B. The value of the land, as determined by the City, which is dedicated for park purposes pursuant to Section 16.32.020D of this section, shall be deducted from the parks and recreational facilities fee as determined by Chapter 3.02 of the Huron Municipal Code. 
F.  Subdivisions Not Within the General Plan. Where the proposed subdivision lies within an area not then but to be included within the City general plan, the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or both, in accordance with the adopted park and recreational principles and standards of the City general plan and in accordance with the provisions of this title. 
G.  Determination of Land or Fee. Whether the city council accepts land dedication or elects to require payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, shall be determined by consideration of the following: 
1.  Recreational element of the City's general plan; 
2.  Topography, geology, access and location of land in the subdivision available for dedication; 
3.  Size and shape of the subdivision and land available for dedication; 
4.  The feasibility of dedication; 
5.  Compatibility of dedication with the City of Huron land use element of the general plan; and 
6.  Availability of previously acquired park property. 
The determination of the city council as to whether land shall be dedicated, or whether a fee shall be charged, or a combination thereof shall be final and conclusive. 
H.  Credit for Private Open Space. Where private open space for park and recreational purposes is provided in a proposed subdivision and such space is to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision, partial credit, not to exceed fifty (50) percent, may be given against the requirement of land dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof if the city council finds that it is in the public interest to do so and that all the following standards are met: 
1.  That yards, court areas, setbacks and other open areas required to be maintained by the zoning and building ordinances and regulations shall not be included in the computation of such private open space; and 
2.  That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by recorded written agreement, conveyance or restrictions; and 
3.  That the use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenant, which runs with the land in favor of the future owners of the property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the City or its successor; and 
4.  That the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access and location; and 
5.  That facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial accordance with the provisions of the recreational element of the general plan. 
I.  Procedure. At the time of approval of the tentative subdivision map, the city council shall determine pursuant to subsection G of this section the land to be dedicated and/or fees to be paid by the subdivider. At the time of the filing of the final subdivision map, the subdivider shall dedicate the land or pay the fees as previously determined by the city council. Open space covenants for private park or recreational facilities shall be submitted to the City prior to approval of the final subdivision map and shall be recorded contemporaneously with the final subdivision map. 
J.  Commencement of Development. At the time of approval of the final subdivision map, the city council shall specify how and when it will use the land or fees or both to develop park or recreational facilities. Such park development plans may also be included in a parks master plan or capital improvement plan. 
K.  Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to subdivisions containing less than five parcels and not used for residential purposes; provided, however, that a condition may be placed on the approval of such parcel map and that if a building permit is requested for construction of a residential structure or structures on one or more of the parcels within four years, the fee may be required to be paid by the owner of each such parcel as a condition to the issuance of such permit. 
The provisions of this section also shall not apply to industrial subdivisions; nor to condominium projects which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are added; nor to parcel maps for a subdivision containing less than five parcels for a shopping center containing more than three hundred thousand (300,000) square feet of gross leasable area and no residential development or uses. 
(Ord. 325 § 6, 1999; Ord. 194 § 902, 1983)  
16.32.030 - School site dedication. 
A.  A subdivider who develops or completes the development of one or more subdivisions in one or more school districts maintaining an elementary school may be required to dedicate to the school district or districts within which such subdivisions are to be located, such land as the city council deems to be necessary for the purpose of constructing thereon such elementary schools as are necessary to assure the residents of the subdivision adequate public school service, except that the city council shall not require the dedication of an amount of land which would make the development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible or which would exceed the amount of land ordinarily allowed under the procedures of the State Allocation Board. 
B.  This section shall not be applicable to a subdivider who has owned the land being subdivided for more than ten years prior to the filing of the tentative subdivision map. 
C.  The requirement of dedication shall be imposed at the time of approval of the tentative subdivision map by the city council. If, within thirty (30) days after the requirement of dedication is imposed by the city council, the school district does not offer to enter into a binding commitment with the subdivider to accept the dedication, this requirement shall be automatically terminated. 
D.  The required dedication shall be made any time before, concurrently with, or up to sixty (60) days after the filing of the final map for any portion of the subdivision. 
E.  In the event the school district accepts the dedication, it shall repay the subdivider or his or her successors the original cost to the subdivider of the dedicated land, plus such other additional cost and expenses of the subdivider as are more particularly provided in Section 66478 of the Government Code. 
F.  In the event the land is not used by the school district as a school site within ten years after the dedication, the subdivider shall have the option to repurchase the property from the district for the amount paid therefore, together with interest at the rate of seven percent per year from the date of payment by the district to the date the option is exercised. 
G.  The school district to which the property is dedicated shall record a certificate with the county recorder, containing therein all information required by Section 66478 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 194 § 903, 1983)  
16.32.040 - Reservations. 
A.  The City may require that areas of real property within a subdivision be reserved for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The requirement is based upon an adopted specific plan or an adopted general plan containing a community facilities element, a recreation and parks element, or a public building element, and the required reservations are in accordance with definite principles and standards contained herein, 
2.  The reserved area is of such size and shape as to permit the balance of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in an orderly and efficient manner, 
3.  The amount of land reserved will not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible; 
B.  The reserved area shall conform to the adopted specific or general plan and shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as to permit an efficient division of the reserved area in the event that it is not acquired within the prescribed period; in such event, the subdivider shall make those changes as are necessary to permit the reserved area to be developed for the intended purpose consistent with good subdividing practices; 
C.  The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall at the time of approval of the final map or parcel map enter into a binding agreement to acquire such reserved area within two years after the completion and acceptance of all improvements, unless such period of time is extended by mutual agreement. The purchase price shall be the market value thereof at the time of the filing of the tentative map plus the taxes against such reserved area from the date of the reservation and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of such reserved area, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering such reserved area; 
D.  If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not enter into such a binding agreement, the reservation of such area shall automatically terminate. 
(Ord. 194 § 904, 1983)  
16.32.050 - Drainage fees. 
Prior to filing of any final map or parcel map, the subdivider shall pay or cause to be paid storm drainage fees specified in Chapter 3.02 of the Huron Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 325 § 7, 1999)  
16.32.060 - Traffic control facilities fee. 
Prior to filing of any final map or parcel map, the subdivider shall pay or cause to be paid traffic control facilities fees as specified in Chapter 3.02 of the Huron Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 323 § 8, 1999)  
16.32.070 - Supplemental improvements reimbursement agreements. 
A.  Supplemental Improvements—Requirement. The subdivider may be required to install improvements for the benefit of the subdivision which may contain supplemental size, capacity or number for the benefit of property not within the subdivision as a condition precedent to the approval of a subdivision or parcel map and thereafter to dedicate such improvements to the public. However, the subdivider shall be reimbursed for that portion of the cost of such improvements equal to the difference between the amount it would have cost the subdivider to install such improvements to serve the subdivision only and the actual cost of such improvements, pursuant to the provisions of Sections 66485 et seq. of the Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  Supplemental Improvements—Reimbursement Agreement—Funding Procedures. No charge, area of benefit, or local benefit district shall be established unless and until a public hearing in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.32.060 of this title is held thereon by the city council, and the city council finds that the fee or charge and the area of benefit or local benefit district is reasonably related to the cost of such supplemental improvements and the actual ultimate beneficiaries thereof. The notice required by Section 16.32.060 of this title shall be given to the subdivider and to those who own property within the proposed area of benefit as shown on the latest equalized assessment role, and the potential users of the supplemental improvements insofar as they can be ascertained at the time. Such notices shall be mailed by the city clerk at least ten days prior to the date established for hearing. 
C.  Supplemental Improvements—Drainage, Sewerage, Bridges and Major Thoroughfares. If the City has adopted a local drainage or sanitary sewer plan or map as required for the imposition of fees therefore, or has established an area of benefit for bridges or major thoroughfares as provided in this title, the City may impose a reasonable charge on property within the area benefited and may provide for the collection of said charge as set forth in this title. The City may enter into reimbursement agreements with a subdivider who constructs said facilities, bridges or thoroughfares, and the charges collected by the City therefor may be utilized to reimburse the subdivider as set forth herein. 
(Ord. 194 § 907, 1983)  
Chapter 16.36 - VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS 
Sections: 
 
16.36.010 - Citation and authority. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1) of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the State of California (hereinafter referred to as the Vesting Tentative Map Statute), and may be cited as the "Vesting Tentative Map Ordinance." 
(Ord. 217 (part), 1985)  
16.36.020 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish procedures necessary for the implementation of the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and the subdivision ordinance. Except as otherwise set forth in the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of the subdivision ordinance shall apply to the Vesting Tentative Map Ordinance. 
To accomplish this purpose, the regulations outlined in this chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, and for the promotion of orderly growth and development. 
(Ord. 217 (part), 1985)  
16.36.030 - Consistency. 
No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan or not permitted by the zoning ordinance or other applicable provisions of this code. 
(Ord. 217 (part), 1985)  
16.36.040 - Definitions. 
A.  A "vesting tentative map" means a "tentative map" for a residential subdivision, as defined in the (Huron) subdivision ordinance, that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map" at the time it is filed in accordance with Section 16.36.060, and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
B.  All other definitions set forth in the (Huron) subdivision ordinance are applicable. 
(Ord. 217 (part), 1985)  
16.36.050 - Application. 
A.  This chapter shall apply only to residential developments. Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by the (Huron) subdivision ordinance, requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for a residential development, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed, in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
B.  If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to an approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction. 
(Ord. 217 (part), 1985)  
16.36.060 - Filing and processing. 
A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and shall have the same contents, accompanying data and reports and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in the (Huron) subdivision ordinance for a tentative map except as hereinafter provided: 
A.  At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map." 
B.  At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, a subdivider shall also supply the following information: 
1.  Height, size and location of buildings; 
2.  Sewer, water, storm drain and road details; 
3.  Information on the uses to which the buildings will be put; 
4.  Detailed grading plans; 
5.  Geological studies; 
6.  Flood control information; 
7.  Architectural plans; 
8.  Any other studies your city has normally deferred to the building permit stage. 
(Ord. 217 (part), 1985)  
16.36.070 - Fees. 
Upon filing a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall pay the fees required by the city council of the City of Huron as established by resolution (method determining fees) for the filing and processing of a tentative map. 
(Ord. 217 (part), 1985)  
16.36.080 - Expiration. 
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same extensions, established by the subdivision ordinance for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map. 
(Ord. 217 (part), 1985)  
16.36.090 - Vesting on approval of vesting tentative map. 
A.  The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards described in Government Code Section 66474.2. 
However, if Section 66474.2 of the Government Code is repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a permit, approval, extension or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following are determined: 
1.  A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both; 
2.  The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with State or federal law. 
C.  The rights referred to herein shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in Section 16.36.070. If the final map is approved, these rights shall last for the following periods of time: 
1.  An initial time period of (one (1) year(s)/months); 
Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded; 
2.  The initial time period set forth in subdivision 1 of this subsection shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds thirty (30) days, from the date a complete application is filed. 
3.  A subdivider may apply for a one (1) year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in subdivision 1 of this subsection expires. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial to (the city council) within fifteen (15) days. 
(Ord. 217 (part), 1985)  
16.36.100 - Development inconsistent with zoning—Conditional approval. 
A.  Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with the zoning ordinance in existence at that time, that inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The City may deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned on the subdivider, or his her designee, obtaining the necessary change in the zoning ordinance to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in the zoning ordinance is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall, notwithstanding Section 16.36.090, confer the vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change in the zoning ordinance and the map, as approved. 
B.  The rights conferred by this section shall be for the time periods set forth in Section 16.36.090(C)(2). 
(Ord. 217 (part), 1985)  
16.36.110 - Applications inconsistent with current policies. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, a property owner or his or her designee may seek approvals or permits for development which depart from the ordinances, policies, and standards described in Sections 16.36.090(A) and 16.36.100, and local agencies may grant these approvals or issue these permits to the extent that the departures are authorized under applicable law. 
(Ord. 217 (part), 1985)  
Chapter 16.40 - FEES, BONDS AND DEPOSITS 
Sections: 
 
16.40.010 - Filing fees. 
Filing fees as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid at the time of filing of subdivision maps and parcel map waiver certificates. No refund of filing fee shall be made for any map or portion thereof deleted, withdrawn or abandoned. 
(Ord. 194 § 1001, 1983)  
16.40.020 - Checking and inspection fees. 
A.  The subdivider shall pay a fee as established by city council resolution for checking the improvement plans and inspecting all proposed improvements controlled by the City prior to the submission of the final map to the city council. 
B.  The fees established by this section shall be based on reasonable improvement cost estimates made by the city engineer. No adjustment in or refund of such fees shall be made once the fees have been paid; except when a final map is withdrawn, or a reversion to acreage map is recorded, the unexpended portion of the required fee may be refunded upon written request made by the subdivider to the city council. 
C.  The city council may retain qualified consulting engineers for the performance of any part of the inspection services. 
D.  In the event the city council permits the required improvements to be financed by proceedings under an appropriate special assessment act as provided for in Section 66462(a)(2) of the Subdivision Map Act, the fees required by this section may be included as an incidental expense of such proceedings. The subdivider shall be refunded the amount of the fees required by this section to the extent that monies for the inspection of improvement construction are available in the moneys provided by the special assessment act proceedings. 
(Ord. 194 § 1002, 1983)  
16.40.030 - Recordation. 
Fees, as provided by Sections 27361 and 27372 of the Governmental Code, shall be paid to the city clerk to defray the costs of recording of any final map, parcel map or certificate of waiver. 
(Ord. 194 § 1003, 1983)  
16.40.040 - Completion of improvements or agreement therefor. 
Completion of Improvements or Agreement Therefor. 
A.  Requirements for the construction of offsite and onsite improvements shall be noticed by certificate on the final or parcel map, or by separate instrument and shall be recorded on, concurrently with, or prior to the final or parcel map being filed for record. 
B.  Fulfillment of such construction requirements shall not be required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval for development of the parcel is issued by the City or until such time as the construction of such improvements is required pursuant to an agreement between the subdivider and the City, except that in the absence of such an agreement, the City may require fulfillment of such construction requirements within a reasonable time following approval of the final or parcel map and prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of a parcel upon a finding by the city council that fulfillment of the construction requirements is necessary for reasons of: (1) the public health and safety; or (2) the required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area. Said findings and requirement shall be made at the time of approval of the tentative subdivision or parcel map, and the requirement shall be made a condition of approval thereof. 
C.  Agreements as to the time for the construction of required improvements as provided above may be entered into by mutual agreement of the City and the subdivider. Such agreements shall be approved by the city council at the time of approval of the tentative subdivision or parcel map. 
D.  Conditions of approval requiring improvements by a time specific and agreements as to the time for the construction of required improvements shall be accompanied by security to guarantee performance as provided in Chapter 16.48. 
(Ord. 194 § 1004, 1983)  
16.40.050 - Security. 
Agreements and requirements referred to in Section 16.24.040(I) and in Section 16.28.390 shall be accompanied by security to guarantee performance as follows: 
A.  Improvement security in the amount of one hundred (100) percent of the total estimated cost of all required work as indicated in the agreement or requirements for the purpose of securing the performance of said work; 
B.  Improvement security in the amount of fifty (50) percent of the estimated cost of all required work to secure payment to the contractor, his or her subcontractors, and persons renting equipment or furnishing labor or materials for such improvements; 
C.  Improvement security to secure the maintenance for a period of one (1) year after the completion and acceptance thereof against any defective work or labor done, or defective materials furnished, in the performance of the agreement with the council or the performance of the act. The security shall not exceed an amount equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the estimated cost of furnishing and installing the facilities. This security shall be in addition to any warranty required of the manufacturer. 
D.  Improvement security to secure the maintenance of a private road for a period of one (1) year after the acceptance thereof against any defective work or labor done or defective material furnished in the construction of the private work which security shall be in an amount equal to the construction cost thereof; 
E.  Security in the amount equal to the estimated cost of placing all monuments and lot corners not set at the time the final map is filed as specified in Section 16.20.230(C) and (D). 
F.  Security in the estimated amount of taxes, and special assessments collected as taxes which are a lien but which are not yet payable as referred to in Section 66493 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
G.  As a part of the obligation guaranteed by the security and in addition to the face amount of the security, there shall be included costs and reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the local agency in successfully enforcing the obligation secured. 
(Ord. 194 § 1005, 1983)  
16.40.060 - Forms of improvement security. 
Whenever this chapter authorizes or requires the furnishing of security in connection with the performance of any act or agreement, such security shall be one of the following at the option of and subject to the approval of the city council: 
1.  Bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties; 
2.  A deposit, either with the City or a responsible escrow agent or trust company, at the option of the city council, of money or negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing deposits of public moneys; 
3.  An instrument of credit from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the State or federal government and pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed for payment; 
4.  A lien upon the property to be divided, created by contract between the owner and the City, if the city council finds that it would not be in the public interest to require the installation of the required improvement sooner than two (2) years after the recordation of the map. 
(Ord. 194 § 1006, 1983)  
16.40.070 - Improvement completion failure—Procedure. 
If the subdivider fails to complete the improvements in the time specified or an extension thereof, the city council may take appropriate legal action against the subdivider and his or her security, with or without first causing such improvements to be completed. In the event the security is insufficient to pay the full cost of the improvements, the subdivider shall be liable for any balance. 
(Ord. 194 § 1007, 1983)  
16.40.080 - Exoneration of security. 
It shall be the duty of the city engineer to inspect all improvements installed and monuments set as to their compliance with this title and City standards. No security given for faithful performance of such work shall be exonerated from the agreement referred to herein until and unless the city engineer certifies compliance thereto. 
(Ord. 194 § 1008, 1983)  
16.40.090 - Improvement security—Release. 
A.  Security given for faithful performance of any act of agreement shall be released upon the final completion of the act or the work encompassed by the agreement and the acceptance of the act or work by resolution of the city council. 
B.  Security securing payment to the contractor, his or her subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment shall, six (6) months after the performance of the act or the completion of the work and its acceptance by resolution of the city council, be reduced to an amount not less than the total of all claims on which an action has been filed and notice thereof given in writing to the city council, and if no such actions have been filed, the security shall be released in full. 
Such release shall not apply to any required guarantee and warrantee period nor to the amount of the security deemed necessary by the city council for such guarantee and warrantee period, nor to cost and reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable attorney's fees. 
C.  In all cases where the performance of the obligation for which the security is required is subject to the approval of another agency, the city council shall not release the security until the obligation is performed to the satisfaction of such other agency. Such agency shall have two (2) months after completion of the performance of the obligation to register its satisfaction or dissatisfaction. If at the end of that period it has not registered its satisfaction or dissatisfaction, it shall be conclusively deemed that the performance of the obligation was done to its satisfaction. 
(Ord. 194 § 1009, 1983)  
Chapter 16.44 - EXCEPTIONS 
Sections: 
 
16.44.010 - Grounds. 
The city council may, upon the petition of a subdivider or upon their own motion, authorize modifications of requirements and improvement standards as set forth in this title, whenever the land involved in a subdivision is: 
A.  Of such size or shape; or 
B.  Subject to such title limitations of record; or 
C.  Affected by such topographical location or conditions; or 
D.  To be devoted to such usage that full conformity to the provisions of this title is impossible or impractical. 
(Ord. 194 § 1101, 1983)  
16.44.020 - Application. 
The application for any exception shall be by petition filed with the secretary of the planning commission at the time the tentative map or tentative parcel map is presented to the planning commission. 
(Ord. 194 § 1102, 1983)  
16.44.030 - Factual data required. 
In order for the property referred to in the petition to come within the provisions of this section, it is necessary for the commission and the city council to find that all the following conditions exist: 
A.  That there are exceptional circumstances or conditions that affect said property or the reasonable use thereof; 
B.  That the exception is necessary to preserve a substantial property right and permit the enjoyment thereof; 
C.  That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public safety, health and welfare; 
D.  That the granting of the exception will not be injurious to or prevent the logical development of other property in the immediate area. 
(Ord. 194 § 103, 1983)  
16.44.040 - Planning commission review. 
The commission, in recommending the granting of an exception for a tentative map or a tentative parcel map, may recommend such conditions as may be necessary to secure substantial compliance with the objectives of this title, protecting the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 194 § 1104, 1983)  
16.44.050 - Decision by the city council. 
The city council shall consider and render its decision on the exception concurrently with its review of and decision on the tentative map or tentative parcel map. The council, in granting an exception, may establish such conditions as may be necessary to secure substantial compliance with the objectives of this title, protecting the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 194 § 1105, 1983)  
Chapter 16.48 - REVERSION TO ACREAGE 
Sections: 
 
16.48.010 - Map Act provisions apply. 
Subdivided real property may be reverted to acreage pursuant to Chapter 6 of the Subdivision Map Act. The provisions of Sections 66499.11 through 66499.20 shall apply. 
(Ord. 194 § 1201, 1983)  
16.48.020 - Tentative subdivision maps—Requirements apply. 
When making a reversion to acreage map, the applicable requirements of Chapter 16.16 as to filing, map form, tract number and committee review, shall be complied with unless waived by the secretary of the planning commission. 
(Ord. 194 § 1202, 1983)  
16.48.030 - Tentative subdivision map—Review—Report. 
Copies of the tentative map, or a reversion to acreage map, shall be distributed to the city engineer, city planner and superintendent of public works. The city engineer, city planner and superintendent of public works shall review and report upon the map in the manner provided in Section 16.16.110. 
(Ord. 194 § 1203, 1983)  
16.48.040 - Planning commission consideration. 
The commission shall consider the tentative subdivision map at a regular or special meeting after given notice of its intent to consider the map, in a newspaper of general circulation, within the area affected, at least ten (10) days preceding the meeting at which the tentative map is to be heard. In making a recommendation to the city council concerning a reversion to acreage map, the commission shall determine that the reversion will have no adverse effect on abutting property or the proper development thereof, and that there exists nonuse of streets and easements within the area included in the reversion to acreage. 
(Ord. 194 § 1204, 1983)  
16.48.050 - City council—Action—Report. 
The city council shall act upon the commission's recommendation at regular or adjourned regular meeting not less than fifteen (15) nor more than forty (40) days after the filing of the commission's recommendation with the city council. The city council shall give public notice of its intent to consider the tentative map in a newspaper of general circulation within the area affected at least ten (10) days immediately preceding the meeting at which the map is to be heard. In approving or conditionally approving a reversion to acreage map, the city council shall find that dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes; and either: (1) all owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to the reversion; or (2) none of the improvements required to be made have been made within two (2) years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is the later; or (3) no lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five (5) years from the date such map was filed for record. 
The city council shall report its action in writing to the subdivider and the planning commission and the city engineer no later than ten (10) days following such action. 
(Ord. 194 § 1205, 1983)  
16.48.060 - Title. 
Upon the title sheet of each map filed for the purpose of reverting subdivided land to acreage, the subtitle shall consist of the words "A REVERSION TO ACREAGE OF . . . . " (Insert the legal description of the land being reverted.) 
(Ord. 194 § 1206, 1983)  
16.48.070 - Dedications terminated. 
Any previous offer of dedication not retained on the reversion to acreage map shall be deemed to be terminated upon approval of the final map or by the city council and the recordation of the final map. 
(Ord. 194 § 1207, 1983)  
16.48.080 - Tax bond. 
A tax bond shall not be required in any cases covered by this chapter. 
(Ord. 194 § 1208, 1983)  
16.48.090 - City engineer—Report and certification. 
A.  The city engineer shall review each map and assure himself or herself that it complies with the requirements of the approved tentative map, with previously recorded property description data and with the provisions of law and this title. The city engineer shall consult with the city planner in making these determinations. 
B.  If the final map is in the correct form prescribed by the Subdivision Map Act and this title and the matters shown thereon are sufficient, their correctness shall be certified on the map by the city engineer. 
C.  The city engineer shall within twenty (20) days after the receipt of the map, transmit the map together with the other materials to the city clerk for presentation to the city council. 
(Ord. 194 § 1209, 1983)  
16.48.100 - City council—Decision. 
A.  Approval of Map. 
1.  At its next regular or adjourned meeting after the filing of a final map with the city clerk, the city council shall consider the map to determine if it is in conformity with all the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this title applicable at the time of approval of the tentative map, or any ruling made thereunder. 
2.  Upon approval of the map by the city council, the city clerk shall deliver the map to the county recorder for recordation. 
B.  Disapproval of Map. 
1.  If the city council determines that the map is not in conformance with either the requirements of this title or the tentative approval of the reversion to acreage, the city council shall disapprove such final map, specifying its reason or reasons therefore, and the city clerk shall, in writing, advise the subdivider of such disapproval and the reason or reasons therefore. 
2.  After the city council has disapproved any map, the proponent may file a new final map with the city clerk altered to conform to all the requirements imposed upon him or her by this title. 
(Ord. 194 § 1210, 1983)  
16.48.110 - Reversion of land previously subdivided by parcel map. 
The City by this title, authorizes that a parcel map is to be filed under the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of reverting to acreage land previously subdivided and consisting of four (4) or less contiguous parcels under the same ownership. Any map so submitted shall be accompanied by evidence of title and nonuse or lack of necessity of any streets or easements which are to be vacated or abandoned. Any streets or easements to be left in effect after the reversion shall be adequately delineated on the map. After approval of the reversion by the city council or planning commission the map shall be delivered to the county recorder. The filing of the map shall constitute legal reversion to acreage of the land affected thereby, and shall also constitute abandonment of all streets and easements not shown on the map. The filing of the map shall also constitute a merger of the separate parcels into one (1) parcel for purposes of this chapter and shall thereafter be shown as such on the assessment roll. On any parcel map used for reverting acreage, a certificate shall appear signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title interest in the land being reverted, consenting to the preparation and filing of the parcel map. 
Subdivided lands may be merged and resubdivided without reverting to acreage by complying with all the applicable requirements for the subdivision of land as provided by this division. The filing of the final map or parcel map shall constitute legal merging of the separate parcels into one (1) parcel and the resubdivision of such parcel, and the real property shall thereafter be shown with the new lot or parcel boundaries on the assessment roll. Any unused fees or deposits previously made pursuant to this division pertaining to the property shall be credited pro rata towards any requirements for the same purposes which are applicable at the time of resubdivision. Any streets or easements to be left in effect after the resubdivision shall be adequately delineated on the map. After approval of the merger and resubdivision by the city council or planning commission the map shall be delivered to the county recorder. The filing of the map shall constitute legal merger and resubdivision of the land affected thereby, and shall also constitute abandonment of all streets and easements not shown on the map. 
The City by this title, authorizes the merger of contiguous parcels under common ownership without reverting to acreage, and shall require the recordation of an instrument evidencing the merger. 
(Ord. 194 § 1211, 1983)  
Chapter 16.52 - AMENDMENTS 
Sections: 
 
16.52.010 - Initiation of amendments to this code—Setting for hearing. 
A.  Amendment of this title may be initiated in one of the following manners: 
1.  By resolution adopted by the commission; 
2.  By resolution adopted by the council, which resolution shall be referred to the commission for a hearing. 
B.  The commission shall hold at least one (1) public hearing on any such proposed amendment. When such a resolution of the council has been filed with the commission or its secretary, the hearing by the commission shall be held within forty (40) days following such filing. 
C.  Notice of Commission Hearing. Notice of the time and place of the public hearing by the commission shall be given by the commission or its secretary by at least one (1) publication in a newspaper of general circulation published in the City, at least ten (10) days before the hearing, and by such other means as the commission may determine. 
D.  Decisions of the Commission. 
1.  Within forty (40) days after the conclusion of such public hearing, the commission shall by resolution make its findings, decision and recommendations in the matter. 
2.  In matters initiated by resolution of the council, failure of the commission to adopt such a resolution within forty (40) days following the first hearing thereon, or failure of the commission to conduct a hearing within forty (40) days following the filing of such resolution with the commission or its secretary, shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed amendment, and the council may proceed with the matter without any further proceedings or report from the commission. 
3.  The commission shall cause its recommendations to be filed with the council. 
E.  The action of the council on such matters shall be final, provided that no substantial change shall be made in any amendment initiated and proposed by the commission, until the proposed change has been filed, with the council, and provided further that failure of the commission to so report within forty (40) days shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed change. No notice of such hearing need be given. 
(Ord. 194 § 1301, 1983)  
Chapter 16.56 - VIOLATIONS PENALTIES 
Sections: 
 
16.56.010 - Prohibited transactions. 
A.  No person shall sell, lease or finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a final map is required by this division until such map thereof in full compliance with the provisions of this division and has been filed for record by the county recorder. 
B.  No person shall sell, lease or finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a parcel map is required by this division, until such map thereof is in full compliance with the provisions of this division has been filed for record by the county recorder. 
C.  Conveyances of any part of a division of real property for which a final or parcel map is required by this division shall not be made by parcel or block number, initial or other designation, unless and until such map has been filed for record by the county recorder. 
D.  This section does not apply to any parcel or parcels of a subdivision offered for sale or lease, contracted for sale or lease, or sold or leased in compliance with or exempt from any law (including a local ordinance), regulating the design and improvement of subdivisions in effect at the time the subdivision was established. 
E.  Nothing contained in subsections A and B of this section shall be deemed to prohibit an offer or contract to sell, lease or finance real property or to construct improvements thereon where such sale, lease or financing, or the commencement of such construction, is expressly conditioned upon the approval and filing of a final subdivision map or parcel map, as required under this division. 
F.  Nothing in this section shall in any way modify or affect the provisions of Section 11018.2 of the Business and Professions Code. 
G.  This division does not bar any legal equitable or summary remedy to which the City or other public agency, or any person, firm or corporation may otherwise be entitled, and the City or other public agency, or such person, firm or corporation may file a suit in the superior court of the county in which any real property attempted to be subdivided or sold, leased or financed in violation of this division enacted pursuant thereto is located, to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision or sale, lease, or financing in violation of this division enacted pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. 194 § 1401, 1983)  
16.56.020 - Voidability of sale. 
A.  Any deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of this title is voidable at the sole option of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, his or her heirs, personal representative, or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy within one (1) year after the date of discovery of the violation of the provisions of said sections, but the deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell is binding upon any successor in interest of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, other than those above enumerated, and upon the grantor, vendor or person contracting to sell, or his or her assignee, heir or devisee. 
B.  Any grantee, or his or her successor in interest, of real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of this title, may, within one (1) year of the date of discovery of such violation, bring an action in the superior court to recover any damages he or she has suffered by reason of such division of property. The action may be brought against the person who divided the property in violation of said sections and against any successors in interest who have actual or constructive knowledge of such division of property. 
C.  Nothing in this section shall render void or voidable any trust deed, mortgage or other encumbrance in the hands of a bona fide holder for value. 
(Ord. 194 § 1402, 1983)  
16.56.030 - Remedies not barred. 
Nothing herein contained shall bar any legal, equitable or summary remedy to which the City of Huron or other political subdivision, or any person may otherwise be entitled. The City or other political subdivision or person may file suit in any court of competent jurisdiction, to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision or sale in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this title. 
(Ord. 194 § 1403, 1983)  
16.56.040 - Permit refusal. 
The City shall refuse to grant building or other permits in relation to the property involved until such time as all of the requirements of this title have been complied with. 
(Ord. 194 § 1404, 1983)  
16.56.050 - Violation of the Subdivision Map Act. 
A.  The City shall not issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to develop any real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of this division or of the provisions of this title enacted pursuant to this division if it finds that development of such real property is contrary to the public health or the public safety. The authority to deny such a permit or such approval shall apply whether the applicant therefore was the owner of record at the time of such violation or whether the applicant therefore is either the current owner of record or a vendee of the current owner of record pursuant to a contract of sale of the real property with, or without, actual or constructive knowledge of the knowledge of the violation at the time of the acquisition of his or her interest in such real property. 
If the City issues a permit or grants approval for the development of any such real property, it shall impose only those conditions that would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the applicant acquired his or her interest in such real property, and which has been established at such time by this division enacted pursuant thereto, except that where the applicant was the owner of record at the time of the initial violation of the provisions of this division enacted pursuant thereto who, by a grant of the real property created a parcel or parcels in violation of this division enacted pursuant thereto, and such person is the current owner of record of one (1) or more of the parcels which were created as a result of the grant in violation of the division enacted pursuant thereto, then the City shall impose such conditions as would be applicable to a current division of the property, and except that if a conditional certificate of compliance has been filed for record under the provisions of subdivision (b) of Section 66499.35 of the Subdivision Map Act only such conditions stipulated in that certificate shall be applicable. 
B.  Certificate of Compliance. 
1.  Any person owning real property or a vendee of such person pursuant to a contract of sale of such real property may request, and the City shall determine, whether such real property complies with the provisions of this division enacted pursuant thereto. Upon making such a determination the City shall cause a certificate of compliance to be filed for record with the county recorder. The certificate of compliance shall identify the real property and shall state that the division thereof complies with applicable provisions of this division enacted pursuant thereto. The City shall impose a reasonable fee to cover the cost of issuing and recording the certificate of compliance. 
2.  If the City determines that such real property does not comply with provisions of this division enacted pursuant thereto, it shall issue a certificate of compliance or a conditional certificate of compliance. The City shall, as a condition to granting a certificate of compliance, impose such conditions as would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the applicant acquired his or her interest therein, and which had been established at such time by this division enacted pursuant thereto, except that where the applicant was the owner of record at the time of the initial violation of the provisions of this division enacted pursuant thereto who by a grant of the real property created a parcel or parcels in violation of this division enacted pursuant thereto, and such person is the current owner of record of one (1) or more of the parcels which were created as a result of the grant in violation of the division enacted pursuant thereto, then the City shall impose such conditions as would be applicable to a current division of the property. Upon making such a determination and establishing such conditions the City shall cause a conditional certificate of compliance to be filed for record with the county recorder. Such certificate of compliance to be filed for record with the county recorder shall serve as notice to the property owner or vendee who has applied for the certificate pursuant to this section, a grantee of the property owner, or any subsequent transferee or assignee of the property that the fulfillment and implementation of such conditions shall be required prior to subsequent issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for development of the property. 
Compliance with such conditions shall not be required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval for development of such property is issued by the City. 
3.  A certificate of compliance shall be issued for any real property which has been approved for development pursuant to Section 66499.34 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
4.  A recorded final map or parcel map shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein. 
(Ord. 194 § 1405, 1983)  
16.56.060 - Violation—Penalties. 
Any offer to sell, contract to sell, or deed of conveyance made contrary to the provisions of this title is a misdemeanor, and any person, firms or corporations, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment in the City jail for a period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 194 § 1406, 1983)  
Title 17 - ZONING* 
Chapters:  
Chapter 17.01 - AUTHORITY, PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE 
Sections: 
 
17.01.010 - Citation. 
This title shall be known as, and may be cited and referred to, as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Huron." 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.01.020 - Adoption. 
There is adopted a zoning ordinance for the City of Huron, State of California, said zoning ordinance establishing regulations pertaining to uses of land use, locations, height, bulk, size and types of buildings in certain districts of the City, specifying said districts; providing for the administration and enforcement of such regulations and prescribing penalties for violations thereof. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.01.030 - Purposes of the zoning ordinance. 
The zoning ordinance of the City of Huron is adopted to promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare through the orderly regulation of land uses. Its regulations are imposed to: 
A.  Provide the economic and social advantages resulting from an orderly planned use of land resources; 
B.  Guide development so that it is consistent with the City of Huron general plan and to promote good design through adhering to accepted standards; 
C.  Prescribe and apply zoning districts of a number, size and location deemed necessary to carry out the purposes of the City of Huron general plan and this title; 
D.  Coordinate policies and regulations of the City of Huron with regard to the use of land with such policies and regulations of the County of Fresno in order to facilitate transition from county to municipal jurisdiction; 
E.  Regulate the size and use of lots, yards and other spaces; 
F.  Regulate the use, location, height, bulk and size of buildings and structures; 
G.  Regulate the intensity of land use; 
H.  Regulate the density in residential areas to conform with the general plan; 
I.  Establish requirements for off-street parking; 
J.  Regulate signs and billboards; 
K.  Maintain and enhance significant environmental resources; 
L.  Protect agricultural producers in areas of planned urban expansion; 
M.  Provide for the enforcement of the regulations of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.01.040 - Applicability. 
This title shall apply, to the extent permitted by law to all property in the incorporated boundaries of the City of Huron whether owned by private individuals, firms, corporations or organizations; by the City of Huron or its agencies, by the County of Fresno or its agencies, by the State of California or its agencies or political subdivisions, by the United States or any of its agencies. Any governmental agency shall be exempt from the provisions of this title only to the extent that such property may not be lawfully regulated by the City of Huron. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.01.050 - Compliance with this title. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any building or structure to be moved, erected, altered, enlarged, or rebuilt that does not strictly conform to the provisions of this title, except as may be otherwise authorized by Chapter 17.74 relating to nonconforming uses and standards. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any lot, parcel, yard, open space, or land to be used for any purpose not specifically permitted by this title. 
C.  Any use not specifically permitted by the provisions of this title is prohibited. 
D.  No department, official, or employee of the City of Huron vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses for buildings, structures, or uses subject to the requirements of this title may or shall issue a permit or license in conflict with the provisions of this title; any permit or license issued in conflict with any provisions of this title shall become null and void from its beginning. No permit or license may or shall be issued by any department, official or employee of the City of Huron for any building, structure; or use subject to the requirements of this title on a parcel of land where the department, official, or employee is aware that a violation of this title exists. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.01.060 - Relationship to other regulations and requirements. 
This title and the provisions thereof shall amend and supersede all prior related ordinances. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.01.070 - Buildings under construction. 
Any building or structure for which a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title may be completed and used in accordance with the plans, specifications, and permits on which said building permit was granted, if construction is commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days after the issuance of said permit and is diligently pursued to completion. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.01.080 - Validity. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this title is for any reason declared to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not effect the validity of the remaining portions of this title. The city council hereby declares that it would have adopted the ordinance codified in this title and each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase, or portion thereof, irrespective of the section, that any one or more sections, subsections, clauses, phrases, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.01.090 - Repeals. 
The repeal, amendment or modification of any prior ordinances of the City of Huron shall not effect any pending prosecutions for violation of any ordinances hereby repealed, amended, or modified. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.02 - ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 
Sections: 
 
17.02.010 - Establishment of base zoning districts. 
In order to classify, regulate, and restrict the uses of lands and buildings, to regulate and restrict the height, bulk and construction of buildings, to regulate the area of yards and other open spaces around buildings, and to regulate the intensity of land use and the density of population, the following base zoning districts are hereby established: 
Residential Districts 
R-A 	Single-Family Residential/Agricultural 24,000 sq. ft. lot minimum 
R-l-A 	Single-Family Low Density Residential 12,000 sq. ft. lot minimum 
R-l 	Single-Family Medium Density Residential 6,000 sq. ft. lot minimum 
R-2 	Medium High Density Residential 9,000 sq. ft. lot minimum 
R-3 	High Density Multi-Family Residential 9,000 sq. ft. lot; 1,500 sq. ft. per unit minimum 
R-3-A 	High Density Multi-Family Residential, one story 9,000 sq. ft. lot; 1,500 sq. ft. per unit minimum 
MHP 	Mobilehome Park 1 acre, 1,500 sq. ft. per unit minimum 
 
  
Commercial Districts 
C-P 	Administrative and Professional Office 
CBD 	Central Business and Shopping 
C-S 	Service Commercial (Central Trading) 
C-H 	Highway Commercial 
 
  
Industrial Zone 
M-L 	Light Industrial 
M-H 	Heavy Manufacturing 
 
  
Special Purpose Districts 
O 	Open Space and Recreation 
P 	Off-Street Parking 
UR 	Urban Reserve 
P-F 	Public Facilities 
PUD 	Planned Unit Development 
GP 	General Provisions and Exceptions 
 
Every lot or parcel of land, or portion thereof, within the incorporated City of Huron shall be classified in only one of the base zoning districts established by this section. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.02.020 - Establishment of combining zone districts. 
In order to classify, restrict, and segregate the uses of lands and buildings, to regulate and restrict the height, bulk and construction of buildings, to regulate the area of yards and other open spaces around buildings, and to regulate the intensity of land use and the density of population, in addition to those restrictions contained in a base zone district, the following combining zoning districts are hereby established: 
A-A 	Airport Compatibility Combining District 
C-L 	Cluster Combining District 
D-D-1 	Design District 
D-D-2 	CBD Design District 
D-D-6 	Industrial Design District 
G-H 	Geologic Hazard Combining District 
P-D 	Precise Development District 
 
In addition to being classified in a base zoning district, a lot or parcel of land, or portion thereof, may be classified in one or more combining zoning districts established by this section. In such cases all building and properties shall be designed in accordance with the regulations in the base and combining zone districts. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.02.030 - Zoning maps. 
The boundaries of the zones established by this chapter are not included in this title, but are shown on the official zoning maps available at the Huron planning department and other information shown thereon shall be as much as part of this title as if the matters and information set forth on such maps were all fully described herein. Where an interpretation is required for the precise boundary of a zone district, such interpretation shall be made in conformance with Chapter 17.73. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.02.040 - Specific plan districts. 
Specific plans adopted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.43 of this title shall be incorporated as a part of this title. Any adopted specific plans shall define the zone boundaries and the terms and conditions of development within those boundaries. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.02.050 - Rules applying to uncertain boundaries on zoning map. 
The following shall apply in determining uncertain boundaries of a district as shown on the official zoning map: 
A.  Where a boundary follows a public street or alley, the centerline of the street shall be the boundary. Where a boundary follows a lot line, the lot line shall be the boundary. 
B.  Where a district boundary divides a lot or parcel, the location of the boundary, unless indicated by dimension, shall be determined by the planning commission based on facts of the property, planned land use, general plan conformity, site planning constraints and opportunities and other material facts. Such decisions shall govern unless appealed to the city council. 
C.  Where any public right-of-way is officially vacated or abandoned, the land use district regulations applied to abutting property shall thereafter extend to the centerline of such vacated or abandoned right-of-way. 
D.  In remaining cases, the planning department shall determine the location of the district boundary. The decision shall be based on the conformity with the general plan. Such a decision may be appealed to the planning commission in accordance with subsection B of this section. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.02.060 - Pre-zoning. 
The City may pre-zone unincorporated property adjoining the City. This process shall comply with Chapter 17.76 (Amendments to this Title). The zoning shall become effective upon annexation. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.02.070 - General requirements. 
A.  Application. All land or structures shall be used and constructed in accordance with the regulations and requirements of the zoning ordinance including obtaining applicable permits prior to use initiation. 
B.  Conflicting Permits and Licenses to be Voided. All permits and licenses shall be issued in conformance with the provisions of this zoning ordinance. Any permit or license issued and in conflict with this zoning ordinance shall be null and void. 
C.  Similar Uses Permitted. When a use is not specifically listed in this zoning ordinance, the planning department may, but is not required to, determine, based on substantial evidence, that the use is similar to other uses listed, and may therefore be treated the same as that similar use. 
In making such determination, the planning department shall make all of the following findings based on substantial evidence: 
1.  The proposed use meets the intent of, and is consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the general plan. 
2.  The proposed use meets the intent of, and is consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of any applicable specific plan. 
3.  The proposed use meets the stated purpose and general intent of the district in which the proposed use is to be located. 
4.  The proposed use does not adversely impact the public health, safety and general welfare of the City's residents. 
5.  The proposed use shares characteristics common with, and is not of greater intensity, density, or greater environmental impact, than those uses listed in the zone district in which it is to be located. 
6.  Classification. The commission (or council in case of an appeal) shall classify such use as to permitting such use by right or permitting such use subject to a conditional use permit. 
7.  Limitations in Powers to Classify. In no instance shall the commission (or council in case of an appeal) determine that a use shall be permitted in a district when such use is specifically listed as first permissible in a less restricted district e.g., a use listed in the M-L district shall not be permitted in the M-H district. 
8.  Effect of Determinations. Uses classified pursuant to this section shall be regarded as listed uses. The City shall maintain an up-to-date list of all such classifications. 
D.  Minimum Requirements. When interpreting and applying the regulations of this zoning ordinance, the provisions shall be the minimum requirements, unless otherwise specified. 
E.  Conflict with Other Regulations. Where conflicts occur between the provisions of this zoning ordinance and the building and fire codes, or other regulations of the City, the more restrictive shall apply. 
It is not intended that this zoning ordinance shall interfere with, repeal, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement in effect at the time of adoption. Where this zoning ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of structures or land, the provisions of this zoning ordinance shall apply. 
Nothing contained in this zoning ordinance shall be deemed to repeal or amend any regulation of the City requiring a permit or license or both. Nor shall anything in this zoning ordinance be deemed to repeal or amend the building code of the City. 
F.  Language. In interpreting this zoning ordinance, the term "shall" is mandatory, and the term "may" is permissive. 
G.  Density and Intensity. The density and intensity limitations established in the zoning ordinance shall apply to each lot. 
H.  Improvements. All provisions and improvements shall be installed as required by Title 16 of the Huron Municipal Code, the City of Huron subdivision ordinance and improvement standards. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.03 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.03.010 - Construction. 
For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this title, words, phrases, and terms shall be deemed to have the meaning ascribed to them in Section 17.03.020. In constructing the provisions of this title, specific provisions shall supersede general provisions relating to the same subject, and text shall supersede diagrams relating to the same subject. Words, phrases, and terms not defined in this section shall have the meaning commonly or logically associated therewith, or as clarified by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.03.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this title: 
"Abandoned" means to cease or suspend from developing or maintaining a building, structure or use for ninety (90) days or lesser time as may be specified herein. 
"Abandoned activity" means a business or activity with no reported sales or activity for a period of at least one hundred eighty (180) days. Exceptions are temporary closures for repairs, alterations, or other similar situations. 
"Abandoned sign" means any display not used for a period of ninety (90) days or more which is considered a public nuisance pursuant to the City of Huron Municipal Code. 
"Abut, abutting (adjacent)" means two or more parcels sharing a common boundary, of at least one point. To physically touch, border upon border, or to share a common corner or property line, except where two or more lots adjoin only at a corner or corners, they shall not be considered as abutting unless the common property line between the two parcels measures not less than eight feet in a single direction. For the purposes of this title, abutting properties shall include those properties separated by any road, street, walkway, easement, alley right-of-way or highway, except a major highway. 
"Access" means safe, adequate, and usable ingress or egress to a property or use. 
"Access drive" or "access way" means a way or means of approach to provide entrance to a property that is safe, adequate and useable as ingress or egress for pedestrians and vehicles. 
"Accessory building or structure" means a structure detached from a principal structure on the same lot, incidental to the principal building, and not designed for human habitation (not a secondary dwelling). An accessory building or structure may be erected only after the principal structure or building is established. 
"Accessory living quarters" means living quarters within an accessory building located on the same premises with the main building, for use by temporary guests of the occupant of the premises, such quarters having no kitchen facilities and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit. 
"Accessory use" means a use of land or building that is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building located on the same lot. An accessory use may be established only after the principal use is established. 
"Acre" means a full acre containing forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet of area within property lines of a lot or parcel. 
"Action" means the decision made by the review authority on a land use application, including appropriate findings, environmental determination and conditions of approval, where applicable. 
"Actual cash value" means current market value as determined by a certified real property appraiser or actual sales price. 
"Address sign" means the numeric reference of a structure or use to a street address included as a part of a wall or monument sign. 
"Adjacent" means near, close or abutting; for example, an industrial district across the street or highway from a residential district shall be considered as "adjacent." 
"Adult-oriented businesses" means businesses selling goods or entertainment of a sexual nature. 
"Advertising structure" means any notice or advertisement, pictorial or otherwise, and all such structures used as an outdoor display, regardless of size and shape, for the purposes of making anything known, the origin or place of sale of which is not on the property with such advertising structure. 
"A-frame sign" means a freestanding sign usually hinged at the top, or attached in a similar manner, and widening at the bottom to form a shape similar to the letter "A." 
"Agriculture" means the use of land for farming, dairying, pasteurizing and grazing, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, apiaries, animal and poultry husbandry, and accessory activities, including but not limited to storage, harvesting, feeding or maintenance of equipment excluding stockyards, slaughtering or commercial food processing. 
"Airport" or "heliport" means any area of land designated and set aside for the landing and taking off of any aircraft regulated by Federal Aviation Administration. 
Airport, Private. "Private airport" means a private airport or airstrip intended for the sole use of the airport owner and his or her invitees. 
Airport, Public Use. "Public use airport" means a publicly or privately owned airport that offers the use of its facilities to the public without prior notice or special invitation or clearance, and that has been issued a California Airport Permit by the Division of Aeronautics of the California Department of Transportation. 
"Alley" means a public or private way, at the rear or side of property, permanently reserved as an ancillary means of vehicular or pedestrian access to abutting property. 
"Alterations" means any construction or physical change in the internal arrangement of rooms or the supporting members of a building or structure, or change in the appearance of any building or structure. 
"Amendment" means a change in the wording, context or substance of this title, addition or deletion or a change in the zone district boundaries or classifications upon the zoning map. 
"Amusement park" means an outdoor facility, which may include structures and buildings, where there are various devices for entertainment, including rides, booths for the conduct of games or sales of items, and buildings for shows and entertainment. 
"Ancillary use" means a use incidental to and customarily associated with a specific principal use, located on the same lot or parcel. 
"Animal hospital" means a place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment; the ancillary use of the premises as a kennel or a place where animals or pets are boarded for remuneration. 
"Animated or moving sign" means any sign or part of a sign which changes physical position by any movement or rotation or which gives the physical impression of such movement or rotation. 
"Antenna" means a device for transmitting or receiving radio, television, or any other transmitted signal. 
Apartment Dwelling, Three-Family or Triplex. "Three-family or triplex apartment dwelling" means a building containing not more than three kitchens, designed and/or used to house not more than three families, living independently of each other, including all necessary domestic household employees of each such family. 
"Apartment hotel" means a multiple dwelling which, in addition to dwelling units has one or more guestrooms. 
"Apartment/multifamily" means a portion of a structure designed and used for occupancy by two or more individual persons or families living independently of each other, including duplex, triplex, fourplex, and other multi-unit configurations. 
"Applicant" means owner(s) or lessee(s) of property, or their agent(s), or person(s) who have contracted to purchase property contingent upon their ability to acquire the necessary permits under this development code, or the agent(s) of such persons. 
Area, Computation of Area. The following methods will be used to compute the area of sign copy: 
1.  The area of a sign is to be computed by multiplying the total height by the total length of all faces of the sign copy, excluding framework or base. 
2.  Where a two-sided sign contains identical copy on each side, the area of the sign shall include both sides. 
3.  The area of a freestanding sign which has three or more faces shall be computed by adding the areas of each face of the sign. 
4.  The area of a freestanding sign that is an object or statuary shall be computed by the appropriate mathematical equation for determining total surface of an object. 
"Attached" means any structure that has an interior wall or roof in common with another structure. 
"Auto accessory parts (new) retail sales" means the sale of differential and transmission assemblies, engine blocks or heads and similar head parts, radiators, and tires and wheels, and tail pipes and mufflers. There shall be no machine work or repairs or installation of merchandise permitted on the premises, nor shall there be a service garage or automobile service of any kind. 
"Automobile sales lot" means an open area used for the display, sale and/or rental of new or used automobiles. 
"Automobile service station" means an area which provides for the servicing or fueling of motor vehicles, including tube and tire repairs, battery charging, storage of merchandise and supplies related to the servicing of motor vehicles, sale of gasoline and other fuel and lubricants, motor vehicle washing, grease racks, and motor vehicle repairs, excluding body and fender work, engine overhauling and replacement, transmission work and other similar activities. 
"Automobile wrecking" means the wrecking or dismantling of motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage of, sale of or dumping of dismantled, partly dismantled, or wrecked motor vehicles or their parts, or salvaging of their parts. The presence on a site of three or more motor vehicles which have not been capable of operating normally for thirty (30) days or more shall constitute prima facie evidence of a motor vehicle wrecking yard. 
"Awning" means a roof-like cover that is attached to and projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding from the elements. 
Bakery, Large. "Large bakery" means a commercial enterprise engaged in large-scale production and wholesale marketing of bakery goods, and which may include incidental retail sales. 
Bakery, Small. "Small bakery" means a retail commercial enterprise engaged in the production of bakery goods intended for retail sale on site and not including any wholesale activities. 
"Banner, flag, pennant or balloon" means any cloth, bunting, plastic, paper, or similar material used for advertising purposes attached to or pinned on or from any structure, staff, pole, line, framing or vehicle, including captive balloons and inflatable signs but not including official flags of the United States, the State of California, and other states of the nation, counties, municipalities, official flags of foreign nations and nationally or internationally recognized organizations. 
"Bar" means a structure, or part of a structure, used primarily for the sale or dispensing of liquor by the drink. 
"Base flood" means a flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year; also referred to in other sources and this text as the one hundred (100) year flood. 
"Base zone" means a zoning district which includes use, height, bulk, space, and development standards for the regulation of development in a particular area (e.g., R-1, C-R, I-L). 
"Basement" means a story partly or completely underground. A basement shall be counted as a story for purposes of height measurement where any portion of a basement has more than one-half of its height above grade. 
"Bed and breakfast" means a transient lodging establishment primarily engaged in providing overnight or otherwise temporary lodging for the general public and may provide meals to the extent otherwise permitted by law. 
"Bench sign" means copy painted on any portion of a bus stop bench, or other bench visible from the public right-of-way. 
"Berm" means a mound or embankment of earth. 
"Bicycle shop" means a business devoted to retail sales, service or repair of bicycles which are not powered by any type of mechanical device. 
"Billboard" means the same as an "Advertising structure." 
"Block" means a parcel of land surrounded by public streets, highways, freeways, railroad rights-of-way, flood control channels, creeks, washes, rivers or unsubdivided acreage or any combination thereof. 
"Block face" means one complete side of a block, usually facing a public street. 
"Boarding or rooming house" means a structure where lodging and meals for three or more boarders is provided for compensation. 
"Breezeway" means a roofed passageway, open on at least two sides where the roof is structurally integrated with the structure of the main building. A fence or wall not exceeding six feet in height may be permitted on one side of the breezeway. 
"Building" means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
"Building area" means the net portion of the lot remaining after deducting all required setbacks from the gross area of the lot. 
"Building coverage" means the percent of lot area which may be covered by all the footprints of buildings or structures on a lot. 
"Building face and/or frontage" means the length of the single front building elevation in which the primary entrance to the business is located. If more than one business is located in any single building, then such length shall be limited to that portion which is occupied by each individual business (see multi-tenant structures and mini malls). 
Building Height. The "building height" is the vertical distance from the average elevation of the finished grade to the highest point of the structure, excluding chimneys and vents. 
"Building official" means the chief building officer of the City or a designee. 
"Building setback line" means the minimum distance as prescribed by this title between any property line and the closest point of the foundation of any building or structure related thereto. 
"Building site" means the ground area of a building together with all open spaces required by this title. 
Building, Main. "Main building" means a building within which is conducted the principal use permitted on the lot or site as provided by this title. 
Building, Principal or Primary. "Principal or primary building" means a building in which the principal use is conducted. 
Business, Retail. "Retail business" means the retail sale of any article, substance or commodity for profit or livelihood, conducted within a building, but not the sale of lumber or other building materials or the open storage or sale of any building materials or the sale of used or secondhand goods or materials of any kind. 
Business, Wholesale. "Wholesale business" means the wholesale handling of any article, substance or commodity for profit or livelihood, conducted within a building, but not including the sale of lumber or other building materials or the open storage or sale of any material or commodity, and not including the processing or manufacture of any product or substance. 
"Campground" means a plot of ground upon which two or more campsites are located, established, or maintained for occupancy by camping units of the general public as temporary living quarters for recreation, education, or vacation purposes. 
Camping Trailer. See "Travel trailer." 
"Camping unit" means any tent, trailer, cabin, lean-to, or similar structure established or maintained and operated in a campground as temporary living quarters for recreation, education, or vacation uses. 
"Caretaker's residence" means a single-family residence on the same property with, or an abutting property owned by the owner of, a commercial or manufacturing use which residence is occupied by one or more persons charged with care or protection of facilities used in such commercial or manufacturing use, and which residence is provided to the occupant as compensation for such services and for which he does not pay money or other thing of value other than his services. 
"Cargo container" means a large metal box typically used for the shipment of containerized goods. 
"Carnival" means a group of two or more devices or acts subject to council approval, operated or conducted for five days or less from time of set up and, in conjunction with an established business for the purpose of attracting the public or to advertise a product, idea or program. 
"Carport." A permanent roofed structure entirely open on two or more sides, used for vehicle parking formed by extension of the roof from the side of another building or a free-standing accessory building, not attached to another building, and except for structural support, it is entirely open on two or more sides. 
Carwash, Self-Service. "Self-service carwash" means any occupancy which provides for automobile washing to be done by the customer. There shall be no employees other than servicemen who check and maintain equipment and supervise the use of the facility. Equipment shall be limited to a water softener, water heater, soap mixing tank, low pressure vacuum units, and one one-horsepower electric motor and pump for each stall or similar equipment which shall produce only a low volume of sound. 
"Cemetery" means an area for burial or entombment of the deceased. 
"Centerline" means a line designated by official survey to be the center of the future or existing fully developed easement, street, road or highway, which may or may not coincide with the construction centerline. 
"Certificate of occupancy" means a permit issued by the planning and building services department prior to occupancy of a structure to assure that the structure is ready for occupancy with all defects corrected and all construction debris removed and the site graded to final grade. Additionally, all on-site amenities (i.e., paving, landscaping, etc.) shall be in place prior to the issuance of the permit. 
"Changeable copy sign" means a sign designed to allow the changing of copy through manual, mechanical, or electrical means including time and temperature. 
"Church" means a building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons regularly assemble for worship, and which buildings, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship. 
"City" means the City of Huron. 
"City attorney" means the city attorney of the City of Huron or his or her designee. 
"City council" means the city council of the City of Huron. 
"City official" means any employee of the City of Huron that has been duly authorized and delegated by the city council. 
"Civic event sign" means a temporary sign, other than a commercial sign, posted to advertise a civic event sponsored by a public agency, school, church, civic-fraternal organization, or similar noncommercial organization. 
"Clinic" means a place for outpatient medical services to human patients. 
"Club" means an association of persons (whether or not incorporated) organized for some common purpose, but not including a group organized primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a business. 
"Cluster district" means a subdivision development in which building lots are sized to conform to the "footprint" of the structures and sited closer together than conventional development, usually in groups or clusters, provided that the total density does not exceed that permitted under conventional zoning and subdivision regulations. The additional land that remains undeveloped is preserved as open space and recreation land. Private development easements around the structures are permitted for inclusion of private landscaping, pools, spas, yards, etc. 
"Cogeneration facility" means a facility which creates the sequential production of both thermal and electrical energy. 
"Collection facility" means a center for the acceptance by donation, redemption or purchase of recycling materials from the public, which may include the following: 
1.  Reverse vending machine(s); 
2.  Small collection facilities which occupy an area of less than five hundred square feet and may include: 
a.  A mobile unit to be removed from the site upon a daily basis, 
b.  Bulk reverse vending machine(s) or a grouping of reverse vending machines, 
c.  Kiosk-type units which may include permanent structures; 
3.  Large collection facilities which may occupy an area of more than five hundred (500) square feet and may include permanent structures. 
"College" means an educational institution offering advanced instruction in any academic field beyond the secondary level, but not including trade schools or business colleges. 
"Columbarium" means a structure of vaults lined with recesses for cinerary urns for the ashes of cremated bodies. 
"Combining (overlay) zone districts" means a zoning district that modifies use, height, bulk, space, or other development standards of the base zone with which it is combined (e.g., CL, design district, A-A). 
"Commercial coach" means a vehicle, without motive power, designed and equipped for human occupancy for industrial, professional, or commercial purposes. 
"Commercial districts" means the CBD, C-P and C-S zoning districts. 
"Commercial office" means any administrative or clerical office maintained as a business or any office established by a public service over which this title has jurisdiction, other than professional office. 
"Commercial purposes" means the raising, growing of any plant or plant crop; the raising, breeding, or training of any animal, bird, or fowl; or the providing of a service having profit as the primary aim. 
"Commercial seasonal/daily sign" means an "open" or "closed" window sign, posted on a daily or seasonal basis. 
"Commercial vehicle" means a vehicle customarily used as part of a business for the transportation of goods or people. 
"Commission" means the planning commission of the City of Huron. 
"Common area" means land within or related to a development, not individually owned or dedicated for public use, which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development and which may include such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate. 
"Common property line" means a lot line shared by two or more properties. 
"Communications equipment building" means a building housing electrical and mechanical equipment necessary for the conduct of a public communication business, with or without personnel. 
"Community apartment" means a development in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of an apartment located on the land. 
"Community care facility" means a state-authorized, certified, or licensed family care home, foster home, or group home serving six or fewer mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped persons or dependent and neglected children (Welfare and Institutions Code 5116). 
"Community center" means a building used for recreational, social, educational, or cultural activities, usually owned and operated by a public or nonprofit group or agency. 
"Community recreation facility" means a recreational facility, such as a park or swimming pool, maintained and operated for the benefit of residents of a particular residential development, including an apartment, condominium, townhouse, subdivision, or mobilehome park. 
"Conditional use permit" means a discretionary entitlement which may be granted under the provisions of this zoning ordinance and which when granted authorizes a specific use to be made of a specific property, subject to compliance with all terms and conditions imposed on the entitlement. 
"Condominium" means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common on a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial, or commercial building on such real property (Civil Code Section 783). 
"Construction commencement" means the start of construction of substantial site and structural improvements after a building permit has been issued, subject to determination by the planning department. 
"Contiguous" means the same as "Abut." 
"Convalescent home" means rest home. 
"Convalescent hospital" means an institution primarily engaged in the care of individuals recovering from illness. 
"Convenience zones" means an area within one-half-mile radius of a supermarket. 
"Corner cut-off" means the provision for and maintenance of adequate and safe visibility for vehicular and pedestrian traffic at all intersections of streets, alleys or private driveways. 
"Council" means the mayor/city council of the City of Huron. 
"Country club" means a land area and building containing recreational facilities, clubhouses, and usual accessory uses, open only to members and their guests for a membership fee. 
"County" means the County of Fresno. 
"County official" means any employee of the County of Fresno that has been duly authorized and delegated. 
"Coverage" means the same as "Lot coverage." 
"Crematory" means a building or structure operated in conjunction with a columbarium, mausoleum, cemetery, or mortuary containing one or more furnaces for the reduction of bodies of deceased persons to cremated remains. 
Cul-de-sac. See Street, Cul-de-sac. 
"Dairy farm" means any place or premises upon which milk is produced for sale or other distribution and where more than two cows or six goats are in location. 
"Day" means a calendar day. 
Day Care Facility, Children. "Children day care facility" means a facility which provides nonmedical care to children under eighteen (18) years of age in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual on less than a twenty-four (24) hour basis. Family day care homes are further divided into the following categories: small (up to eight children); large (nine to fourteen (14) children; and day care center fifteen (15) + children). Day care facilities include family day care homes, infant centers, pre-schools, and extended day care facilities. 
"Day nursery or child care nursery" means any group or building, building or portion thereof used primarily for the daytime care of children with or without compensation. 
"Days" shall always be consecutive calendar days unless otherwise stated. 
"Dead storage" is that type of storage in which the goods, property, or equipment come to rest for safekeeping in an approved zoning designation and are not put to use. Said property shall not be connected to utility services. 
"Decision making authority" means the planning department, planning commission, or city council, depending on which has been assigned the responsibility and authority for reviewing and approving a particular permit pursuant to Chapter 17.75. 
"Dedication" means a conveyance of land to some public use, especially streets, made by owner and accepted for such use by or on behalf of the public. 
"Defensible space" means a design concept term used to describe a series of physical design characteristics that maximize resident control of behavior, particularly crime, within a public semiprivate, or private area, structure, or community. 
"Density" means the number of dwelling units per gross acre, unless otherwise stated, for residential uses. 
"Density bonus" consistent with Government Code, a density bonus up to 35 percent over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the applicable zoning district will be available to developers who provide affordable housing as part of their projects. Developers of affordable housing will also be entitled to receive incentives on a sliding scale to a maximum of three, where the amount of density bonus and number of incentives vary according to the amount of affordable housing units provided. 
"Department" means the City of Huron planning and building services department hereafter referred to as the "department." 
"Design" means and includes the planning and engineering of the following: street alignments, grades and widths; drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities, including alignment and grades thereof; location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way; fire roads and fire breaks; lot size and configuration; traffic access; grading; land to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes; building and other such specific physical and aesthetic requirements. 
"Detached" means any building or structure that does not have a wall or roof in common with any other building or structure. 
"Development" means the placement or erection of any solid material or structure; discharge or disposal of any dredged material or any gaseous liquid, solid or thermal waste; grading, removing, dredging, mining or extraction of any soil or materials; change in the density or intensity of use of land, including, but not limited to, subdivision pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act (commencing with Section 66410 of the Government Code), and any other division of land, including lot splits, except where the land division is brought about in connection with the purchase of such land by a public agency for public recreational use; change in the intensity of use of water, or of access thereto; construction, reconstruction, demolition, or alteration of the size of any structure including any facility of any private, public or municipal utility; and the removal of any major vegetation. As used in this code, "structure" includes but is not limited to any building, road pipe flume, conduit, siphon, aqueduct, telephone line, and electrical power transmission and distribution line. A "project," as defined in Government Code Section 65931, is included with this definition. An increase of twenty-five (25) percent or more on assessed valuation shall be considered a substantial increase in development. 
"Directional signs" means any sign which contains only the name, location of building, services and/or occupants that are not located on the parcel upon which the sign is located. Said signs are separate from and are not to be construed as an advertising structure. 
"Director" means the director of the City of Huron planning department. 
"Discretionary decision" means a decision requiring the exercise of judgment or deliberation when the public official or body decides to approve or disapprove a particular activity. 
"District" means a zoning district established by this zoning ordinance. 
"District attorney" means the district attorney of the County of Fresno or a designee. 
"Domestic agriculture" means agricultural activities carried on for noncommercial purposes. 
"Dormitory" means a structure intended principally for sleeping accommodations, and where nonindividual kitchen facilities are provided, where such structure is related to an educational or public institution or is maintained and operated by a recognized nonprofit welfare organization. 
"Double faced sign" means a single structure designed with the intent of providing copy on both sides. 
Double Frontage Lot. See Lot (through). 
"Drainage channel" means any existing open ditch, culvert or channel, naturally created or designed to transmit water for flood control or irrigation purposes. 
"Drugstore" means a retail store engaged in the sale of prescription drugs and patent medicines, carrying related items such as cosmetics and toiletries and such unrelated items as tobacco and novelty merchandise. Such as may also include a soda fountain or lunch counter. 
"Dump" means a place used for the disposal, abandonment or discarding of garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, rubble, waste material, offal or dead animals. 
"Duplex" means a detached building designed for or occupied exclusively by two families living independently of each other. Of which structure is joined by a common wall or roofline. 
"Dwelling" means a structure or portion thereof designed for residential occupancy, not including hotels or motels. (See "Dwelling unit.") 
"Dwelling unit" means one or more rooms including bathroom(s) and a kitchen, designed as a unit for occupancy by one family for living and sleeping purposes. 
Dwelling, Multifamily or Multiple. "Multifamily or multiple dwelling" means a structure containing two or more dwelling units or a combination of two or more separate single-family dwelling units (duplexes, triplexes, townhouses or apartments). 
Dwelling, Single-Family. "Single-family dwelling" means a building or buildings (excluding mobilehomes) designed for or occupied exclusively by one family, including a manufactured home in compliance with California Government Code Section 65852.3. 
"Easement" means a grant of one or more property rights by the property owner for the use of public, a corporation or another person or entity. 
"Eaveline" means the bottom of the roof eave or the roof parapet where no eave exists. 
"Educational institution" means a school, college or university, supported wholly or in part by public funds or giving general academic instruction equivalent to the standards prescribed by the State Board of Education. 
"Electric distribution substations" means an assembly of equipment which is part of a system for the distribution of electric power where electric energy is received at a subtransmission voltage and transformed to a lower voltage for distribution for general public use. 
"Electric transmission substation" means an assembly of equipment which is part of a system for the transmission of electric power where electric energy is received at a very high voltage from its source of generation by means of a network of high voltage lines and where, by means of transformers, said high voltage is transformed to a low subtransmission voltage for purposes of supplying electric power to large individual customers, interchange connections with other power-producing agencies, or electric distribution substations for transformation to still lower voltages for distribution to smaller individual users. 
"Entertainment (live)" means any act, play, revue, pantomime, scene, dance act, or song and dance act, or any combination thereof, performed by one or more persons whether or not they are compensated for the performance. 
"Face" means the area or display surface used for the message. 
"Family" means any 2 or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
"Farmworker/Employee housing" means in compliance with the Employee Housing Act, farmworker housing up to twelve (12) units or thirty-six (36) beds are considered an agricultural use and permitted in any zone that permits agricultural uses and employee housing for six or fewer employees are to be treated as a single family structure and permitted in the same manner as other dwellings of the same type in the same zone. 
"Farmers' market" means a retail market where agricultural produce is offered for sale to the general public, either within an enclosed building or outdoors. 
"Fast-food restaurant" means an establishment whose principal business is the sale of pre-prepared or rapidly prepared food directly to the customer in a ready-to-consume state for consumption either within the restaurant building or off the premises. 
"Feed lot or feed yard" means a lot, or portion of a lot used for the enclosing of livestock for market, and not operated in connection with a bona fide farm. 
"Fence" means an artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land. 
"Filling station" means the same as "Automobile service station." 
"Flashing sign" means any directly or indirectly illuminated sign that contains an intermittent or sequential flashing light source. 
"Flood boundary floodway map (FBFM)" means an official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration, using their own information or information supplied by the Fresno County water agency, the Fresno County public works department, the State Reclamation Board, or other Federal Agencies, has delineated both the areas of flood hazard and the floodway. 
"Flood control channel" means the same as "Drainage channel." 
"Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special and historical flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the City of Huron. 
"Flood or flooding" means any general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from the overflow of inland or tidal waters or from the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood Zone. The flood has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year; also referred to as the one hundred (100) year flood, regulatory flood, intermediate regional flood, or base flood. 
"Floodplain" means a land area adjoining a river, stream, watercourse, or lake which is likely to be flooded, including alluvial cones, wherein streams may change their course. 
"Floodway or designated floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot or increasing the velocity to greater than seven feet per second, whichever results in the widest floodway. The floodway is delineated on the flood boundary floodway map and the State Reclamation Board designated floodway map. Floodways are also delineated on the official zoning maps as floodplain primary (FPP) district. 
Floor Area. Whenever the term "floor area" is used in this zoning ordinance as a basis for requiring off-street parking for any structure, it shall be assumed that, unless otherwise stated, said floor area applies not only to the ground floor area but also to any additional stories, or basement of the structure. All horizontal dimensions shall be taken from the exterior faces of walls including enclosed porches. 
"Freestanding sign" means a sign which is supported by one or more uprights, braces, poles, or similar structural components that is not attached to a building or buildings. 
"Front wall" means the nearest wall of a structure to the street upon which the structure faces, but excluding cornices, canopies, eaves, or any other architectural embellishments. 
"Frontage" means the side of a lot abutting a street (the front lot line), except the side of a corner lot. 
"Funeral home" means an establishment with facilities for the preparation of the deceased for burial or cremation, for the viewing of the body, and for funerals. 
"Future tenant identification sign" means a temporary sign which identifies a future use of a site or building. 
"Garage" means an enclosed building, or a portion of an enclosed building used for the parking of vehicles. 
"Garage or yard sale" means the sale of goods which is undertaken by the occupant of a residence where the garage sale occurs, which is no longer than two consecutive days in duration and which occurs no more frequently than twice a year. 
Garage, Private. "Private garage" means a detached accessory building or a portion of a main building on the same lot as a dwelling for five but not more than fifteen (15) persons other than members of the resident family, excepting a nursing home as defined in this section. 
Garage, Repair. "Repair garage" means a building other than a private garage used for the care, repair or equipment of automobiles, or where such vehicles are parked or stored for remuneration, hire or sale. 
Garage, Storage. "Storage garage" means any premises, used exclusively for the storage of vehicles. 
"General plan" means the City of Huron general plan as adopted by the city council, pursuant to Government Code, hereafter referred to as the "general plan." 
"Governmental sign" means a sign erected and maintained pursuant to and in discharge of any governmental function, or required by law, ordinance of other governmental regulation. 
"Grade" means the degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface (see "Slope"), and the average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of a building. In case walls are parallel to and within five feet of a sidewalk, said ground level shall be measured at the sidewalk. 
"Grand opening" means a promotional activity not exceeding thirty (30) calendar days used by newly established businesses, within two months after occupancy, to inform the public of their location and service available to the community. Grand opening does not mean an annual or occasional promotion of retail sales by a business. 
"Granny flat" means an additional dwelling unit intended for the sole occupancy of one or two adult persons who are sixty-two (62) years of age or over, and the floor area of the attached "granny flat" dwelling unit does not exceed thirty (30) percent of the existing living area of the primary residence or the floor area of the detached "granny flat" dwelling unit does not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square foot on a lot designated as residential, as defined in Government Code Section 65852.1. 
"Greenhouse" means a building or structure constructed chiefly of glass, glass-like translucent material, cloth or lath, which is devoted to the protection or cultivation of flowers or other tender plants. 
"Gross acreage" means the total area within the lot lines of a lot or parcel of land before public streets, easements or other areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use are deducted from such lot or parcel, and does not include adjacent lands already dedicated for such purposes. 
"Gross floor area" means the area included within the surrounding exterior finish wall surface of a building or portion thereof, exclusive of courtyards. 
"Group care facility" means a facility or detached dwelling unit providing twenty-four (24) hour nonmedical care of persons in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual. 
"Guest" means any transient person who occupies a room for sleeping purposes. 
"Guest house" means living quarters, having no kitchen facilities, located on the same premises with a main building and occupied for the sole use of members of the family temporary guest, or persons permanently employed on the premises. 
"Guest ranch" means a building or buildings and open space for use of transients only, providing housing and meals and having recreational activities of one or more types for compensation. 
"Guest room" means a room which is designed to be occupied by one or more guests for sleeping purposes, having no kitchen facilities, not including dormitories. 
"Habitable structure" means any structure used for living purposes, including working, sleeping, cooking, eating, or recreation. 
"Half-story" means a story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, parts of which are not more than three feet above the floor of such story. 
"Hazardous waste" means a waste, or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may either: 
1.  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible, illness; 
2.  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of or otherwise managed. 
"Hedge" means a fence or barrier formed or bushes set close together. 
"Height" means the vertical distance from the base to the top of any structure, measured from lowest point of the structure, or average grade. 
"Height of sign" means the greatest vertical distance measured from the existing planned grade of the top of the curb or the street frontage to the highest element of the sign. 
"Hog ranch or farm" means any premises used for the commercial breeding or raising of hogs which are kept confined as a stockyard and fed concentrated food for the purposes of developing or fattening the animals for retail or wholesale sale. (Hogs raised as an FFA, 4-H, or Junior Farmer project are not to be classified as a hog ranch or farm unless the express purpose is for the commercial wholesale or retail sales market.) 
"Holiday decoration sign" means temporary signs, in the nature of decorations, clearly incidental to and customarily associated with holidays. 
"Home for the aged" means the same as "Rest home." 
"Home occupation" means an activity conducted in compliance with Chapter 17.19 carried out by an occupant conducted as an accessory use within the primary dwelling unit. 
1.  Such home occupation may include: 
a.  Consultive professional occupations upon approval of the planning commission and city council, whose function is one of rendering a service and does not involve the dispensing of goods or products; 
b.  The giving of music lessons and similar occupations; 
c.  Drafting, designing and the like, using only the normal drafting equipment. 
2.  The following criteria shall apply for the evaluation of a "home occupation." 
a.  There shall be no employment of help other than members of the resident family. 
b.  There shall be no use of materials or mechanical equipment not recognized as being part of normal household or hobby uses, except that such equipment as typewriters, adding machines, portable hair dryers, permanent wave machines, filing cabinets and desks. 
c.  There shall be no sales of products or services not produced on the premises. 
d.  The use shall not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic beyond that normal to the district in which it is located. 
e.  It shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for delivery of materials to or from the premises, other than a vehicle not to exceed one ton, owned by the operator of such home occupation, which shall be stored in an entirely enclosed garage. 
f.  No excessive or unsightly storage of materials or supplies, indoor or outdoor, for purposes other than those permitted in the district. 
g.  It shall not involve the use of signs or structures other than those permitted in the district of which it is a part. 
h.  Not more than one room in the dwelling shall be employed for the home occupation. 
i.  No building or space outside of the main building shall be used for home occupational purposes except for agricultural uses. 
j.  In no way shall the appearance of the structure be so altered or the conduct of the occupation within the structure be such that the structure may be reasonably recognized as serving a nonresidential use (either by color, materials or construction, lighting, signs, sounds or noises, vibrations, etc.). 
k.  There shall be no use of utilities or community facilities beyond that normal to the use of the property for residential or agricultural purposes as defined in that district. 
"Horticultural" means the cultivation of an orchard, garden, or garden on a small or large scale. 
"Hospital" means an institution, designed within an integrated campus setting for the diagnosis, care, and treatment of human illness, including surgery and primary treatment. 
"Hotel" means a facility offering transient lodging accommodations on a daily rate to the general public with most rooms gaining access from an interior hallway, and providing additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreation facilities. 
"Household pets" means keeping of domesticated animals, fish, fowl, small birds; provided, that there shall be not more than two mature animals, fowl and small birds or any one species; provided, that they shall be kept in a safe and sanitary manner; and keeping of other pets; provided, that such other pets which are not kept exclusively within a dwelling shall be limited to not more than three adult animals, until such time that the keeping of animals as identified above, becomes a commercial use as determined by the city council. 
1.  Household pets shall not include horses, cows, goats, sheep, other equine, bovine, ovine or ruminant animals, pigs, predatory wild animals, ducks, geese, turkeys, game birds and fowl which normally constitute an agricultural use. The keeping of household pets or other animals is lawful only in those districts where the use is listed as a permitted use or when any household pets are kept as an accessory use to lawfully maintain residences in other districts. The keeping of any animal not herein described as a household pet shall not be deemed an accessory residential use. 
2.  Any person keeping or maintaining animals not defined as "household pets" by this subsection within an enclosure nearer than one hundred (100) feet from any residential zone shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and in violation of this title. 
"House trailer" means the same as "Mobilehome." 
"Housing for the elderly" means housing consisting of at least eight units restricted to a person sixty (60) years of age or older, or to a person/persons sixty (60) years or older plus spouse then residing with said elderly person. 
"Hunting club" means a designated area where wild game birds or animals may be hunted. Normally membership or entry fee is required as a prerequisite to hunting. 
"Identification sign" means a sign giving the nature, logo, trademark, or other identifying symbol, address, or any combination of the name, symbol and address of a building, business, development, or establishment on the premises where it is located. 
"Illegal sign" means any of the following: a sign erected without first complying with all ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of its construction and erection or use; a sign that was legally erected but whose use has ceased, or the structure upon which the display is placed has been abandoned by its owner, not maintained, or not used to identify or advertise an ongoing business for a period of not less than ninety (90) days; a sign that was legally erected which later became nonconforming as a result of the adoption of an ordinance, the amortization period for the display provided by the ordinance rendering the display nonconforming has expired, and conformance has not been accomplished; a sign which is a danger to the public or is unsafe; a sign which is a traffic hazard not created by relocation of streets or highways by the acts of the City or County. 
"Illuminated sign" means a sign with an artificial light source for the purpose of lighting the sign. 
"Industrial districts" means the M-L and M-H zoning districts. 
"Industry" means the manufacture, fabrication, processing, reduction or destruction of any article, substance or commodity, or any other treatment thereof in such a manner as to change the form, character or appearance thereof, and including storage elevators, truck storage yards, warehouses, wholesale storage, and other similar types of enterprise. 
"Infill development" means development that occurs on up to four contiguous vacant lots scattered within areas that are already largely developed or urbanized. 
"Institutional sign" means a sign identifying the premises of a church, school, hospital, rest home, or similar institutional facility. 
"Intent and purpose" means the commission and council, by the adoption of this zoning ordinance, have made a finding that the health, safety and welfare of the community will be served by the creation of the district and by the creation of the district and by the regulations therein. 
"Inverted 'T' frame sign" means a freestanding sign usually in the form or shape similar to the letter "T" which is upside down or inverted. Such signs are usually designed to be portable, hence they are not considered permanent signs. 
"Junk and salvage facility (also, dismantling and wreckage yard)" means primary or accessory use of structures and/or land for storage, dismantling and/or selling of cast-off, unused, scrap or salvage material or any sort. 
"Kennel" means any lot where four or more dogs, cats, or other small animals over the age of four months are kept, where such keeping is for pleasure, profit, breeding, or exhibiting, including places where said animals are boarded, kept for sale, or hire. 
"Kiosk" means an off-premise sign used for directing people to the sales office or models of a residential subdivision project. 
"Kitchen" means any room, all or part of which are designed and/or used for storage, refrigeration, cooking and the preparation of food. 
"Land use" means a description of how land is utilized. 
"Landscaping" means an area devoted to or developed and maintained predominantly with native or exotic plant materials including turf, groundcover, trees, shrubs, and other plant materials; and also including accessory decorative outdoor landscape elements such as pools, fountains, paved or decorated surfaces (excluding driveways, parking, loading, or storage areas), and sculptural elements. 
"Laundromat" means an establishment providing washing, drying, or dry cleaning machines on the premises for rental use to the general public for family laundering or dry cleaning purposes. 
"Livestock" means any cattle, sheep, swine, goat, horse, mule, or other equine animals. 
"Livestock feedlot" means an enclosed area where animals are confined and fed concentrated food to raise or fatten them for slaughter or commercial sale. 
"Living area" means the interior inhabitable area of a dwelling unit, including the basement and attic, but excluding the garage or any accessory structure. 
"Loading" means the removal or placement of any commodity in, on or from a vehicle of any type. 
"Loading space" means an off-street space or berth on the same lot with a main building, or contiguous to a group of buildings for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading, and which abuts a street, alley or other appropriate means of ingress or egress. 
"Local street" means a street or road primarily for service to abutting property. 
"Logo sign" means an established trademark or symbol identifying the use of a building. 
Lot. 
1.  A single parcel of land for which a legal description is filed on record or the boundaries of which are shown on a subdivision map or record of survey map filed in the office of the county recorder. 
2.  The term "lot" shall include a part of a single parcel of land when such part is used as though a separate lot for all of the purposes of this title. 
3.  The term "lot" shall include two or more abutting lots when combined and used as though a single lot. 
The classification of lots are as follows: 
Corner. A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets at an angle of not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. If the angle is greater than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees, the lot shall be considered an "interior lot." 
Cul-de-sac. A lot fronting on, or with more than one-half of its lot width fronting on, the turnaround-end of a cul-de-sac street. 
Curve. A lot fronting on the outside curve of the right-of-way of a curved street, which street has a centerline radius of two hundred fifty (250) feet or less. 
Flag. A lot having access or an easement to a public or private street by a narrow, private right-of-way. 
Interior. A lot abutting only one street. 
Key. A lot with a sideline that abuts the rear line of any one or more adjoining lots. 
Reverse Corner. A corner lot, the rear of which abuts the side of another lot. 
Through. A lot having frontage on two generally parallel streets. 
"Lot area" means the total area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any street rights-of-way and including only that area which is usable for its intended purpose. 
Lot Area, Minimum. "Minimum lot area" means the smallest lot area established by this title on which a use structure may be located in a particular zoning district. 
"Lot averaging" means the design of individual adjoining lots within a residential subdivision in which the average lot area equals the minimum prescribed area for the low residential land use zoning district. To maintain an average, some lots may be reduced to a maximum of ten percent below the minimum lot size, while a corresponding number of lots shall each maintain a lot area of at least ten percent above the minimum lot size. Allowable density shall be within the prescribed maximums. 
"Lot coverage" means that portion of the lot that is covered by buildings and structures. 
"Lot depth" means the average distance between the front and rear lot lines or between the front line and the intersection of the two sidelines, if there is no rear line. 
"Lot frontage" means the portion of the lot contiguous to the street. 
"Lot line" means any boundary of a lot. The classifications of lot lines are: 
Front. On an interior lot, the line separating the parcel from the street. On a corner lot, the shorter lot line abutting a street. (If the lot lines on a corner lot are equal in length, the front lot line shall be determined by the planning department.) On a through lot, the lot line abutting the street providing access to the lot. 
Interior. Any lot line not abutting a street. 
Rear. A lot line, not intersecting a front lot line, which is most distant from and most closely parallel to the front lot line. In the case of an irregularly shaped lot or a lot bounded by only three lot lines, a line within the lot having a length of ten feet, parallel to and most distant from the front lot line shall be interpreted as the rear lot line for the purpose of determining required yards, setbacks, and other provisions of this Development Code. 
Side. Any lot line which is not a front or rear lot line. 
"Lot of record" means a lot held in separate ownership as shown on the records of the county recorder at the time of the passage of an ordinance or regulation establishing the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
"Lot width" means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a midway point between the front and rear lot lines. 
"Lower income households" means households with incomes eighty (80) percent or less of the County median income, or those superseded by the guidelines which comply with the California Department of Housing and Community Development Guidelines. 
"Main building" means the building in which the principal use of a lot is located. 
"Major street or major highway" means a highway which is used, designed to be used, or is necessary to carry heavy volumes of traffic, and designated as a "major highway or arterial" in the circulation element of the general plan. 
"Manufactured carport." A detached factory manufactured accessory building customarily used as a carport not attached to another building, and except for structural support, it is entirely open on all four sides that is not located in the front yard of a residential dwelling. 
"Manufactured home" means a factory built or manufactured home including mobilehomes, as permitted by the State of California and federal laws. 
"Mausoleum" means a tomb for one or more deceased persons. 
"Median" means a paved or planted area separating a street or highway into two or more lanes of opposite direction of travel. 
"Median income" means a specified threshold which complies with the California Department of Housing and Community Development Guidelines where one-half of the County earns more and one-half of the County earns less income. 
"Medical building" means clinics or offices for doctors, dentists, oculists, chiropractors, osteopaths or similar practitioners of the healing arts; including accessory laboratory and prescription pharmacy uses, but not including office for veterinarians. 
"Mineral exploration" means exploration by scientific means, in a manner similar to the exploration for petroleum products, for the purpose of determining the existence and extent of commercial mineral deposits. 
"Mini-mall" means a parcel with a commercial structure divided into at least three spaces for rent or a parcel with a collection of structures with different tenants. 
"Ministerial" means staff and planning department and/or building inspection personnel. 
"Ministerial decision" means a decision requiring the application of the statutes, ordinances, or regulations to the facts as prescribed and involving little or no personal judgment by the public official or decision making body as to the wisdom or manner of carrying out a project. 
"Mini-warehouse" means a structure containing separate storage spaces of varying sizes leased or rented on an individual basis. 
"Minor plan modification" means a minor change or modification of an approved development plan which is not in conflict with the intent, policy, or expectations or original project approvals. 
"Mixed-use development" means the development of a parcel(s) or structure(s) with two or more different land uses such as, but not limited to a combination of residential, office, manufacturing, retail, public, or entertainment in a single or physically integrated group of structures. 
"Mobile recycling unit" means an automobile, truck, trailer or van, licensed by the Department of Motor Vehicles which is used for the collection of recyclable materials, including bins, boxed, or containers transported by trucks, vans or trailers, and used for the collection of recyclable materials. 
"Mobilehome" means a structure transportable in one or more sections, designed and equipped to contain not more than two dwelling units to be used with or without a foundation system. Mobilehome does not include a recreational vehicle, commercial coach, or manufactured housing. 
"Mobilehome accessory structure" means any awning, cabana, ramada, storage cabinet, storage building, private garage, carport, fence, windbreak, or porch of any residential building or structure established for the use of the occupant of a mobilehome on a lot. 
"Mobilehome park" means an area or tract of land where two or more lots are rented or leased or held out for rent or lease but not divided as owner occupied lots to accommodate mobilehomes for human occupancy. 
Mobilehome, One-Family. "One-family mobilehome" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation, which contains not more than one dwelling unit and which is not a recreational vehicle, commercial coach or factory-built home. 
"Moderate income" means persons with income of eighty (80) percent to one hundred twenty (120) percent of the County median income. 
"Monument sign" means an independent structure supported from grade to the bottom of the sign with the appearance of having a solid base where the total height of which is at least fifty (50) percent of the overall width of the sign. 
"Mortuary" means a place in which the deceased are kept until burial. 
"Motel" means a group of attached or detached buildings containing individual sleeping or living units, providing transient accommodations for up to thirty (30) days with garage or parking space conveniently located to each unit with most rooms gaining access from an exterior walkway, including tourist courts, auto courts, or motor lodges. 
"Nameplate sign" means sign, located on the premises, giving the name of address, or both, of the owner or occupant of a building or premises. 
"Nature or wildlife preserve" means an area set aside for the preservation of natural vegetation or wildlife where the general public may view the vegetation or wildlife, with or without charge. 
"Neighborhood" means an area of a community with characteristics that distinguish it from other community areas and which may include distinct ethnic or economic characteristics or boundaries defined by physical barriers, such as major highways and railroads or natural feature, such as rivers. 
"Net site area" means the total area within the lot lines of a lot or parcel of land after public street easements or other areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use are deducted from such lot or parcel. 
"Nonconforming (illegal)" means a structure, lot, or use which did not conform to applicable laws when constructed or initiated, and does not conform to the provisions of this title. 
"Nonconforming building (structure)" means a structure or building the size, dimensions, or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment to this zoning ordinance but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment, to conform to the present requirements of the zoning or districts. 
"Nonconforming lot" means a lot, the area, dimensions, or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of this zoning ordinance, but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the applicable zoning district or districts. 
"Nonconforming sign" means a legally established sign which fails to conform to the regulations of this title. 
"Nonconforming use" means a lawful use when established but which does not conform to subsequently established zoning or zoning regulations. 
"Nuisance" means an interference with the enjoyment and use of property. 
"Nursery school" means the same as "Day nursery." 
"Nursing home" means a structure operated as a lodging house in which nursing, dietary and other personal services are rendered to convalescents, not including persons suffering from contagious diseases, and which surgery is not performed and primary treatment, such as customarily is given in hospitals and sanitariums, is not provided. A convalescent home shall be deemed a nursing home. 
"Occupancy or occupied" means the residing of an individual or individuals overnight in a dwelling unit, or the installation, storage, or use of equipment, merchandise, or machinery in any public, commercial, or industrial building. 
"Office" means a business or commercial establishment for the rendering of service, administrative or consultation but excluding retail services. 
"Official plan line" means the future right-of-way of any road or highway as adopted by resolution of the city council. 
"Off-site" means located outside the lot in question. 
"Off-site sign" means any sign which advertises or informs in any manner businesses, services, goods, persons or events at some location other than upon which the sign is located. Off-premise sign, billboard, and outdoor advertising structure are equivalent terms. 
"Off-street parking" means an area for the temporary storage of motor vehicles that is directly accessible to but not located on a dedicated street right-of-way. 
Oil or Gas Exploration by Scientific Means. "Exploration by scientific means" means and includes, but is not limited to, the following: seismic surveys, magneto-telluric, magnetometer or gravity meter surveys; surface mapping and holes less than five hundred (500) feet deep drilled for the purpose of taking core samples, velocity readings, temperature measurements, or water samples. 
"One ownership" means ownership of real property by a person, persons, firm, corporation, or partnership, or any combination thereof, individually, jointly, or in common whereby such property is under a single or unified control. 
"On-site informational sign" means a sign commonly associated with, and not limited to, information and directions necessary or convenient for visitors coming on the property, including signs marking entrances and exits, parking areas, circulation direction, rest rooms, and pick-up and delivery areas. 
"Open house sign" means a temporary sign posted to indicate a salesperson is available to represent the property subject to sale, lease or rent. 
"Open space" means any parcel or area of land or water which is essentially unimproved and devoted to one or more of the following uses: preservation of natural resources; the managed production of resources; outdoor recreation; or public health and safety. 
"Ordinance" means the zoning ordinance of the City of Huron, Title 17, of the Huron Municipal Code. 
"Outdoor advertising structure" means any structure of any kind or character erected or maintained for outdoor purposes, upon which any outdoor advertising sign may be placed, and either: 
1.  Advertising a use not located on the site or a product on the site where it is located; or 
2.  Exceeding three hundred (300) square feet in area. See "Advertising structure" and "Sign." 
"Parcel" means a lot or parcel of land under one ownership that has been legally or subdivided or combined and is shown as a single parcel on the latest equalized assessment roll. (See Lot.) 
"Park" means public or private land used for active and passive recreation. 
"Parking area" means any public or private land area designed and used for parking motor vehicles capable of moving under their own power, including parking lots, garages, private driveways, and legally designated areas of public streets. 
"Parking district" means the same as the P district. 
"Parkway" means the area of a public street that lies between the curb and the adjacent property line or physical boundary definition such as fences or walls, which is used for landscaping tree lines and/or passive recreational purposes. 
"Patio, covered" means the same as structure, but not the same as a temporary accessory parking structure. 
"Permanent" means to endure, remain or to continue without fundamental or marked change. 
"Permanent storage" means the storage of motor vehicles, trailers, airplanes, boats, parts thereof, or building materials for a period of forty-eight (48) or more consecutive hours. 
"Permit" means written governmental permission issued by an authorized official empowering the holder thereof to do some act not forbidden by law but not allowed without such authorization. 
"Permitted use" means any use allowed in a land use zoning district and subject to the provisions applicable to that district. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, company, joint stock association, corporation, estate, trust, organization, business, business trust, public agency, school district, State of California, and its political subdivisions or instrumentality's, receiver, syndicate or any group or combination thereof, acting as a unit, including any trustee, receiver or assignee. 
Pets. See "Household pets." 
Pharmacy. See "Drug store." 
"Planned residential development (PRD)" or "planned unit development (PUD)" means a type of development characterized by comprehensive planning for the project as a whole, clustering of structures to preserve usable open space and other natural features, and a mixture of housing types within the prescribed densities. 
"Planning commission" means hearing and review body established by City of Huron. 
"Planning department" means the planning department for the City of Huron or his or her designee. 
"Plot" means a single unit parcel of land; or a parcel of land that can be identified and referenced to a recorded plat or map. 
"Plot plan" means a plan graphically describing proposed and existing buildings, structures, lot lines, and other required information submitted in conjunction with an application for discretionary or ministerial review and approval. 
"Pole sign" means a sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other support so that the bottom edge of the sign face is six feet or more above grade. 
"Political sign" means a temporary sign directly associated with national, state, or local elections. 
"Portable canopy." A non-porous stand alone, tent-like covering fastened to vertical and/or horizontal poles used for the purpose of providing shelter to items placed, or located thereunder, provided said poles are able to be easily removed and are not permanently affixed in or to the ground by poured footings or other means, and except for structural support, it is entirely open on all four sides that is not located in the front yard of a residential dwelling. 
"Portable sign" means a sign that is not permanently affixed to a structure or ground. 
"Poultry ranch" means the raising, breeding, hatching of poultry for commercial purposes. 
"Preschool" means a licensed public or private institution which provides structured educational services to children between the ages of two and five. 
"Principal dwelling" means the dwelling in which is conducted the principal residential use of the lot on which it is located. 
"Principal use" means the primary or predominant use of any lot, building or structure. 
"Processing facility" means a building or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials to prepare either for efficient shipment, or to an end user's specifications by means such as bailing, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning, and remanufacturing. Processing facilities include the following: 
1.  Light processing facilities occupy areas under forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet of collection, processing and storage area, and average two outbound shipments per day. Lightprocessing facilities are limited to bailing, briquetting, compacting, grinding, crushing, shredding and sorting of source separated recyclable materials sufficient to qualify as a certified processing facility. A light processing facility shall not shred; compact, or bale ferrous metals other than food or beverage containers. 
2.  A heavy processing facility is any processing facility other than a light processing facility. 
"Produce stand" means a permanent or temporary structure utilized for the sale of agricultural, horticultural, or farming products grown or products by the owner of lessee of the property on which the structure is located, is used throughout the year and no thirty (30) day time period elapses where the stand is not utilized. A temporary stand is one that is used seasonally and normally periods of time in excess of thirty (30) days pass where the stand is not utilized. 
"Professional office" means any building or portion thereof used or intended to be used as an office for a lawyer, architect, engineer, land surveyor, accountant, optometrist, doctor, dentist and other similar professions but shall not include other medical buildings or commercial offices. 
"Prohibited use" means a use that is not permitted in a zoning district. 
"Promotional sign" means a sign erected on a temporary basis to promote the sale of new products, new management, new hours of operation, new service or to promote a special sale. 
Property Line. See "Lot line." 
"Public buildings and uses" means buildings, structures and use of land, maintained by federal, State, County or City government or agency thereof, or by any school district or other special district created by law, in either a governmental or proprietary capacity. 
"Public hearing" means a meeting announced and advertised in advance and open to the public with the public given an opportunity to talk and participate. 
"Public park" means a park, playground, swimming pool, beach, pier, reservoir, golf course or athletic field within the City which is under the control, operation or management of the City, the County, or the State. 
"Public right-of-way" means a strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a road, trail, water line, sanitary sewer and/or public uses. 
"Public works department" means the public works department of the City of Huron, and the building inspection division. 
"Public works director" means the public works director of the City of Huron or his or her designee. 
"Quadruplex" means four attached dwellings in one structure in which each unit has two open space exposures and shares one or two walls with the adjoining unit or units. 
"Quarry" means a place where rock, ore, stone and similar materials are excavated, processed for sale or for off-site use. 
"Queue (line)" means an area for temporary awaiting of motor vehicles or pedestrians while obtaining a service or other activity. 
"Railroad right-of-way" means a strip of land of a maximum width of one hundred (100) feet only for the accommodation of mainline or branch line railroad trucks, switching equipment and signals, but not including lands on which stations, offices, storage buildings, spur tracks, sidings, employee housing, yards or other uses are located. 
"Ramada" means an arbor or pergola-like structure. 
"Real estate sign" means an on-site sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the premises, or a portion of the premises on which the sign is located. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle towed or self-propelled on its own chassis or attached to the chassis of another vehicle and designed or used for recreational or sporting purposes. The term recreational vehicle includes, but is not limited to, travel trailers, pickup campers, camping trailers, motor coach homes, converted trucks or buses, boats and boat trailers, and all terrain vehicles. 
"Recreational vehicle park" means an area or tract of land where one or more spaces are rented or held out for rent to owners or users of recreational vehicles or tents and which is occupied for sixty (60) consecutive days or less. 
"Recycling" means the process by which waste products are reduced to raw materials and transformed into new products, including automobiles. 
"Recycling facility" means a center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials. A certified recycling facility or certified processor is certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. A recycling facility does not include storage containers located on a residential, commercial or manufacturing designated parcel used solely for the recycling of material generated on the parcel. 
"Recycling or recyclable material" means reusable domestic containers including, but not limited to metals, glass, plastic and paper which are intended for reuse, remanufacture, or reconstitution for the purpose of using in altered form. Recyclable material does not include reuse of hazardous materials. 
"Rehabilitation" means the upgrading of a building previously in a dilapidated or substandard condition for human habitation or use. 
"Religious institution" means a structure which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities. 
Repair, Vehicle. "Vehicle repair" means the major repair or overhaul of any vehicle, including but not limited to the following: pulling head, motor, transmission, rear end, or body work, as distinguished from minor tune-up, replacing hoses, fan belts, and spark plugs. 
"Residence" means a home, abode, or place where an individual family is actually living at a specified point in time. 
"Residential accessory structures" means buildings and structures normally associated with dwellings, such as detached garages, carports, greenhouses, storage buildings, and swimming pools, but excluding cargo containers. 
"Residential care facility" means a family home, group care facility, or similar facility for twenty-four (24) hour nonmedical care of persons in need of personal services, supervision or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual. 
"Residential districts" means the following districts: R-A (Single-Family Residential/Agricultural), R-1-A (Single-Family/Low Density Residential), R-1 (Single-Family/Medium Density Residential), R-2 (Medium/High Density Residential), R-3 (High Density Residential), R-3-A (High Density Multiple Family Residential), and MHP (Mobilehome Park). 
"Residential hotel" means a hotel offering simple room or suite accommodations on a weekly or monthly basis (Also see Single Room Occupancy—SRO). 
"Resort hotel" means a group of buildings containing guest rooms and providing outdoor recreational activities. 
"Rest home" means an institution primarily engaged in the provision of permanent living space for the elderly or mentally infirm. 
"Restaurant" means a use providing preparation and retail sale of food and beverages, including cafes, coffee shops, sandwich shops, ice cream parlors, fast food take-out (i.e., pizza), and similar uses, and may include licensed "on-site" provision of alcoholic beverage for consumption on the premises when accessory to such food service. 
Restaurant, Drive-Thru. "Drive-thru restaurant" means a use providing preparation and retail sale of food and beverages, as defined under "restaurant" with added provision of one or more drive-thru lanes for the ordering and dispensing of food and beverages to patrons remaining in their vehicles. 
"Retail services" means establishments in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption. 
"Reverse vending machine(s)" means an automated mechanical device which accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers including, but not limited to aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container's redemption value as determined by the State. A reverse vending machine may sort and process containers mechanically provided that the entire process is enclosed within the machine. In order to accept and temporarily store all container types in a proportion commensurate with their relative redemption rates, and to meet the requirements of certification as a recycling facility, multiple grouping of reverse vending machines may be necessary. A bulk reverse vending machine is a reverse vending machine that is larger than fifty (50) square feet, is designed to accept more than one container at a time and will pay by weight instead of by container. 
"Review authority" means the person, committee, commission or council responsible for the review and/or final action on a land use entitlement. 
"Rezone" means to change the zoning classification of particular lots or parcels pursuant to provisions of this title. 
"Right-of-way" means a strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied or is occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, waterline, sanitary storm sewer, or other similar uses. 
Road. See "Street." 
"Roof" means the outside top covering of a building. 
"Roof sign" means a sign erected, constructed, or placed upon, above an eave, or over a roof of a building, including a mansard roof and which is wholly or partially supported by such buildings. 
"Room" means an unsubdivided portion of the interior of a dwelling unit, excluding bathroom, kitchen, closets, hallways and service porches. 
Rooming House. See "Boarding house." 
"Rounding of quantities" means the consideration of distances, unit density, density bonus calculations, or other aspects of development or the physical environment expressed in numerical quantities which are fractions of whole numbers; the numbers are to be rounded to the nearest highest whole number when the fraction is 0.5 or more, and to the next lowest whole number when the fraction is less than 0.5, except as otherwise provided in this title. 
"Sanitary landfill" means a disposal site employing an engineered method of disposing of solid wastes in a manner that minimizes environmental hazards by spreading, compacting to the smallest practical volume, and applying cover material over all exposed wastes at the end of each operating day. 
"Satellite dish antenna" means an apparatus capable of receiving or transmitting communications from a satellite. 
Schools, Elementary, Junior or High. "Elementary, junior or high schools" means an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which offers instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code or which is maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school, senior high school or any special institution of education, but it does not include a vocational or professional institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college, or university. 
School, Trade. "Trade school" means schools offering preponderant instruction in the technical, commercial or trade skills, such as real estate schools, business colleges, electronic schools, automotive and aircraft technician schools, and similar commercial establishments operated by a nongovernmental organization. 
"Second dwelling unit" means an additional dwelling unit on a parcel with an existing primary dwelling unit, which provides complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, which may be rented. 
"Secondary highway" means a street or highway to carry moderate volumes of traffic and designed as a "Secondary Highway Collector Street" or in the circulation element of the general plan and described in the City of Huron subdivision standards. 
"Senior congregate care housing" means a structure(s) providing residence for a group of senior citizens (sixty (60) years of age or more) with central or private kitchen, dining, recreational, etc. facilities with separate bedrooms and/of living quarters. 
"Servants quarters (separate)" means complete living quarters either attached or detached from that of the main dwelling, including kitchen facilities but not rented or used for permanent or temporary living quarters by members of the family. 
"Service station" means the same as "Automobile service station." 
Services, Commercial. "Commercial services" means establishments providing services or entertainment, as opposed to products, to the general public. 
"Setback" means the required distance that a building, structure, parking or other designated item must be located from a lot line. 
Setback, Front/Rear Average. "Front/rear average setback" means the average front/rear yard setback of a group of five adjacent dwelling units. The setback on any unit may vary up to five feet as long as the average setback of all five units equals the minimum required for the land use zoning district. 
"Sidewalk" means a paved, surfaced, or leveled area, paralleling and usually separated from the street, used as a pedestrian walkway. 
"Sidewalk/parking lot sale" means a promotional sales event conducted by one or more businesses which is held outside the confines of the commercial or manufacturing structure(s) in which such business is normally conducted and which sale involves the outdoor display within a paved or concrete area on the same lot as the structure(s) of merchandise which is normally displayed within the structure(s). 
"Sign" means any object, structure, housing, device, figure, statuary, painting, display message, placard, or other contrivance, or any part thereof, situated outdoor or indoor, which is designed, constructed, created, engineered, intended or used to advertise, or to provide data or information in the nature of advertising, for any of the following purpose: to designate, identify or indicate the name of the business of the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the advertising display is located; or, to advertise the business conducted, services available or rendered, or the goods produced, sold, or available for sale, upon the property where the advertising display is erected. 
"Sign area" means the total exterior surface of a sign, including all side of a sign having more than one surface unless otherwise specified, and including spaces between or within letters and symbols. 
"Sign program" means a coordinated program of one or more signs for an individual building or building complexes with multiple tenants. Also Comprehensive sign plan. 
"Single room occupancy (SRO) facility" means a cluster of seven or more units within a newly constructed residential hotel of weekly or longer tenancy providing sleeping or living facilities for one or two persons per unit, in which sanitary facilities may be provided within the units, and cooking facilities may be shared within the hotel. 
"Site" means any lot or parcel of land or combination of contiguous parcels of land. 
"Site line" means the area with a site triangle preserved at a height between thirty (30) inches to eight feet above grade and to be maintained free of landscaping and structures to preserve safety at an intersection. 
"Site plan" means a plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning, all of the uses proposed for a specific parcel of land. 
"Site plan review" means a plan graphically describing proposed buildings, structures, and other required information submitted in conjunction with an application for discretionary review and approval. 
"Site triangle" means a line of site or vision preserved to protect public health and safety associated with vehicle and pedestrian conflict at intersections defined as the area within twenty-five (25) feet parallel to each public street or right-of-way with the connecting line or hypotenuse of the triangle defining the area. No structures with a height between thirty (30) inches and eight feet shall be located within said site triangle with the exception of government and traffic regulatory signals. 
"Slope" means the degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degrees. 
Slope Percentage = 	Rise 

Run 	x 100 = % 
 
  
Slope Ratio = 	Run 

Rise 	- (x) feet run to one foot rise = x: 1/5
 
  
%Grade 	100% 	50% 	40% 	33.3% 	30% 	25% 	20% 	15% 	12% 	10% 	8% 	6% 
Degrees 	45 	26.6 	21.8 	18.4 	16.7 	14 	11.3 	8.5 	6.8 	5.7 	4.6 	3.4 
Ratio 	1:1 	2:1 	2.5:1 	3:1 	3.3:1 	4:1 	5:1 	6.7:1 	8.3:1 	10:1 	12.5:1 	16.7:1 
 
"Small fowl" means birds raised or grown for hobby purposes, show, or racing, normally no larger than a small chicken (e.g., pigeon, parrot, or cocktail). 
"Small lot subdivision" means limited lot size subdivision (six thousand (6,000) square feet minimum lot size) for single-family detached dwellings. 
"Soffit" means the horizontal underside of an eave. 
"Solar facilities" means the airspace over a parcel that provides access for a solar energy system to absorb energy from the sun. 
"Solid waste" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes, and other discarded solid and semisolid wastes. 
"Specific plan" means a plan consisting of text, maps, and other documents and exhibits regulating development within a defined area of the City, consistent with the general plan and the provisions of Government Code Section 65450 et seq. 
"Specific plan line" means the designated centerline of any road or highway as adopted by resolution of the city council from which the ultimate right-of-way is determined in accordance with the circulation element of the general plan. 
Stable, Commercial. "Commercial stable" means a structure for the keeping of horses, mules or ponies which are boarded for compensation. 
Stable, Private. "Private stable" means an accessory structure for the keeping of horses or ponies for the use of occupants of the premises. 
"Start of construction" means the first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, or any site preparation work, including, but not limited to, leveling and grading. 
"Stockyard" means an enclosed area where livestock are temporarily confined and fed concentrated food while waiting for shipping to market, slaughter, or resale. 
"Storage" means a space or place where goods, materials and/or personal property is put for more than twenty-four (24) hours. 
"Story" means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between such floor and ceiling above it. 
Story, Half. "Half story" means a story with at least two of its opposite sides situated in a sloping roof, the floor area of which does not exceed two-thirds of the floor area immediately below it. 
"Stream" means a watercourse having a source and terminus, banks, and channel through which waters flow at least periodically. 
"Street" means any public or private thoroughfare, which affords a primary means of access to abutting property. 
Street, Cul-de-sac. "Cul-de-sac street" means a street with a single common ingress and egress and with a turnaround at the end. 
Street, Local. "Local street" means a street designed to provide vehicular access to abutting property and to discourage through traffic. 
Street, Private. "Private street" means a street owned and maintained by a person or persons and intended for access to a limited number of private lots. 
Street, Public. "Public street" means a street built to standards required and maintained by the City of Huron. 
"Structure" means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground. 
"Structure floor" means the floor sheathing, structural beams, floor joists, or concrete slab of a building. 
"Subdivision" means, pursuant to California Subdivision Map Act definition Section 66424, the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easement or railroad rights-of-way. "Subdivision" includes a condominium project, as defined in subdivision (f) of Section 1351 of the Civil Code, a community apartment project, as defined in subdivision (d) of Section 1351 of the Civil Code. 
"Substantial improvement" means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the assessed value of the structure, either (1) before the improvement is started, or (2) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored before the damage occurred. Substantial improvement is started when the first alteration of any structural part of the building commences. 
"Supermarket" means a full service, self-service retail store of at least twenty thousand (20,000) square feet which sells a line of dry grocery, canned goods, or nonfood items and some perishable items. 
"Swap meets" means any indoor or outdoor place, location, or activity where new or used goods or secondhand personal property is offered for sale or exchange to the general public by a multitude of individual licensed vendors, usually in compartmentalized spaces; and, where a fee may be charged to prospective buyers for admission, or a fee may be charged for the privilege of offering or displaying such merchandise. The term swap meet is interchangeable with and applicable to: flea markets, auctions, open air markets, farmers' markets, or other markets, or other similarly named or labeled activities; but the term does not include the usual supermarket or department store retail operations. 
"Swimming pools" means a structure which shall conform to yard requirements but which shall not count as part of lot coverage requirements. 
"Tarp." A sheet of strong, flexible, water resistant or waterproof material and may include reinforced grommets at the corners and/or along the sides to form attachment points for rope/guy wires allowing the tarp to be tied down or suspended. 
"Temporary" means a short period of time as reasonable within the context or for the use. 
"Temporary accessory parking structure." A non-porous covering fastened to vertical and/or horizontal poles fastened to vertical poles integral to the covering material. Vertical poles shall be firmly fastened to the paved surface of the driveway by fixtures easily removed and are not permanently affixed in or to the ground by footings or other means. The temporary accessory parking structure shall only be used for the purpose of providing shade to one private operational vehicle parked thereunder. The temporary accessory parking structure shall not substitute for the covered parking required in a residential district. A temporary accessory parking structure may be located in the front yard provided that a ministerial permit is obtained from the planning department according to Section 17.60.06(A)(1). 
"Temporary construction sign" means a temporary sign erected on the premises on which construction is taking place, during the period of such construction, indicating the names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors, or similar artisans, and the owners, financial supporters, sponsors, and similar individuals or firms having a role or interest in the structure or project. 
"Temporary sign" means a sign intended to be displayed for a limited period of time. 
"Temporary structure" means a structure without any foundation or footings and which is removed when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased. Does not include temporary accessory parking structure. 
"Temporary use" means a use established for a specified period of time, with the intent to discontinue the use at the end of the designated time period. 
"Tire, battery and accessory parts retail sales and service store means an occupancy for the retail sale and installation of automobile tires, batteries and other automobile parts and accessories wherein all activity including storage, shall be conducted completely within a building designed and intended for this purpose. Such occupancy shall exclude the sale and installation of differential and transmission assemblies, engine blocks or heads, and similar hard parts and radiators, and shall also exclude machine work, tire recapping, retreading, rebuilding, and vulcanizing, battery repair or rebuilding, or general automobile repair, except as permitted in an automobile service station. 
"Towing service" means an entity that operates a service to transfer a vehicle, boat or other motorized machine from one point to another by use of a tow truck. A tow truck as defined in section 615 of the California Vehicle Code. Also includes slide back carriers and wheel lift vehicles. 
"Traffic safety sight area" means a space that is set aside on a corner lot in which all visual obstructions, such as structures and plantings, which inhibit visibility and thus cause a hazard to traffic and pedestrian safety are prohibited. (See site triangle) 
"Trailer" means a structure mounted on wheels, towed or hauled by another vehicle, and use for short-term human occupancy, carrying materials, goods, or objects or as a temporary office. 
"Trailer court" means travel trailer and recreational vehicle park. 
"Trailer sales and service lot" means an open area where trailers or mobilehomes are sold, leased or rented, but where no repairs, repainting or remodeling are done and where no trailers or mobilehomes are occupied as a dwelling. 
"Transfer/Processing station" includes those facilities utilized to receive solid wastes, temporarily store, separate, convert, or otherwise process the materials in the solid wastes, or to transfer the solid wastes directly from smaller to larger vehicles for transport. Transfer station does not include any facility with the principal function of which is to receive, store, separate, convert, or otherwise process, in accordance with State minimum standards, manure; nor does it include any facility, with the principal function of which is to receive, store, convert, or otherwise process wastes which have already been separated for reuse and are not intended for disposal. 
"Transfer station large volume" mean a transfer station which receives more than one hundred (100) cubic yards of waste per operating day. 
"Transfer station, small volume" means a transfer station which receive less than one hundred (100) cubic yards of waste per operating day. 
"Transient basis" means a continuous period of thirty (30) days or less. 
"Transitional housing" means longer-term housing than homeless shelters offering additional services rendered to meet needs of recovery, life skills training, education, job training, job placement, and/or child care. 
"Travel trailer" means a portable unit mounted on wheels and of such a size and weight as not to require special highway movement permits when drawn by a motor vehicle, and for human habitation for recreational or temporary occupancy. 
"Travel trailer park." (See recreational vehicle park.) 
"Triplex." (See dwelling.) 
"Truck parking" means the parking of trucks including "bob tail" trucks in the rear yard only, but restricting five ton or greater diesel trucks or rigs in designated districts. All other trucks, allowed on streets or lots in conformance with City regulations. 
"Truck repair" means a commercial activity engaged in the service and repair of trucks, including truck tire repair. 
"Truck service station" means an occupancy which provides especially for the servicing of trucks with incidental operations similar to those permitted for "automobile service station." 
"Use" means the purpose (type and extent) for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which either land or a structure is occupied or maintained. 
"Utility easement. (See easement.) 
"Variance" means a discretionary entitlement which permits the departure from the strict application of the development standards contained in this zoning chapter. 
"Variety store" means a retail store that sells inexpensive items, often with a single price for all items in the store. Typical merchandise includes cleaning supplies, toys, household goods and gardening equipment. 
"Vehicle sign" means a sign which is attached to or painted on a vehicle which is parked on or adjacent to any property, the principal purpose of which is to attract attention to a product sold or an activity or business located on such property. 
"Vehicle tow services franchise agreement" means a document which sets forth the terms and conditions of an agreement between the operator and the Huron Police Department. 
"Wading pools" means a shallow pool of permanent or portable construction used by children for wading. 
"Washroom" means a room equipped with washing and toilet facilities. 
"Wall" means any structure or device forming a physical barrier, which is so constructed that fifty (50) percent or more of the vertical surface is closed and prevents the passage of light, air and vision through said surface in a horizontal plane. 
"Wall sign" means a sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for, or forms the background surface of, the sign and which does not project more than eighteen (18) inches from such building or structure. 
"Warehousing" means a building or buildings used for the storage of goods, of any type, when such building or buildings contain more than five hundred (500) square feet of storage space, and where no retail operation is conducted. 
"Warning sign" means a sign limited to messages of warning, danger, or caution. 
"Waste to energy facility," also called a "biomass energy facility," means facility where the burning of clean organic materials produce steam or electrical energy. The facility may produce both steam and electrical energy and in such cases it will also be a cogeneration facility. 
"Watercourse" means a natural or man-made intermittent or perennial drainage channel which includes, but is not limited to, the terms river, tributary, steam, or creek. 
"Wholesaling" means the selling of any type of goods for the purpose of resale. 
"Wild animal keeping" means keeping or maintaining any dangerous, wild, carnivorous, or exotic animal that is wild by nature and not customarily domesticated by man so as to live and breed in a tame condition. 
"Wildlands" means any area of land that is essentially unimproved, in a natural state of hydrology, vegetation and animal life, and not under cultivation. 
"Wind activated sign" means a sign or object, some or all of which is moved by wind as a method of attracting attention. 
Wind-Driven Electrical Generators, Experimental. "Experimental wind-driven electrical generators" means wind systems that are the first of their kind and their use constitutes a testing of a new concept or design. 
Wind-Driven Electrical Generators, Production. "Production wind-driven electrical generators" means electrical generators that have progressed beyond the experimental stage and construction of a significant number on a continuing basis has occurred. 
Wind-Driven Electrical Generators, Prototype. "Prototype wind-driven electrical generators" means electrical generators that have progressed beyond the experimental stage and construction of a significant number on a continuing basis has occurred. 
"Window sign" means any sign that is applied or attached to a window or located in such a manner that it can be seen from the exterior of the structure. 
"Yard" means an open space, other than a court, that lies between the principal or accessory building or buildings and the nearest lot line. Such yard is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as may be specifically provided in this zoning ordinance. 
Yard, Front. "Front yard" means an area extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line or the existing or future street right-of-way and a structural setback line parallel thereto. On corner lots, the shortest street frontage shall be the front yard in residential land use districts, while the longest street frontage shall be the front yard in commercial/industrial land use districts. 
Yard, Front Determination. "Front determination yard" means the narrowest portion of the lot abutting a street. In no case shall the front yard be determined by the placement of a structure, or include an alley accessway or railroad right-of-way. 
"Yard, Impound" means a fenced and screened from public view area solely for the storage of vehicles (automobiles, trucks or any other motorized vehicle) impounded by either the CHP or Huron Police Department. The impound yard shall meet the CHP and Huron Towing Ordinance criteria. 
Yard, Interior Side. "Interior side yard" means an area extending from the required front yard or, where there is no required front yard, from the front lot line to the required rear yard or, where there is no required rear yard, to the rear lot line and from the interior side lot line to a setback line parallel thereto. 
Yard, Junk. "Junk yard" means the storage and dismantling of autos, trucks, or other machinery for commercial purposes. Includes salvage yards and dismantling yards. 
Yard, Rear. "Rear yard" means a yard extending across the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and the nearest line or point of the main building or of any accessory building or structure. On flag lots, the rear yard location shall be determined through project review. 
Yard, Side of Street. "Side of street yard" means an area extending from the required front yard or, where there is no required front yard, from the front lot line to the rear lot line, and from the side street lot line, or the existing or future side street right-of-way (whichever is greater) to a structural setback line parallel thereto. 
"Zero lot line" means the location of a structure on a lot in such a manner that one or more of the structure's sides rest directly on a lot line. 
Zone. See "District," as defined and described in this title. 
"Zone modification" means permission for minor departures from the literal requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
"Zoning" means dividing of the City into districts and the establishments of regulations governing the use, placement, spacing, and size of land and buildings. 
"Zoning district" means a specifically delineated area or zone in the City within which regulations and requirements uniformly govern the use, placement, spacing, and size of land and buildings. 
Zoning District, Change of. "Change of zoning district" means the legislative act of removing one or more parcels of land from one zoning district and placing them in another zoning district on the official zone map of the City of Huron. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 362, § 1, 11-16-11; Ord. No. 369 , § 1, 4-6-2016)  
Chapter 17.05 - EXCLUSIVE AGRICULTURE (A-E) ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.05.010 - Purpose and application. 
The purpose of the exclusive agriculture (A-E) zone is to designate areas suitable for agriculture uses and to prevent development of agricultural land to non-agricultural uses that will not be consistent with the general plan. The zone can also be used for the purpose of establishing a green belt in and around the City of Huron. Uses in the A-E zone are limited primarily to agricultural uses and other activities compatible with agricultural uses. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.05.020 - Permitted uses. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-1 and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 17.73.030 are permitted. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.05.030 - Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-1 and all others determined to be similar to those uses pursuant to Section 17.73.030 are permitted subject to securing a conditional use permit (CUP) in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth in Chapter 17.70 of this title. In addition, the planning department may require a precise development (P-D) overlay pursuant to the procedures and standards set forth in Chapter 17.54 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.05.040 - Prohibited uses. 
All other uses not permitted by Sections 17.05.020 and 17.05.030 are prohibited, including final map subdivisions. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.05.050 - Minimum lot size. 
Each lot shall have a minimum size of at least forty (40) gross acres. There shall be no minimum lot size for agricultural industrial uses approved in conjunction with a CUP. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.05.060 - Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. 
There shall be no more than one principal single-family dwelling per legal lot. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.05.070 - Yards and setbacks. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.05.080 - Height limits. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.05.090 - Minimum distance between structures. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.05.100 - Parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.60 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.05.110 - Signs. 
The following types of signs are permitted in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.61 of this title: 
A.  Temporary real estate signs advertising the property for sale not to exceed eight feet and thirty-two (32) square feet each; 
B.  Temporary construction signs; 
C.  Temporary political, religious or civic campaign signs; 
D.  One agricultural sign with a maximum height of eight feet and a maximum sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet per face in conjunction with a use permitted by this zone. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.05.120 - Landscaping. 
None required except as follows: 
A.  When a CUP is issued: 
1.  Landscaping shall be required; 
2.  To be done in accordance with Chapter 17.51. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.05.130 - Special review procedures and development standards. 
A.  Development in the A-E zone shall also comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.71 of this title. 
B.  Temporary produce stands ("stand") for the sale of agricultural, horticultural or farm products permitted pursuant to Section 17.05.020 shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The floor area of the stand shall not exceed four hundred (400) square feet in size. 
2.  The stand shall comply with the setbacks required in Table 17-2. 
3.  The stand shall be erected in such a manner that it may be readily moved by the means of skids or other device. 
4.  The owner shall remove the stand at his or her expense when the stand is not in use for a period of thirty (30) days. 
5.  Customer parking areas shall be treated with a dust binder in a manner to continuously prevent fugitive dust. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.06 - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL/AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT (R-A) 
Sections: 
 
17.06.010 - Purpose and application. 
The district is intended primarily for application to areas located at the fringe of the City's corporate area, where denser population and full provision of urban services is inappropriate. It will provide living areas which combine certain advantages of both urban and rural location by limiting development to very low density concentrations of one family dwellings and permitting limited numbers of animals and fowl to be kept for pleasures or hobbies, free from activities of a commercial nature. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.06.020 - Permitted uses. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-3 and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 17.73.030 are permitted. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.06.030 - Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-3 and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 17.73.030 are permitted subject to securing a CUP in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 17.70 of this title. 
In addition the planning department may require a precise-development overlay to be used in connection with some projects pursuant to the procedures and standards set forth in Chapter 17.54 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.06.040 - Prohibited uses. 
All other uses not expressly permitted by Sections 17.06.020 and 17.06.030 are prohibited, including final tract map subdivisions. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.06.050 - Minimum lot size. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.06.060 - Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.06.070 - Yards and setbacks. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.06.080 - Height limits. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.06.090 - Minimum distance between structures. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.06.100 - Parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.60 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.06.110 - Signs. 
The following types of signs are permitted in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.61 of this title: 
A.  Temporary real estate signs advertising the property for sale, not to exceed eight feet in height and thirty-two (32) square feet of sign area; 
B.  Temporary construction signs; 
C.  Temporary political, religious, or civic campaign signs; 
D.  One agricultural sign with a maximum height of eight feet and thirty-two (32) square feet of sign area per face in conjunction with a use permitted by this zone. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.06.120 - Landscaping. 
None required except as follows: 
A.  When a CUP is issued: 
1.  Landscaping is required; 
2.  To be done in accordance with Chapter 17.51. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.06.130 - Special review procedures and development standards. 
A.  The breeding and raising of livestock permitted pursuant to Section 17.06.020 shall be limited to one cow, horse, sheep, hog, donkey, mule, goat or other similar animal per one-half acre of lot area. 
B.  Temporary produce stands ("stand") for the sale of agricultural, horticultural or farming products permitted pursuant to Section 17.06.020 shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The floor area of the stand shall not exceed four hundred (400) square feet. 
2.  The stand shall comply with the setbacks as set forth in Table 17-4. 
3.  The stand shall be erected in such a manner that it can be readily removed by means of skids or other devices. 
4.  The owner shall remove the stand at his or her own expense when the stand is not in use for a period of thirty (30) days. 
5.  Customer parking areas shall be treated with a dust binder in a manner to continuously prevent fugitive dust. 
C.  A mobilehome or recreational vehicle permitted as a temporary dwelling pursuant to Section 17.06.020 shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Building permits for the construction of the conventional single-family residence shall be obtained prior to or in conjunction with the installation permit for the mobilehome or recreational vehicles. 
2.  The mobilehome or recreational vehicle shall be removed from the premises or placed in storage if: 
a.  Six months has passed since the mobilehome or recreational vehicle was installed. 
b.  Seven days has passed since the mobilehome or recreational vehicle was installed. 
c.  The building permit has lapsed due to lack of activity. 
3.  One extension of time for a period not to exceed six months may be granted by the planning department upon written request of the property owner. The extension of time may only be approved subject to the following conditions: 
a.  An active building permit is on file with the Huron building inspection department. 
b.  The construction of the conventional dwelling unit on the site has progressed to a stage of inspection and approval of the framing, rough electrical, rough mechanical, and rough and top-out of plumbing of the dwelling. 
4.  Any mobilehome or recreational vehicle permitted as a temporary dwelling in excess of a six-month period of time pursuant to subsection (C)(3) of this section shall be removed or placed in dead storage if: 
a.  The extension of time expired; 
b.  Seven days has passed since the conventional dwelling unit was approved for occupancy; 
c.  The building permit has lapsed due to lack of activity. 
D.  Development in the R-A zone shall also comply with the interpretations and provisions of Chapter 17.73 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.07 - URBAN RESERVE DISTRICT (UR) 
Sections: 
 
17.07.010 - Purpose. 
The UR district is an overlying district, intended to set aside undeveloped agricultural land for future land uses due to urban expansion, while preventing the development of land uses which might conflict with the future planned use of the area. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.07.020 - Uses permitted. 
Those uses listed as permitted in the R-A district, Section 17.06.020. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.07.030 - Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit. 
Water pump stations. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.07.040 - Uses expressly prohibited. 
Those uses listed as expressly prohibited in the R-A district, Section 17.06.040. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.07.050 - Property development standards. 
A.  Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall not be less than five acres. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. 
1.  Width. The minimum lot width shall be one hundred sixty-five (165) feet. 
2.  Depth. The minimum lot depth shall be one hundred seventy (170) feet, measured from the centerline of the abutting street right-of-way. 
C.  Population Density. There shall not be more than one family per dwelling unit. Maximum, one dwelling unit per lot. 
D.  Building Height. 
1.  The maximum height of the main building shall be thirty (30) feet, not to exceed two stories. 
2.  Accessory structures shall not have a height greater than one story, not to exceed twelve (12) feet to plate height. 
E.  Yards. The provisions of the R-A district, Section 17.06.070, shall apply. 
F.  Space Between Buildings. The provisions of the R-A district, Section 17.06.090, shall apply. 
G.  Lot Coverage. The provisions of the R-A district, Section 17.06.060, shall apply. 
H.  Fences, Hedges and Walls. The provisions of the R-A district, Section 17.06.120, shall apply. 
I.  Off-Street Parking. The provisions of the R-A district, Section 17.06.100, shall apply. 
J.  Access. There shall be adequate vehicular access from a developed and improved street, alley or service road. 
K.  Outdoor Advertising. The provisions of the R-A district, Section 17.06.110, shall apply. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.07.060 - General provisions and exceptions. 
All land uses shall be subject to the "General Provisions and Exceptions" prescribed in Chapters 17.70. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.07.070 - Site plan review. 
Before any building or structure is erected in this district, a site plan shall be submitted to the city administrator for review and approval. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.10 - SINGLE-FAMILY/LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-1-A) 
Sections: 
 
17.10.010 - Purpose and application. 
The district is intended to provide living areas within the City where development is limited primarily to low density concentrations of one family dwellings on a lot of not less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet in area. Regulations are designed to: 
A.  Promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life; 
B.  Provide space for community facilities needed to complement urban residential area and for institutions which require a residential environment; 
C.  Minimize traffic congestion and avoid the overloading of utilities designed to serve only low density residential use; and 
D.  Provide housing options for all segments of the population. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.10.020 - Permitted uses. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-3 and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 17.73.030 are permitted. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.10.030 - Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-3 as conditional and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 17.73.030 are permitted subject to securing a conditional use permit in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 17.70 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.10.040 - Prohibited uses. 
All other uses not permitted by Sections 17.10.020 and 17.10.030 are not permitted. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.10.050 - Minimum lot size. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.10.060 - Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.10.070 - Yards and setbacks. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.10.080 - Height limits. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.10.090 - Minimum distance between structures. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.10.100 - Parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.60 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.10.110 - Signs. 
Real estate signs up to six square feet shall be permitted, in accordance with Chapter 17.61 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.10.120 - Landscaping. 
Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.51 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.10.130 - Fences (including walls and hedges). 
Fencing may be permitted in accordance with minimum standards provided in Table 17-4. Any fencing with the required setbacks shall be open and not solid. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.10.140 - Special review procedures and development standards. 
A.  The breeding and raising of animals for domestic, hobby, food, scientific or fur-bearing purposes is prohibited. 
B.  A mobilehome or recreational vehicle permitted as a temporary dwelling pursuant to Table 17-3 shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Building permits for the construction of the conventional single-family residence shall be obtained prior to or concurrently with the installation of the mobilehome or recreational vehicle. 
2.  The mobilehome or recreational vehicle is to be removed from the premises or placed in dead storage when: 
a.  Six months have passed since the mobilehome or recreational vehicle was installed. 
b.  Seven days have passed since the conventional single-family dwelling unit was approved for occupancy. 
c.  The building permit has lapsed due to lack of activity. 
C.  All development in the R-1-A zone shall comply with the minimum standards set out in Chapter 17.19, Residential District Specific Standards. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.11 - SINGLE-FAMILY/MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (5,000 SQUARE FOOT MINIMUM LOT) ZONE (R-1) 
Sections: 
 
17.11.010 - Purpose and application. 
The district is intended to provide living area within the City where development is limited primarily to low density concentrations of single-family dwellings. Regulations are designed to: 
A.  Promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life; 
B.  Provide space for community facilities needed to complement urban residential areas and for institutions which require a residential environment; 
C.  Minimize traffic congestion and avoid the overloading of utilities designed to serve only low density residential use; and 
D.  Provide housing options for all segments of the population. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.11.020 - Permitted uses. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-3 and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 17.73.030 are permitted. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.11.030 - Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-3 as conditional and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Chapter 17.73 of this title are permitted subject to securing a conditional use permit in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 17.70 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.11.040 - Prohibited uses. 
All other uses not permitted by Sections 17.11.020 and 17.11.030 are prohibited. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.11.050 - Minimum lot size. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.11.060 - Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.11.070 - Yards and setbacks. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.11.080 - Height limits. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.11.090 - Minimum distance between structures. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.11.100 - Parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.60 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.11.110 - Signs. 
Real estate signs up to six square feet shall be permitted in accordance with Chapter 17.61 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.11.120 - Landscaping. 
Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.51 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.11.130 - Fences (including walls and hedges). 
Fencing may be permitted in accordance with minimum standards provided in Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.11.140 - Special review procedures and development standards. 
A.  The breeding and raising of animals whether for domestic, hobby, food, scientific or fur-bearing purposes is prohibited. 
B.  A mobilehome or recreational vehicle permitted as a temporary dwelling pursuant to Table 17-3 shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Building permits for the construction of the conventional single-family residence shall be obtained prior to or concurrently with the installation of the mobilehome or recreational vehicle. 
2.  A mobilehome or recreational vehicle is to be removed from the premises or placed in dead storage when: 
a.  Six months have passed since the mobilehome or recreational vehicle was installed. 
b.  Seven days have passed since the conventional single-family dwelling unit was approved for occupancy. 
c.  The building permit has lapsed due to lack of activity. 
C.  All development in the R-1 zone shall comply with the minimum standards set out in Chapter 17.19, Residential District Specific Standards. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.12 - MEDIUM/HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (9,000 SQUARE FOOT MINIMUM LOT) DISTRICT (R-2) 
Sections: 
 
17.12.010 - Purpose and application. 
The district is intended primarily to provide for relatively high density concentrations of residential uses in areas where such higher density use is consistent with the general plan and which are convenient to public facilities and services which enable such concentrations. The R-2 district is intended primarily for application to residential areas where proximity to neighborhood residential uses or major streets make multifamily uses appropriate in the vicinity of single-family dwellings. 
The medium density residential land use category (7.6 — 15.0 dwelling units/gross acre) provides for a land use pattern characterized predominantly by small scale attached multiple-family residential developments. The typical residential pattern includes duplexes, triplexes and fourplexes, larger scale, low rise, high-amenity apartments. Areas designated as medium-high density residential are to be integrated throughout the community adjacent to transportation, community services and commercial developments. To avoid inappropriate concentration of these facilities, such developments shall be limited to twenty-five (25) contiguous units when integrated into a single-family subdivision and to fifty (50) contiguous units when developed as a freestanding development. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.12.020 - Permitted uses. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-3 and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 17.73.030 are permitted. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.12.030 - Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-3 as conditional and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Chapter 17.73 of this title are permitted subject to securing a conditional use permit in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 17.70 of this title. Such conditional uses shall include R-2 developments in excess of fifteen (15) total units. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.12.040 - Prohibited uses. 
All other uses not permitted by Sections 17.12.020 and 17.12.030 are prohibited. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.12.050 - Minimum lot size. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.12.060 - Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.12.070 - Yards and setbacks. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.12.080 - Height limits. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.12.090 - Minimum distance between structures. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.12.100 - Parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.60 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.12.110 - Signs. 
The following signs are permitted in the R-2 zone in accordance with Chapter 17.61 of this title: 
A.  Two monument signs (one per major entrance) up to six feet in height and sixteen (16) square feet per sign face; 
B.  One real estate sign up to six square feet. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.12.120 - Landscaping. 
Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.51 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.12.130 - Fences (including walls and hedges). 
Fencing may be permitted in accordance with minimum standards provided in Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.12.140 - Special review procedures and development standards. 
A.  All development in the R-2 zone shall comply with the minimum standards set out in Chapter 17.19, Residential District Specific Standards. 
B.  Development in the R-2 zone shall also comply with the interpretations and provisions of Chapter 17.73 of this title. 
C.  Development in the R-2 zone shall include a minimum ten percent landscaped open space. 
D.  Projects in excess of fifteen (15) total units shall require a conditional use permit. 
E.  Projects of less than fifteen (15) units shall require a site plan review, pursuant to Chapter 17.75. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.13 - HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL ZONE (R-3) 
Sections: 
 
17.13.010 - Purpose and application. 
The R-3 district is intended to provide for the development of high density multiple-family residential structures, for the purposes of rental or sale to permanent occupants. The high density residential land use category (15.1—24.0 dwelling units/gross acre) provides for the highest residential densities permitted in the City. It is intended that this category utilize innovative site planning, provide on-site recreational amenities, and be located near major community facilities, business centers, and streets of at least collector capacity. Such developments shall use high quality architectural design features, intensified landscaping, adequate open space, adequate parking, and adequate on-site recreational facilities. High density residential developments shall be limited in size to no more than one hundred (100) units on one site to reduce the impact of such facilities on any one neighborhood in the community. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.13.020 - Permitted uses. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-3 and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 17.73.030 are permitted. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.13.030 - Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-3 and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Chapter 17.73 are permitted with the standards set out in Chapter 17.51 and subject to securing a conditional use permit in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 17.70 of this title. Projects in excess of fifteen (15) units or with a density in excess of twenty-four (24) units per gross acre shall require a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.13.040 - Prohibited uses. 
All other uses not permitted by Sections 17.13.020 and 17.13.030 are prohibited. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.13.050 - Minimum lot size. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.13.060 - Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.13.070 - Yards and setbacks. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.13.080 - Height limits. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.13.090 - Minimum distance between structures. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.13.100 - Parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.60 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.13.110 - Signs. 
The following signs are permitted in the R-3 zone in accordance with Chapter 17.61 of this title: 
A.  Two monument signs (one per major entrance) up to six feet in height and sixteen (16) square feet per sign face; 
B.  One real estate sign up to six square feet. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.13.120 - Landscaping. 
Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.51 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.13.130 - Fences (including walls and hedges). 
Fencing may be permitted in accordance with minimum standards provided in Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.13.140 - Special review procedures and development standards. 
A.  All development in the R-3 zone shall comply with the minimum standards set out in Chapter 17.19, Residential District Specific Standards. 
B.  Development in the R-3 zone shall also comply with the interpretations and provisions of Chapter 17.73 of this title. 
C.  Projects in excess of twenty-four (24) units shall require a condition use permit. 
D.  Projects less than twenty-four (24) units shall require site plan review. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.14 - HIGH DENSITY MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT, ONE STORY (R-3-A) 
Sections: 
 
17.14.010 - Purpose. 
The R-3-A district is intended to provide for the development of high density multiple-family residential structures, limited to one story in height, for the purposes of rental or sale to permanent occupants. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.14.020 - Uses permitted. 
A.  Uses permitted in the R-2 district, Section 17.12.020, shall apply. 
B.  Uses permitted in the R-3 district, Section 17.13.020, shall apply. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.14.030 - Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit. 
The uses listed in the R-3 district, Section 17.13.030, shall apply. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.14.040 - Uses expressly prohibited. 
A.  The uses listed as uses expressly prohibited in the R-3 district, Section 17.13.040; 
B.  Any dwelling structure exceeding one story or twenty (20) feet in height. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.14.050 - Property development standards. 
A.  The provisions of the R-3 district, Section 17.13.140, shall apply, excepting Section 17.13.140(D) relating to building height. 
B.  Building Height. 
1.  Main buildings or structures erected in this district shall not exceed one story or twenty (20) feet in height. 
2.  Accessory buildings erected in this district shall not exceed one story or twelve (12) feet to plate height). 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.14.060 - General provisions. 
All uses shall be subject to the "General Provisions," prescribed in Chapters 17.70 through 17.79. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.14.070 - Residential planned unit development standards. 
The provisions of Chapter 17.19 shall apply. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.14.080 - Site plan review. 
Before any building or structure, with the exception of one family dwellings, is erected on any lot in the R-3-A district, a site plan shall have been submitted to and approved by the city administrator. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.15 - MOBILEHOME PARK DISTRICT (MHP) 
Sections: 
 
17.15.010 - Purpose. 
The MHP district is intended to provide for accommodation of residential mobilehomes in unified parks. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.15.020 - Uses permitted. 
A.  Carnivals (reference definitions, Chapter 17.03); 
B.  Signs; 
C.  Telephone booth; 
D.  The keeping of household pets subject to the provisions of Section 17.10.140(A); 
E.  Trailer park and trailer court, to include accessory buildings and swimming pools. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.15.030 - Uses permitted subject to conditional use permit. 
A.  Accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a conditional use; 
B.  Electrical distribution substation; 
C.  Water pump station. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.15.040 - Uses expressly prohibited. 
A.  Advertising structures; 
B.  Commercial uses; 
C.  Industrial uses; 
D.  Multiple-family residences; 
E.  Truck parking. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.15.050 - Property development standards. 
Reference Section 17.19.010(I). 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.15.060 - General provisions. 
All uses shall be subject to the "General Provisions," prescribed in Chapters 17.70 through 17.79. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.15.070 - Site plan review. 
Before any residential mobilehome park may be approved and before any buildings for mobilehome park purposes are erected, the applicant shall submit a site plan review to the planning department for approval. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.18 - SECONDARY DWELLINGS 
Sections: 
 
17.18.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this section is to establish procedures and standards for secondary dwellings. Secondary dwellings provide housing opportunities for the varying needs of the elderly, low-income and other economic groups. The intent is also to ensure a safe and attractive residential environment by promoting high standards of site development to preserve the integrity of single-family areas. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.18.020 - Legislative findings. 
Pursuant to Government Code Section 65852.2(a)(4), the City finds that secondary dwellings are consistent with the allowable density and with the general plan and zoning designation provided the units are located on properties with R-A, R-1-A, R-1, or R-2 zoning. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.18.030 - Density/lot size. 
The minimum lot size on which attached secondary dwellings may be placed shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet; the minimum lot size for a detached secondary dwelling shall be nine thousand (9,000) square feet. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.18.040 - Application and approval. 
An application for a secondary dwelling shall be submitted to the zoning administrator on a form supplied by the planning department. The zoning administrator shall approve the application provided the proposed secondary dwelling complies with the development standards set forth in this section. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.18.050 - Development standards. 
The following standards shall apply to all secondary dwellings: 
A.  General Standards. 
1.  Attached or detached secondary dwellings shall: 
a.  Not be sold or financed separately from the principal structure, but may be rented or leased; 
b.  Include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation, separate and independent from the primary dwelling; 
c.  Only be placed on a site containing an existing single-family dwelling at the time an application for a secondary dwelling is submitted; 
d.  Be compatible with the design of primary dwelling and the surrounding neighborhood and not cause excessive noise, traffic, parking or other disturbance to the existing neighborhood or adversely affect public services and resources, including water supply, fire protection, and sewage disposal. 
2.  The principal structure as well as any proposed conversion or addition shall be in compliance with the minimum standards of Title 24, California Code of Regulations, the Uniform Building Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, Uniform Housing Code, Uniform Mechanical Code, and National Electrical Code, as adopted and modified by the City, applicable to the building, conversion, or addition when built. 
3.  A secondary dwelling shall not be permitted on a lot in addition to a guest house or similar structure. If a secondary dwelling has been approved on a lot, a guest house or other occupiable accessory structure may not subsequently be approved unless the secondary dwelling is removed. 
4.  In addition to the required parking for the principal structure, a minimum of one off-street parking space shall be provided for each bedroom in the secondary dwelling. The additional parking shall be provided as specified in the applicable zoning district. The zoning administrator may grant modifications to allow the additional required parking to be located within the setbacks based on a finding that the setback requirements cannot be met because of the topography of the site and the location of the principal structure. 
B.  Attached Secondary Dwellings. 
1.  Attached secondary dwellings shall be designed and constructed as follows: 
a.  The total floor area of the secondary dwelling shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the habitable space of the primary dwelling. 
b.  The secondary dwelling shall have a separate entrance. 
c.  The garage of the primary dwelling shall not be converted to a secondary dwelling. 
d.  The exterior of the portion of the primary dwelling used for an attached secondary dwelling shall be designed to be consistent with the rest of the primary dwelling, and shall not appear as a separate residential unit. 
C.  Attached Secondary Dwellings. 
1.  Detached secondary dwellings shall be designed and constructed as follows: 
a.  The maximum floor area of the secondary dwelling shall be one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet, exclusive of any garage. 
b.  The design of the secondary dwelling shall be consistent with the primary dwelling. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.18.060 - Appeals. 
Decisions of the zoning administrator are final, subject to appeal to the commission. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.19 - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT SPECIFIC STANDARDS 
Sections: 
 
17.19.010 - Land use district specific standards. 
In addition to the general and specific design guidelines contained in each applicable base zone, the following standards shall apply to specific residential districts: 
A.  Accessory Structures. Accessory structures in residential land use districts shall be subject to the permit procedure described in Section 17.52.020, are subject to ministerial review, and shall be compatible with the materials and architecture of the main dwelling on the property. Accessory structures may only be constructed on a lot containing a primary dwelling unit. Accessory structures may be built to the interior side and rear property lines provided that such structures are not closer than ten feet to any other structure. Zoning ordinance requirements may further restrict the distance to be maintained from property lines or other structures. The accessory structure may be a maximum of twenty (20) percent of the main structure footprint and comply with the requirements set forth in Table 17-4. 
B.  Livestock (Small and Large). Large animals shall be considered those typically associated with farms or agricultural land uses such as cattle, sheep, goats, horses, or hogs. Livestock are allowed in zones identified in Table 17-3. In zones where large animals are permitted, all of the following development standards and conditions apply: 
1.  Breeding, raising and keeping of small animals for domestic use of the resident on the lot is permitted, however, there shall be no killing of animals or dressing of such animals for any commercial purposes. 
2.  Keeping of cattle, sheep, goats, horses or hogs owned by the resident of the lot is permitted provided that any combination of such animals is limited to one animal per one-half acre. No killing or dressing of such animals shall be conducted on the lot. 
3.  Pens, coops, stables and other structures housing livestock or poultry shall be at least: 
a.  One hundred (100) feet from the front property line and twenty-five (25) feet from side and rear property lines; 
b.  Corrals and other enclosures shall be no less than thirty (30) feet from dwelling units within the same zoning district or less restrictive agricultural districts, but no less than one hundred (100) feet from division lines separating the R-A district from more restrictive zoning districts. Pastures may be located within the front yard setback for those lots with substantial front yard setbacks. 
4.  All fencing shall comply with the applicable design district. Fencing within the front yard setback parallel to the street shall be of an aesthetic variety, type, material and color such as split rail fencing as approved by the planning department chain link fencing shall not be permitted in a front yard. 
5.  All development which involves housing or enclosing livestock shall be reviewed by the planning department for compliance with this section and any other applicable statutes, laws and ordinances. 
6.  Applicant shall allow inspection of animal maintenance facilities by the City of Huron building inspector, animal control, and by the Fresno County health department. 
7.  Any permit issued pursuant to this section may be revoked or modified pursuant to Chapter 17.75 (Permit Procedures) of this title upon receipt of a recommendation for revocation or modification from the Fresno County health department, Huron animal control officer or from the City of Huron building inspector. 
C.  Day Care Standards. An operating license, if required, shall be obtained through the Fresno County employment and temporary assistance department, division of social services, prior to or concurrently with obtaining a permit pursuant to this chapter. The applicant shall comply with all State, County, and City regulations which are administered by the department or any other agency designated by the State Department of Social Services. Day care homes for both children and/or adults shall comply with the following provisions: 
1.  The activity shall conform to all property development standards of the land use district in which it is located. Day care facilities shall be located in a single-family dwelling, detached from any other dwelling structure. 
2.  Day care facilities may be located no closer than five hundred (500) feet, in any direction, from an existing large family day care home, measured from property line to property line except that they may be located no closer than two hundred fifty (250) feet measured from property line to property line from any existing large family day care home not fronting on the same street. 
3.  Day care facilities shall have a maximum capacity of fourteen (14) individuals receiving care unless otherwise specified herein. 
4.  The maximum number of children (including licensee's own children) under the age of twelve (12) for whom care shall be provided when there is no assistant provider in the home shall be consistent with the State Health and Safety Code. 
5.  The capacity specified on the license shall be the maximum number of children for whom care can be provided. 
6.  An outdoor play area of no less than seventy-five (75) square feet per child, but in no case less than four hundred fifty (450) square feet in area shall be provided. The outdoor play area shall be located in the rear area. Stationary play equipment shall not be located in required side and front yards. 
7.  All fences shall meet the requirements of the base zone district. Materials, colors, textures and design of the fence or wall shall be compatible with on-site development and adjacent properties. All fences or walls shall provide for safety with controlled points of entry. 
8.  On-site landscaping shall be consistent with that prevailing in the neighborhood and shall be installed and maintained, pursuant to Chapter 17.51. Landscaping shall be provided to reduce noise impacts on surrounding properties. 
9.  All on-site parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.60 (Off-Street Parking Standards) sufficient off-street loading space shall be provided in addition to the required off-street parking to serve the dwelling. The required loading space may be located within the required front yard setback; however, it cannot impede access to the off-street parking required to serve the dwelling. 
10.  All on-site lighting shall be stationary, directed away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, and of an appropriate intensity to the use it is serving. 
11.  All on-site signage shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.61 (Signs). 
12.  The center shall contain a fire extinguisher and smoke detector devices and meet all standards established by the Fresno County fire marshal. 
13.  A center within a residential land use district may operate up to fourteen (14) hours per day. 
14.  Outdoor activities may only be conducted between the hours of eight a.m. to eight p.m. 
15.  All day care centers shall file a City application pursuant to Chapter 17.75. 
16.  Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked, modified or appealed pursuant to Chapter 17.75. 
17.  Day care facilities shall be subject to a CUP in accordance with this subsection and Chapter 17.70. 
D.  Density Bonus. The purpose of the density bonus provision is to implement general plan policies and State law requirements for density bonuses in specified residential projects. 
1.  Affordable Housing. State Government Code Section 65915 provides for the granting of a density bonus or other incentives of equivalent financial value when a developer of housing agrees to construct at least one of the following: 
a.  Ten percent of the total units of a housing development for persons and families of lower income, as defined in Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code; 
b.  Five percent of the total units of a housing development for very low-income households, as defined in Section 50105 of the Health and Safety Code; 
c.  Any number of dwelling units of a housing development for qualifying senior citizen housing, as defined in Section 51.2 of the Civil Code; 
d.  Ten percent of the total units in a condominium development for moderate-income households, as defined in Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code; 
e.  The density bonus will increase incrementally as follows: 
i.  For each one percent increase above ten percent minimum for lower income households, the density bonus shall increase by 1.5 percent to a maximum of thirty-five (35) percent, 
ii.  For each one percent increase above five percent minimum for very low income households, the density bonus shall increase by 2.5 percent to a maximum of thirty-five (35) percent, and 
iii.  For each one percent increase above ten percent minimum for moderate-income households, the density bonus shall increase by one percent to a maximum of thirty-five (35) percent. 
2.  Interpretation. A request for a density bonus and regulatory concessions and/or incentives pursuant to Government Code Section 65915 shall be ministerial, and subject to the following interpretations: 
a.  For the purpose of this section, "density bonus" shall mean a density increase of twenty-five (25) percent over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under this title. When determining the number of housing units which are to be affordable, the density bonus shall not be included. 
b.  The procedures for implementing this section are as follows: 
i.  The City shall within thirty (30) days of receipt of a written proposal, notify the developer in writing of the procedures governing these provisions. 
ii.  The planning department may grant the density bonus and regulatory concessions (and/or incentives), which must result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions only if all of the following findings are made based on substantial evidence: 
(A)  The developer has proven that the density bonus and adjustment of standards is necessary to make the project economically feasible; 
(B)  That additional adjustment of standards are not required in order for the rents for the targeted units to be set, pursuant to Government Code Section 65915; 
(C)  The proposed project is compatible with the purpose and intent of the general plan and this title; 
(D)  The density bonus shall only apply to housing developments (subdivision, planned unit development or a condominium project) consisting of five or more dwelling units; 
(E)  The density bonus or combination of bonuses may not exceed twenty (20) percent; 
(F)  Prior to the issuance of a building permit for any dwelling unit in a development for which "density bonus units" have been granted or preliminary incentives received, the developer shall submit documentation to the planning department which identifies the restricted units. A written affordability covenant shall be executed with the City to guarantee for thirty (30) years the units continued use and availability to low and moderate income households. The agreement shall extend more than thirty (30) years if required by another financing program. The terms and conditions of the agreement shall run with the land which is to be developed, shall be binding upon the successor in interest of the developer, and shall be recorded in the office of the Fresno County recorder; 
(G)  The density bonus units are generally dispersed throughout a development project and shall not differ in appearance from other units in the development if combined with fair market value. 
iii.  Agreement. The agreement shall include the following provisions: 
(A)  The developer shall give the City the continuing right of first refusal to purchase or lease any or all of the designated units at fair market value; 
(B)  The deeds to the designated units shall contain a covenant stating that the developer of his or her successor in interest shall not sell, rent, lease, sublet, assign, or otherwise transfer any interests for same without the written approval of the City confirming that the sales price of the unit is consistent with the limits established for low and moderate income households, which shall be related to the Consumer Price Index; 
(C)  The City shall have the authority to enter into other agreements with the developer or purchasers of the dwelling units, as may be necessary to assure that the required dwelling units are continuously occupied by eligible households. 
iv.  Review and Approval. No development may occur pursuant to this chapter until an application for a density bonus permit has been submitted and approved as provided in this section: 
(A)  Application Contents. An application for a density bonus permit review shall include the following: 
(1)  Name and address of applicant, 
(2)  Name(s) and address(es) of property owner(s), 
(3)  Assessor's parcel number(s), 
(4)  Legal description, 
(5)  A site development plan drawn at the scale specified by the planning department, which includes the following information: 
(a)  Topography of the lot(s), 
(b)  Proposed street system and parking area, 
(c)  Lot design, 
(d)  Location of buildings, 
(e)  Location of other proposed uses, 
(f)  Proposed setbacks, 
(g)  Areas to be reserved for parks, schools, or other public or quasi-public facilities, 
(h)  Proposed landscaping, 
(i)  Water supply and distribution, 
(j)  Sewage disposal system, 
(k)  Drainage system, 
(l)  North arrow, 
(6)  A narrative description of the proposed development, including the following: 
(a)  Total number of dwelling units and number of dwelling units per acre, 
(b)  Number of dwelling units to be made available to persons of low and moderate income or to lower income households, if applicable, 
(c)  Methods of maintaining the affordability of the units described in this subsection, if applicable, 
(d)  Building coverage expressed as a percent of the total area of the property, 
(e)  Area of land devoted to landscaping or open space usable for recreation purposes and its percentage of the total land area, 
(f)  Method of sewage disposal, 
(g)  Water supply, both domestic and fire, 
(h)  Proposed on-site drainage facilities, 
(i)  Methods of flood control, where appropriate, 
(j)  Phasing or development schedule. 
(B)  Review and Approval. Where a discretionary permit or rezoning is required for the residential project, the density bonus permit application shall be reviewed and approved in conjunction with that discretionary permit or rezoning approval project. Where no discretionary permit or rezoning is required for the residential project, the density bonus permit application shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with the procedures set out in Section 17.75.020. 
E.  Front/Rear Yard Averaging Standards. See Chapter 17.52, Cluster Combining District and Chapter 17.74, Nonconforming Structures, Uses, Lots and Signs. 
F.  Guest House, Granny Flat. Guest houses and granny flats (guest house or granny flat units) are to be treated as accessory, are subject to ministerial permit review and shall be constructed in the following manner: 
1.  All guest house or granny flat units shall conform to all developmental standards of the underlying land use district; 
2.  There shall be no more than one guest house or granny flat unit on any lot; 
3.  The floor area of the guest house or granny flat unit shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet or thirty (30) percent of the primary dwelling unit; 
4.  The guest house or granny flat unit shall not exceed one story in height, or the height of the main dwelling; 
5.  There shall be no cooking facilities other than an under-counter refrigerator and microwave in a guest house or granny flat unit; 
6.  The guest house or granny flat unit shall conform to all of the setback regulations outlined in the applicable land use district; 
7.  A guest house or granny flat unit shall be used only by the occupants of the main dwelling, their nonpaying guests, or domestic employees. The guest house or granny flat shall not be rented, or as may be permitted by Section 65583, et seq. of the Government Code; 
8.  The City may require that the guest house or granny flat unit be metered separately from the main dwelling unit for gas, electricity and water/sewer services with the approval of the city engineer and building services; 
9.  Prior to issuance of a building permit for the guest house or granny flat unit, a covenant of restriction to run with the land, shall be recorded which specifies that the use of the second dwelling unit as an independent dwelling may continue only as long as one unit on the property is owner-occupied; 
10.  The guest house or granny flat unit is compatible with the design of the main dwelling unit and the surrounding neighborhood in terms of landscaping, scale, height, length, width, bulk, lot coverage and exterior treatment, and will not cause excessive noise, traffic or other disturbances to the existing neighborhood or result in significantly adverse impacts on public services and resources; 
11.  The guest house or granny flat unit shall not cause a high concentration of such units sufficient to change the character of the surrounding residential neighborhood; 
12.  One on-site parking space shall be provided for a guest house or granny flat unit in addition to the primary dwelling units parking requirement. 
G.  Home Occupation Standards. These provisions allow for the conduct of home occupations which are incidental to and compatible with surrounding residential land uses. A home occupation represents a legal income-producing activity by the occupant of the dwelling. In general, a home occupation is a residential accessory use so located and conducted that the average neighbor, under normal circumstances, would be unaware of its existence. The standards and provisions for home occupations are intended to ensure compatibility with other permitted uses and with the residential character of the neighborhood. 
1.  Permitted Home Occupations. Home occupations may include, but are not limited to the following: 
Activity 	Includes 
a. On-site professional service and consultation—by appointment only 	Minister, rabbi, priest, architect, broker, consultant, engineer, insurance agent, land surveyor, bookkeeper, accountant, typist, private investigator or similar use as determined by the planning department. 
b. Off-site personal services requiring home office 	Gardening and landscaping service, locksmith, and other uses where storage in vehicle is required, or similar use as determined by the planning department. 
c. Sales—no door-to-door sales, delivery to customers only 	Sales representative (including jewelry, cosmetics, products of domestic consumption), manufacturing representative, catalog and telephone sales only or similar use as determined by the planning department. 
d. Artisan studio 	Artist, sculptor, photography studio, author, composer, weaver, crafts, model making, rug and blanket weaving, lapidary or similar use as determined by the planning department. 
e. Group instructional (income producing activities) 	Small day care (up to 8 children), educational craft and music instruction, tutor (limited to 6 or fewer students and one vehicle at a time and/or 1 session per week) or similar use as determined by the planning department. 
 
No home occupation permit shall be required for an in-home educational activity, including but not limited to music lessons, academic tutoring, or religious instruction, provided that no more than six students are present at any one time, and the use complies with all of the operating standards outlined below. In addition, no home occupation permit shall be required for a business using the owners or any partners home as its business address provided: (a) that there is no signage at the home address; (b) there are no building materials stored at the home address; (c) that no manufacturing takes place at the home address; (d) that in the course of doing business, no employees or customers appear at the home address to transact business. 
2.  Operating Standards. Home occupations shall comply with all of the following operating standards: 
a.  The home occupation shall not alter the appearance of the dwelling unit; 
b.  There shall be no displays, sale or delivery of merchandise or advertising signs on the premises; 
c.  There shall be no signs other than the address and name of the resident; 
d.  There shall be no advertising which identifies the home occupation by street name; 
e.  The home occupation shall be confined completely to one room located within the dwelling. It shall not occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of the gross area of one floor of the residence. No portion of any garage, carport or other accessory structure shall be used for home occupation purposes, other than for storage which does not impair required parking in the garage; 
f.  Only one vehicle no larger than a three-fourths-ton truck may be used by the occupant directly or indirectly in connection with a home occupation; 
g.  No external alterations or construction features can be made to accommodate a home occupation nor can any change be made which would change the fire rating of the structure or the fire district in which the structure is located; 
h.  There shall be no use or storage of material or mechanical equipment, either indoor or outdoor, not recognized as being part of a normal household or hobby use; 
i.  Activities conducted and equipment or material used shall not change the fire safety or occupancy classifications of the premises. Utility consumption shall not exceed normal residential usage; 
j.  No use shall create or cause noise, dust, light, vibration, odor, gas, fumes, toxic/hazardous materials, smoke, glare, or electrical interference or other hazards or nuisances; 
k.  Only the occupants of the dwelling may be engaged in the home occupation; 
l.  The home occupation shall not require the services of commercial carrier freight deliveries at the site in a frequency greater than what is normally found in a residential area; 
m.  The home occupation shall not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic in excess of that customarily associated with the land use district in which it is located; 
n.  No business license shall be issued until a home occupation permit is obtained, pursuant to the municipal code; 
o.  A home occupation permit shall not be transferable; 
p.  There shall be no more than one home occupation in any dwelling unit; 
q.  If the home occupation is to be conducted on rental property, the property owner's written authorization for the proposed use shall be obtained prior to the submittal of a home occupation permit; 
r.  Any special condition established by the planning department and made a part of the record of the home occupation permit, as deemed necessary to carry out the intent of this section. 
3.  Prohibited Home Occupation Uses. The following list presents example uses that are not incidental to nor compatible with residential activities, and are prohibited: 
a.  Antique shop; 
b.  Auto repair; 
c.  Barber and beauty shop; 
d.  Businesses which engage in the training, breeding, raising, or grooming of dogs, cats, or other animals on the premises; 
e.  Cabinetry; 
f.  Carpentry and cabinet making; 
g.  Funeral chapel or funeral home; 
h.  Kennel; 
i.  Medical and dental offices, clinics, and laboratories; 
j.  Mini storage; 
k.  Repair, fix-it or plumbing shops; 
l.  Storage of equipment, materials, and other accessories to the construction and service trades; 
m.  Vehicle repair (body or mechanical), upholstery and painting; 
n.  Welding and machining; 
o.  Any other use determined by the planning department to not be incidental nor compatible with residential activities. 
4.  Application. The conduct of a home occupation requires the approval of the planning department who may establish conditions to further the intent of this section. An application for a home occupation permit shall be a form prescribed by the planning department and shall be filed with the department pursuant to Chapter 17.75. All permitted home occupations shall fall under one of the five listed categories in subsection (G)(1) of this section, or be a prohibited use pursuant to subsection (G)(3) of this section. No home occupation shall be established until an application for a home occupation permit has been submitted to and approved by the planning department as being consistent with the requirements of this chapter in accordance with the procedures set out in Section 17.75.020. 
5.  Revocation. A home occupation permit (permit) may be revoked or modified by the planning department if any one of the following findings can be made: 
a.  That the use has become detrimental to the public health, safety or traffic or constitutes a nuisance; 
b.  That the permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud; 
c.  That the use for which the permit was granted has ceased or was suspended for six or more consecutive calendar months; 
d.  That the condition of the premises, or the area of which it is a part, has changed so that the use is no longer justified under the meaning and intent of this section; 
e.  That one or more of the conditions of the home occupation permit have not been met; and 
f.  That the use is in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or regulation. 
H.  Mobilehome and Manufactured Housing on Individual Lots. Manufactured or mobilehomes are subject to ministerial permit review and shall be installed in the following manner: 
1.  Mobile or manufactured homes may be used as single-family dwellings if the home is certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974; 
2.  Mobile or manufactured homes which are used as single-family residences shall be installed on an approved permanent foundation system in compliance with applicable codes in all residential zones; 
3.  Planning department shall determine that the subject lot together with the proposed mobile or manufactured home is compatible with surrounding development. This determination shall include an assessment of on-site design and development standards and materials, architectural aesthetics, setbacks, building height, accessory buildings, access, off-street parking, and any other criteria determined appropriate by the planning department. If individual codes, covenants and restrictions governing development within a subdivision are applicable, and more restrictive than those imposed by this title, the codes, covenants and restrictions shall prevail; 
4.  The following design standards in addition to those design district standards specified in Chapter 17.51 shall govern the installation and construction of manufactured and mobilehomes: 
i.  All homes shall have a minimum eave dimension of eighteen (18) inches, 
ii.  All roofing and siding shall be of similar materials on dwelling structures on adjacent properties excepting that siding and roofing shall be nonreflective and shall be installed from the ground up to the roof, 
iii.  All roofs shall have a minimum pitch of 1:4, 
iv.  All homes shall have a minimum width (across the narrowest portion) of twenty (20) feet. 
I.  Mobilehome Park Development Standards. Mobilehome parks are subject to a conditional use permit and shall be constructed in the following manner: 
1.  Individual mobilehome space minimum setbacks shall be measured from the edge of internal private streets and space lines; 
2.  Maximum mobilehome space coverage (mobilehome and its accessory structure) shall be seventy-five (75) percent; 
3.  Each mobilehome shall be equipped with skirting or provided with a support pad which is recessed to give the appearance of the mobilehome being located at grade; 
4.  All on-site utilities shall be installed underground in accordance with the City of Huron improvement standards; 
5.  The mobilehome park shall be provided with parking as required by Chapter 17.60 (Off-Street Parking Standards); 
6.  A common recreation area which may contain a recreation building shall be provided in the park for use by all tenants, owners and their invited guests. The area shall be provided in one common location with a minimum aggregate area of four hundred (400) square feet of recreational space per mobilehome space or lot; 
7.  All exterior boundaries of the mobilehome park shall appear similar to conventional residential developments and shall be screened by a decorative wall, fence or other comparable device six feet in height and include landscaping pursuant to this chapter; 
8.  Common open space shall be landscaped in accordance with a landscape plan approved by the review authority consistent with Chapter 17.51; 
9.  All mobilehome park or subdivision developments shall provide open space recreational amenities within the site which may include: a swimming pool; spa; clubhouse; tot lot with play equipment; picnic shelter - barbeque area; court game facilities such as tennis, basketball or racquetball; improved baseball or softball fields; or, day care facilities. The types of amenities shall be approved by the planning department and provided according to the following schedule: 
Dwelling Units 	Amenities 
0—9 	0 
10—50 	1 
51—100 	2 
101—200 	3 
201—300 	4 
 
Add one amenity for each one hundred (100) additional units or fraction thereof. 
10.  Landscaped setback easements shall be provided along the periphery of the mobilehome development and shall be fifteen (15) feet in width for all sides adjacent to public right-of-way. The interior edge of this landscape easement (and not the edge adjacent to the public right-of-way) shall be used for setback purposes. 
11.  Mobilehomes shall have individual space setbacks as follows: 
Front 	15' 
Side 	5' 
Street side 	15' 
Rear 	5' 
Rear yard through lot 	15' 
 
12.  Mobilehomes shall be limited in height to one story or fifteen (15) feet, whichever is less. 
13.  Minimum distance between mobilehomes and mobilehome accessory structures shall be ten feet. 
14.  All fences and walls shall be no taller than three feet within the required front yard space setback and no taller than six feet within the required side and rear yard space setbacks. 
J.  Multifamily Development Standards. Multifamily development shall conform to the following requirements: 
1.  Multifamily developments shall provide fifteen (15) percent useable open space for passive and active recreational uses. Useable open space areas shall not include: rights-of-way; vehicle parking or maneuvering areas; areas adjacent to or between any structures less than fifteen (15) feet apart; setbacks; patio or private yards; 
2.  Each dwelling shall have a private (walled) patio or balcony not less than fifty (50) square feet in area or ten percent of the dwelling unit (whichever is less), and said patio or balcony shall not be used for storage; 
3.  All multifamily developments shall provide recreational amenities within the site which may include: a swimming pool; spa; clubhouse; tot lot with play equipment; picnic shelter - barbeque area; court game facilities such as tennis, basketball or racquetball; improved softball or baseball fields; or day care facilities. The type and number of amenities shall be approved by the planning department and provided in accordance with the following schedule: 
Dwelling Units 	Amenities 
0—11 	1 
12—50 	2 
51—100 	3 
 
4.  Off-street parking spaces for multifamily developments shall be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet from the dwelling unit (front or rear door) for which the parking space is provided; 
5.  Driveway approaches within multifamily developments of twelve (12) or more units shall be delineated with interlocking pavers, rough textured concrete, or stamped concrete and landscaped medians; 
6.  If laundry hookups are not provided in each dwelling unit, common laundry facilities of sufficient number and accessibility consistent with the number of living units and the Uniform Building Code shall be provided at a rate of at least one washer and one dryer for each five dwelling units; 
7.  Management and security plans shall be submitted for review and approval for multifamily developments with fifteen (15) or more dwelling units. These plans shall be comprehensive in scope; 
8.  Multifamily Site Planning. 
a.  Building Articulation. Long, unbroken facades and box like forms shall be avoided. Building facades shall be broken up to give the appearance of a collection of smaller structures. To the extent possible, each of the units shall be individually recognizable. This can be accomplished with use of balconies, setbacks and projections which help articulate individual dwelling units or collections of units, and by the pattern and rhythm of windows and doors. Wall planes shall be offset no less frequently than every thirty-two (32) feet and rooflines shall be articulated with varying heights. 
b.  Clustering of Units. Clustering of multifamily units shall be a consistent site planning element. Structures composed of a series of simple yet varied planes assure compatibility and variety in overall building form. 
The following design techniques shall be considered and implemented whenever possible: 
i.  Varying front setbacks within same structure, 
ii.  Staggered and jogged unit planes, 
iii.  Use of reverse building plans to add variety, 
iv.  Maximum of two adjacent units with identical wall and rooflines. 
c.  Project Entries. Project entries shall provide direct visibility to the project with landscaping, recreational facilities and project directories. Special attention is to be given to the hardscape and landscape treatments to enhance the overall project image at project entries. 
d.  Entry Drives. The principal vehicular access into a multifamily housing project shall be through an entry drive rather than a parking drive. 
e.  On-Site Parking and Drives. 
i.  Projects with parking drives longer than two hundred fifty (250) feet, or contiguous parking lots in excess of fifty (50) cars are not permitted. 
ii.  Parking areas shall be visible from the residential units which use them. 
f.  Parking Courts. 
i.  A parking court of any length shall not consist of more than two double loaded parking aisles (bays) adjacent to each other. 
ii.  The maximum length of a parking court shall not exceed ten stalls. 
iii.  The parking courts shall be separated from each other by dwelling units or by a landscaped bulb not less than eighty (80) square feet in area. Architectural elements such as trellises, porches or stairwells may extend into these landscaped bulbs. 
g.  Garages. 
i.  Individual parking garages within residential structures shall be enclosed behind garage doors. 
ii.  Garages with parking aprons less than twenty (20) feet in length or width shall have automatic garage door openers and/or sectional roll-up doors. 
h.  Carports. Where carports are utilized, they shall follow the same criteria for spatial arrangement as parking courts (subsection (J)(8)(f) above). Carports may be incorporated with patio walls or used to define public and private open space, but incorporating carports into exterior project walls adjacent to streets shall be prohibited. The ends of each cluster of carports shall be landscaped. 
i.  Pedestrian Access from Parking. Landscape bulbs shall align with major building entrances to provide pedestrian access to the building entrance from a parking court or drive. Bulbs that align with entrances shall include a pathway as well as a vertical landscape or architectural element, for example a trellis or a tree. 
j.  Open Space. Residents of housing projects shall have safe and efficient access to useable open space, whether public or private, for recreation and social activities. The design and orientation of these areas shall take advantage of available sunlight and shall be sheltered from the noise and traffic of adjacent streets or other incompatible uses. 
Required common open spaces shall be conveniently located for the majority of units. Private open spaces shall be contiguous to the units they serve and screened from public view. Projects shall have secure open spaces and children's play areas that are visible from the units. 
k.  Planted Areas. All areas not covered by structures, drives, parking or hardscape shall be appropriately landscaped. Such planted area shall include trees at a rate of one fifteen (15) gallon tree per five hundred (500) square feet of planted area, or such greater amount in order to achieve fifty (50) percent shading in ten years. 
l.  Refuse Storage/Disposal. Trash bins shall be fully enclosed in accordance with the City of Huron improvement standards. Said enclosures shall be landscaped on their most visible sides. Locations shall be conveniently accessible for right-hand-side trash collection and maintenance and shall not block access drives during loading operations. 
m.  Support Facilities. Any support structures within multifamily residential projects such as laundry facilities, recreation buildings and sales/lease offices shall be consistent in architectural design and form with the rest of the complex. Temporary sales offices shall also be compatible with these guidelines. 
n.  Mailboxes. Where common mailbox services are provided, they shall be located close to the project entry, or near recreational facilities. The architectural character shall be in similar form, materials and colors to the surrounding buildings. Mailbox locations must be approved by the U.S. Postal Service. 
o.  Security. Multifamily projects shall be designed to provide a maximum amount of security for residents and visitors. Parking areas shall be well lit and located so as to be visible from residential units. Landscaping shall be planned and maintained to provide views into open space areas. 
9.  Multifamily Architecture. The design of multifamily developments shall comply with the requirements of the underlying zone district and the following: 
a.  Facade and Roof Articulation. Structures containing three or more attached dwellings in a row shall incorporate at least one of the following: 
i.  For each dwelling unit, at least one architectural projection not less than two feet from the wall plane and not less than four feet wide shall be provided. Such projections shall extend the full height of single story structures, at least one-half the height of a two-story building, and two-thirds the height of a three-story building. 
ii.  A change in wall plane of at least two feet in depth for at least twelve (12) feet in length for each two units shall be provided. 
b.  Materials. Piecemeal embellishment and frequent changes in materials shall be avoided. 
c.  Balconies, Porches and Patios. Balconies, porches and patios shall be required. These elements shall be integrated to break up large wall masses, and to offset floor setbacks. 
d.  Dwelling Unit Access. The use of long, monotonous access balconies and corridors which provide access to five or more units shall be avoided. Instead, access points to units shall be clustered in groups of four or less. To the extent possible, the entrances to individual units shall be plainly visible from nearby parking areas. The use of distinctive architectural elements and materials to denote prominent entrances shall be used. 
e.  Exterior Stairs. Simple, clean, bold projections of stairways shall be used to compliment the architectural massing and form of the multifamily structure. Stairways shall be of smooth stucco, plaster or wood, with accent trim of complimentary colors. Thin-looking, open metal, prefabricated stairs are prohibited. 
f.  Carports, Garages and Accessory Structures. Carports, detached garages, and accessory structures shall be designed as an integral part of the architecture of projects. They shall be similar in materials, color and detail to the principal structures of the development. Carports may utilize flat roofs but shall not project above any exterior walls adjacent to the streets, and shall be located in parking courts to the rear of buildings. Prefabricated metal carports shall not be used. 
Where garages are utilized, doors shall appear to be recessed into the walls rather than flush with the exterior wall. Their design shall be simple and unadorned. 
g.  Solar Panels. Solar panels, when used, shall be integrated into the roof design, flush with the roof slope. Frames shall be colored to match the roof colors. Natural aluminum finish is strongly discouraged. Any mechanical equipment shall be enclosed and completely screened from view. 
h.  Mechanical and Utility Equipment. All mechanical equipment whether mounted on the roof or ground shall be screened from view. Utility meters and equipment shall be placed in locations where they are not exposed to view from the street or they shall be suitably screened. All screening devices shall be compatible with the architecture and color of the adjacent structures. 
i.  Antennas. All antennas shall be placed in attics or building interiors. All new units shall be pre-wired to accept cable reception. Satellite dish antennas are specifically prohibited on roofs and shall be considered early in the design process in terms of location and any required screening. 
10.  Multifamily In-Fill in Single-Family Neighborhoods. If multifamily projects are located in existing neighborhoods they shall be compatible with adjacent structures and fit within the context of the existing neighborhood. Minimum requirements include the following: 
a.  Front Yard Setbacks. Front yard setbacks for new multifamily projects are pursuant to the requirements of the base zone district (shown on Table 17-4) and if setback average is used, the setback shall be equal to or greater than the average setbacks for the two adjacent properties. 
b.  Architectural Compatibility. New multifamily development in existing neighborhoods shall incorporate architectural characteristics and maintain the scale of existing structures on the property and surrounding development, by incorporating window and door detailing, facade decoration, materials, color, roof style and pitch, porches and other features that are compatible. 
K.  Recreational Vehicle Storage Facilities. If recreational vehicle storage facilities are proposed or required by the planning department, they shall be reviewed through application of a ministerial or discretionary permit and shall be constructed in the following manner: 
1.  Centralized storage areas shall be provided for recreation vehicles, boats, etc., at a minimum rate of one space for each six dwelling units. Any fractional space requirement shall be constructed as requiring one full storage space pursuant to Chapter 17.60 Off-Street Parking Standards. 
2.  Individual storage spaces shall measure not less than twelve (12) feet by thirty (30) feet, and shall have direct access to a driveway with a minimum paved width of twenty-five (25) feet. 
3.  Storage areas shall be paved and drained. 
4.  Storage areas shall be completely screened from exterior view by the combination of landscaping, masonry walls, fences or other comparable screening devices six feet in height, subject to the approval of the planning department. 
L.  Planned Residential Development/Small Lot Subdivisions. Residential uses are permitted in the cluster combining district, and small lot divisions are permitted in residential land use zone districts subject to the procedures in Section 17.75.030. Attached and detached single-family dwelling units are permitted. The purpose of allowing these types of developments is to promote residential amenities beyond those expected in conventional residential developments, to achieve greater flexibility in design, to encourage well planned neighborhoods through creative and imaginative planning as a unit, to provide for appropriate uses of land which is sufficiently unique in its physical characteristics or other circumstances to warrant special methods of development through the encouragement of integrated planning and design. All such projects shall conform with the following: 
1.  Density. The underlying residential use district and combining district shall determine the maximum number of dwelling units allowed in a planned unit development or small lot subdivision. Where a parcel or parcels having more than one land use district, the maximum number of dwelling units shall be determined by adding together the allowable density for each land use district area. 
2.  Site Coverage. Structures shall not occupy more than forty (40) percent of the gross site area for single-family detached units, and sixty (60) percent for zero lot line and patio homes. 
3.  Height. Detached single-family structures shall not exceed two and one-half stories, or thirty-five (35) feet. Attached single-family structures shall not exceed two and one-half stories or thirty-five (35) feet. If more than two units are attached, the multifamily development standards shall apply. 
4.  Setbacks. The minimum setback from the project perimeter shall be determined by setbacks related to the Street Functional Classification or twenty-five (25) feet whichever is less. Setbacks between dwelling units in planned unit developments (cluster developments) shall be determined by the base zoning district. 
5.  Open Space. All cluster developments with twelve (12) or more dwelling units shall provide thirty (30) percent useable open space for passive and active recreational uses. Useable open space areas shall not include: rights-of-way; vehicle parking and maneuvering areas; areas adjacent to or between any structures less than fifteen (15) feet apart; setbacks; patios and private yards. 
6.  Amenities. All cluster developments shall provide recreational amenities within the site which may include a: swimming pool; spa; clubhouse; tot lot with play equipment; picnic shelter - barbeque area; court game facilities such as tennis, basketball or racquetball; improved baseball or softball fields; or, day care facilities. The type of amenities shall be approved by the planning department and provided according to the following schedule: 
Dwelling Units 	Amenities 
0—11 	1 
12—50 	2 
51—100 	3 
101—200 	4 
201—300 	5 
 
Add one amenity for each one hundred (100) percent additional units or fraction thereof. 
7.  Private streets shall not be allowed pursuant to the City of Huron subdivision ordinance. 
8.  Maintenance and Completion of Open Space, Amenities, Landscaping, and Manufactured Slopes. No lot or dwelling unit in the development shall be sold unless a corporation, home owner's association, assessment district or other approved appropriate entity has been legally formed with the right to assess those properties which are jointly owned or benefited to operate and maintain all of the mutually available features of the development including, but not limited to, open space, amenities, and landscaping. Conditions, covenants and restrictions (CC&R's) may be developed and recorded for the development subject to the review and approval of the city attorney. The recorded CC&R's shall not be under the jurisdiction of the City for enforcement. No lot or dwelling unit shall be sold unless all approved and required open space, amenities, landscaping, or other improvements, or approved phase thereof, have been completed or completion is assured by a financing guarantee method approved by the city engineer. 
M.  Senior Citizen/Congregate Care/Group Quarter Housing Design Standards. Senior group housing developments designed to accommodate more than six persons are subject to discretionary permit review and shall be constructed in the following manner: 
1.  A bus turnout and shelter on the on-site arterial or collector frontage shall be dedicated if the project is located on a bus route as determined by the planning department. 
2.  The parcel upon which the senior group housing is to be established shall conform to all standards of the underlying land use district. 
3.  The senior/group housing shall conform with all local, State and federal requirements. 
4.  The main pedestrian entrance to the development, common areas, and the parking facility shall be provided with handicapped access pursuant to the Uniform Building Code. 
5.  Indoor common areas and living units shall be handicap adaptable and be provided with all necessary safety equipment (i.e., safety bars, etc.) as well as emergency signal/intercom systems as determined by the planning department. 
6.  Adequate internal and external lighting including walkways shall be provided for security purposes. The lighting shall be energy efficient, stationary, deflected away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, and of an intensity compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
7.  Common recreational and entertainment activities of a size and scale consistent with the number of living units to be provided. The minimum size shall equal one hundred (100) square feet for each living unit. 
8.  Common laundry facilities of sufficient number and accessibility consistent with the number of living units and the uniform building code shall be provided. The facilities shall have keyed access for tenants only. 
9.  The project shall be designed to provide maximum security for residents, guests and employees. 
10.  Trash receptacles shall be provided for on the premises and be of sufficient size and number as determined appropriate by the public works director. 
11.  The City may require a traffic study for senior citizen/congregate care/group quarter facilities located in R-2 or less intensive residential zones. 
N.  Residential Architectural Design Criteria. It is the intent of the general plan and the provisions of this section to require a variety of residential development types, which are innovative in design and compatible with surrounding neighborhoods while being conducive to creating a balanced housing market in the City. The following represents components of design requirements for all residential subdivisions. 
1.  Houses within new residential subdivisions situated on lots deeper than one hundred (100) feet shall have a minimum five-foot variation in the front yard setback from twenty-five (25) to thirty (30) feet. No more than two houses with the same front yard setback shall be placed on adjacent lots. 
2.  The use of roof forms, including shed, gable, and hip roofs, alone or in combination shall be used to achieve a variety of roof lines for houses adjacent to public streets. All such roofs shall be of a concrete tile, approved shake, or a twenty-five (25) year minimum architectural style composition shingle with dimensional variations. A minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the houses within an approved subdivision shall have concrete or approved tile roofs. All other proposed roofing materials shall be subject to review and approval by the City of Huron planning commission. 
3.  All exterior wall elevations of buildings and screen walls shall have architectural treatments enhancing building appearance. Uniform materials and consistent style should be evident within a development in all exterior elevations. Secondary materials should be used to highlight building features and to provide visual interest. 
4.  All houses within new subdivisions shall provide decorative lighting on both sides of the garage or shall provide lighting under the eave of said garage. 
5.  Residential mechanical equipment shall not be visible from street frontage. 
6.  The second story of a two-story residence shall be situated to the rear of the house. 
7.  Front yard fencing shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches in height and shall not be chainlink. Front yard fencing shall be compatible with the architectural style and character of the house. 
8.  If custom homes are not proposed, subdividers/developers of residential subdivision tracts shall provide a variety of floor plans and building elevations as follows: 
RESIDENTIAL FLOOR PLAN AND ELEVATION GUIDELINES 
Number of Single-Family Dwellings 	Min. No. of Bldg. Footprints 	Min. No. of Elevations per Bldg. Footprint (excludes reverse plans) 
1—3 	1 	1 
4—8 	2 	2 
9—18 	3 	2 
19—36 	3 	3 
37—60 	3 	4 
61—99 	4 	4 
100+ 	4 for the first 100 houses, plus 1 for each 20 houses over 100 	4 
 
* The required number of building elevations may be reduced by one for every two building footprints added to the required minimum number specified above. 
9.  No two identical elevations shall be placed side by side within a subdivision. 
10.  Color. 
a.  The use of monochromatic and complementary accent and trim colors is considered to meet the intent of this chapter. 
b.  The use of bright or garish colors (i.e., fluorescent "hot" or "day-glow" colors) shall not be permitted. 
c.  Using building materials in their natural state, such as brick or stone, is strongly recommended. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.21 - ADMINISTRATIVE AND PROFESSIONAL OFFICE (C-P) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.21.010 - Purpose and application. 
This designation provides for office development, which includes medical, dental, law, or other professional offices. Professional office land uses should be designated which allow construction of new office unified centers, the redevelopment of existing areas to office use, and the conversion of older homes to offices along major streets. Where homes are converted to offices, the area should be a logical extension of existing or planned office/commercial uses, and the lot should be of adequate size to accommodate parking in the rear of the structure or outside of the front yard landscape setback. This zone is to be applied in and adjacent to the downtown and near major medical facilities. The zone may also serve as a buffer between retail commercial and residential areas. The zone may also be combined with the cluster combining (C-L) district to achieve innovative and creative office, commercial and/or residential development. The C-P administrative and professional office district is intended to provide for the development of an integrated professional district wherein all of the related types of uses and facilities may be located. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.21.020 - Permitted uses. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-2 and all others deemed to be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 17.73.030 are permitted in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 17.51 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.21.030 - Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-1 as conditional and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 17.73.030 are permitted in accordance with standards set out in Chapter 17.51 and subject to securing a conditional use permit in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 17.70 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.21.040 - Prohibited uses. 
All other uses not permitted by Sections 17.21.020 and 17.21.030 are prohibited. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.21.050 - Minimum lot size. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.21.060 - Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.21.070 - Yards and setbacks. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.21.080 - Height limits. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.21.090 - Minimum distance between structures. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.21.100 - Parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.60 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.21.110 - Signs. 
The following signs are permitted in accordance with Chapter 17.61 of this title: 
A.  Temporary real estate signs (not to exceed eight square feet); 
B.  Temporary subdivision signs; 
C.  Temporary construction signs; 
D.  Temporary political campaign signs; 
E.  One monument sign along each street frontage for building and tenant identification up to sixteen (16) square feet per sign face, and not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in aggregate. The maximum height of signs shall be five feet. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.21.120 - Landscaping. 
Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.51 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.21.130 - Special review procedures and development standards. 
A.  All development in the C-P zone shall comply with the minimum requirements set out in Chapter 17.51 of this title. 
B.  Development in the C-P zone shall comply with the interpretations and provisions of Chapter 17.73 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.22 - CENTRAL BUSINESS AND SHOPPING DISTRICT (CBD) 
Sections: 
 
17.22.010 - Purpose and application. 
The central business district designation provides the City with a mixed-use activity area in the downtown area, including retail, office, service, wholesale, public and institutional establishments and special residential uses. It is intended to provide for a wide range of uses and to promote feasibility in the reuse of downtown buildings. The CBD Commercial zone shall be used in the downtown area in order to attract and accommodate commercial, financial, office, governmental and limited residential uses. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.22.020 - Permitted uses. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-1 and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 17.73.030 are permitted in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 17.51 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.22.030 - Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-1 as conditional and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 17.73.030 are permitted in accordance with the standards set out in Chapter 17.51 and subject to securing a conditional use permit in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 17.70 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.22.040 - Prohibited uses. 
All other uses not permitted by Sections 17.22.020 and 17.22.030 are prohibited. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.22.050 - Minimum lot size. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.22.060 - Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.22.070 - Yards and setbacks. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.22.080 - Height limits. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.22.090 - Minimum distance between structures. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.22.100 - Parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.60 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.22.110 - Signs. 
Signs are permitted in accordance with Chapter 17.51 CBD Design District (DD2). 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.22.120 - Landscaping. 
Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.51 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.22.130 - Special review procedures and development standards. 
A.  All development in the CBD zone shall comply with the minimum standards set out in Chapter 17.51 of this title. 
B.  Development in the CBD zone shall comply with the interpretations and provisions of Chapter 17.73 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.24 - HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL (C-H) ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.24.010 - Purpose and application. 
The highway commercial designation provides for localized concentrations of uses catering to the traveling public including service stations, hotels, restaurants, or other visitor-serving uses. Highway commercial nodes may be located on one corner of major intersections outside of the contiguous community. Such highway commercial nodes shall be limited in size to three total acres unless it can be demonstrated that a greater amount will not have an adverse impact on existing or planned commercial facilities in the community. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.24.020 - Permitted uses. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-1 and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 17.73.030 are permitted in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 17.51 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.24.030 - Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-1 as conditioned and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 17.73.030 are permitted in accordance with the standards set out in Chapter 17.50 and subject to securing a conditional use permit in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 17.70 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.24.040 - Prohibited uses. 
All other uses not permitted by Sections 17.24.020 and 17.24.030 are prohibited. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.24.050 - Minimum lot size. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.24.060 - Yards and setbacks. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.24.070 - Height limits. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.24.080 - Minimum distance between structures. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.24.090 - Parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.60 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.24.100 - Signs. 
The following signs are permitted in accordance with the Chapter 17.61 of this title: 
A.  Temporary real estate signs (not to exceed eight square feet); 
B.  Temporary construction signs; 
C.  Temporary political signs; 
D.  Wall signs (on-site identification only) not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent width of the primary building face; 
E.  One monument sign per arterial or collector street frontage with a maximum height of twenty (20) feet where the posted speed is sixty (60) mph or greater, fifteen (15) feet when the posted speed is greater than forty-five (45) mph, but less than sixty (60) mph, or ten feet where the posted speed is forty-five (45) mph or less, not to exceed six square feet of sign area per foot of permitted height. 
The maximum permitted area of all signs shall not exceed two square feet for each lineal foot of street frontage. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.24.110 - Landscaping. 
Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.51 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.24.120 - Special review procedures and development standards. 
A.  All development in the C-H zone shall comply with the minimum standards set out in Chapter 17.51 of this title. 
B.  Development in the C-H zone shall comply with the interpretations and provisions of Chapter 17.73 of this title. 
C.  Site area shall be in conformance with Section 17.24.010. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.25 - SERVICE COMMERCIAL (C-S) ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.25.010 - Purpose and application. 
The service commercial designation provides for a mix of retail and non-retail commercial that is higher in intensity than community commercial. Such uses may have characteristics that require visual and physical accessibility from a main street, specifically Lassen Avenue/SR 269 and in some instances need to be separated from residential areas. Uses that make up the latter include, but are not limited to vehicle towing services, smog testing (test only) centers, tire shops, and etc. Retail uses that will benefit from main street (Lassen Avenue/SR 269) access and visibility include, but are not limited to, automotive parts stores, public facilities including city hall, police or fire departments; department stores, variety stores, hardware, grocery and pharmacies, medical clinics and offices fast food and drive through restaurants and etc. This commercial designation should be applied adjacent to other commercial and/or industrial areas or by conditional use permit adjacent to residential areas. Automotive repair shops (including body work), smog centers with repair services and etc. are permitted conditionally. Multi-family housing is a permitted use provided that no significant environmental conditions will be created and the development standards of section 17.13 are implemented. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 369 , § 1, 4-6-2016)  
17.25.020 - Permitted uses. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-1 and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 17.73.030 are permitted in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 17.51 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.25.030 - Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-1 as conditioned and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 17.73.030 are permitted in accordance with the standards set out in Chapter 17.51 and subject to securing a conditional use permit in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 17.70 of this title. 
The C-S district has been set forth to serve as the central trading area of the community. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.25.040 - Prohibited uses. 
All other uses not permitted by Sections 17.25.020 and 17.25.030 are prohibited. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.25.050 - Minimum lot size. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.25.060 - Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.25.070 - Yards and setbacks. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.25.080 - Height limits. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.25.090 - Minimum distance between structures. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.25.100 - Parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.60 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.25.110 - Signs. 
The following signs are permitted in accordance with chapter 17.61 of this title: 
A.  Temporary real estate signs (not to exceed eight square feet); 
B.  Temporary construction signs; 
C.  Temporary political signs; 
D.  Wall signs not to exceed five percent of building face area (on-site identification only); 
E.  Monument signs not to exceed five feet in height and thirty-five (35) square feet, of cumulative copy area (on-site only). 
F.  Free standing signs are permitted and are subject to planning commission review and approval. See Table 17-6 for site sign information. 
The maximum permitted area of all signs shall not exceed one-half square foot for each lineal foot of public street frontage. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 369 , § 1, 4-6-2016)  
17.25.120 - Landscaping. 
Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.51 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.25.130 - Special review procedures and development standards. 
A.  All development in the C-S zone shall comply with the minimum standards set out in Chapter 17.51 of this title. 
B.  Development in the C-S zone shall comply with the interpretations and provisions of Chapter 17.73 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.26 - COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL (C-C) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.26.010 - Purpose and application. 
The purpose of this district is to provide lower intensity commercial sites for a wide range of commercial and office uses which are diverse, visually pleasing, convenient in terms of parking and access, attractive, and used by citizens of Huron as well as visitors to the area. The community commercial zone is intended to form a buffer between the more intensive service commercial zone and residential areas. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 369 , § 1, 4-6-2016)  
17.26.020 - Permitted uses. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-1 and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 17.73.030 are permitted. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.26.030 - Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-1 as conditional and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 17.73.030 are permitted and subject to securing a conditional use permit in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 17.70 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.26.040 - Prohibited uses. 
All other uses not permitted by Sections 17.26.020 and 17.26.030 are prohibited. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.26.050 - Minimum lot size. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.26.060 - Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.26.070 - Yards and setbacks. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.26.080 - Height limits. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.26.090 - Minimum distance between structures. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.26.100 - Parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.60 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.26.110 - Signs. 
The following signs are permitted in accordance with Chapter 17.61 of this title: 
A.  Temporary real estate signs (not to exceed eight square feet); 
B.  Temporary construction signs; 
C.  Temporary political signs; 
D.  Wall signs not to exceed five percent of building face area (on-site identification only); 
E.  Monument signs not to exceed five feet in height and thirty-five (35) square feet, of cumulative copy area (on-site only). 
The maximum permitted area of all signs shall not exceed one-half square foot for each lineal foot of public street frontage. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.26.120 - Landscaping. 
Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.51. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.26.130 - Special review procedures and development standards. 
A.  Development in the C-C zone shall comply with the interpretations and provisions of Chapter 17.73 of this title. 
B.  Screening and Storage. The following shall apply to all developments: 
1.  All roof-mounted air conditioners, roof vents, etc. should be screened from view from ground level whenever possible. Such screening must be of a style and material such that it is an integral part of the building architecture. 
2.  Where commercial or industrial property adjoins a residential zone, a concrete block or masonry wall to a height recommended by the director shall be located on the property line except in a required front yard, or the street side setback of a corner lot. This requirement may be waived if an alternative landscaped buffer is provided and approved by the planning commission as an exception. 
3.  Approved uses that are not conducted entirely within a completely enclosed structure, on a site across a street or alley from a residential district shall be screened by a concrete block or masonry wall and be landscaped along the frontage of the wall to a height to be determined by the director. No materials or equipment shall be stored to a height greater than that of the wall or fence. 
4.  In the C-C district, all businesses, services and processes shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed structure, except for off-street parking and loading areas, gasoline service stations, outdoor dining areas, nurseries, garden shops, bus depots and transit stations and electric distribution substations where permitted. 
5.  Where commercial or office uses are so situated abutting property zoned for single-family residential use, the second story of the structure to be occupied as a commercial or office use shall be designed to limit visibility onto the adjacent residential property. 
C.  Curb Cuts. Curb cuts for proposed developments shall be limited to the extent that access is provided to the site with minimum of ingress and egress points so as to protect the safe traffic flow of Huron's arterial and collector streets. Unless an exception is granted by the planning commission, drive access points in commercial and industrial zones shall be shared access easements unless it is not feasible to do so. 
D.  Lighting. No on-site lighting shall directly or indirectly illuminate adjacent properties or the public street which provides access. The lights and standards to be used shall be approved by the director. 
E.  Auto Traffic Easements. When deemed necessary for the traffic safety of the community, the director shall have the right to require as a condition of granting approval of a planning entitlement, that a parcel provide an easement for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
F.  Residential Architectural Design Criteria. All subdivision shall comply with Section 17.19.010(N) of this title. 
G.  Residential Landscaping Requirements. All new residential developments shall comply with Section 17.19.010(N) of this title. 
H.  General Standards. All development shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Street and road dedications shall be made to the City, in a manner prescribed by the City of Huron public works department, for all existing or proposed local, collector, and arterial streets. The required dedication shall be consistent with the requirements of the circulation element of the City of Huron. 
2.  All developments within the City of Huron shall provide road or street improvements pursuant to the Huron subdivision ordinance. Street improvements shall include base and pavement ties to existing pavement. 
3.  Obstructions within street rights-of-way shall be removed. 
4.  Curb, gutter, and sidewalk shall be constructed as required by the City of Huron subdivision ordinance when required as part of street improvements. 
5.  All access drives, parking areas, and vehicle maneuvering areas shall be surfaced with a minimum of two inches of asphaltic concrete paving or material of higher quality. 
6.  All new on-site utility services shall be placed underground. 
7.  Prior to the issuance of any building permits, a plan for the disposal of drainage waters originating on-site and from adjacent road rights-of-way shall be approved by the City of Huron public works department, if required. Easements or grant deeds shall be given to the City of Huron for drainage purposes or access thereto, as necessary. 
8.  The method of water supply and sewage disposal shall be as required and approved by the City of Huron and Fresno County health department. 
9.  Fire flows and fire protection facilities shall be as required and approved by the Fresno County fire department. 
10.  When commercial or industrial property is adjacent to property zoned for single-family residential purposes, a six-foot high solid masonry wall set in a planter of minimum five-foot width with trees spaced at twenty (20) foot intervals shall be constructed between the proposed development and the adjacent property along the rear and side property lines. The design and materials proposed shall be approved by the director prior to construction of said wall. 
11.  When multifamily residential, commercial, or industrial construction in excess of one story is proposed adjacent to property zoned for residential uses, structures shall be situated so that windows above the first story do not have direct views of other residential areas, collectors and arterials, or noise producing equipment or activities. 
12.  All exterior lighting shall be directed away from adjacent properties. 
13.  All trash receptacles shall be screened so that they are not visually obtrusive from any off-site location. The location and method of screening for all trash receptacles shall be approved by the director. 
14.  Architectural design and materials of all proposed buildings shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
15.  Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.60 of this title. 
16.  Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
17.  Signs may be provided as specified by the applicable zoning district regulation and Chapter 17.61 of this title. 
18.  During all on-site grading and construction activities, adequate measures shall be implemented to control fugitive dust. 
19.  Street improvements and construction of curb, gutter, and sidewalks shall be required for additions to development existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, unless waived in accordance with Chapter 17.75. 
I.  The director or the planning commission may waive or reduce parking requirements where a documented hardship, not involving economics exists, where there are unusual circumstances that prevent compliance with any required development standards, or when there is not a demonstrated need for all of the parking required by this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.29 - COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.29.010 - Design standards. 
In addition to the development standards contained in Chapter 17.51, the base zone and City combining zone districts, the following standards shall apply to commercial projects. 
A.  Adult Businesses. 
1.  Adult businesses are permitted, subject to a conditional use permit, only in the heavy industrial land use zone district. 
a.  Prohibition. It is unlawful to cause or permit the establishment of substantial enlargement of an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, massage parlor or sexual encounter establishment within two thousand (2,000) feet of another such business or within one thousand (1,000) feet of any religious institution, school or public park within the City or within one thousand (1,000) feet of any property designated for residential use or used for residential purposes. 
b.  Measurement of Distance. The distance between any two adult entertainment businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest structural wall of each business. The distance between any adult entertainment business and any religious institution, school or public park or any property designated for residential use or used for residential purposes shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest property line of the religious institution, school or public park or any property designated for residential use or used for residential purposes. 
B.  Alcohol Sales. A business or establishment requiring issuance of an alcohol beverage control (ABC) permit or license shall obtain the required permits consistent with Table 17-1 and shall comply with the following minimum standard(s): 
1.  Structures subject to an off-site ABC license shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of any religious institution, school, or public park within the City; one hundred (100) feet of any property designated for residential purposes; and shall not be located in such close proximity to another similar use to cause oversaturation of the neighborhood. The license application shall be reviewed by the planning department and Huron police services department prior to City approval. 
2.  Sit-down restaurants whose predominant function is the service of food and where the on-site sale of alcoholic beverages is incidental or secondary to the sale of food, are exempt from the requirement of a conditional use permit. An incidental bar or lounge may be allowed for the convenience of dining patrons. If the bar area exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area a conditional use permit shall be required. 
C.  Automobile and Automobile Accessory Sales, Parts and Service. New and used automobile sales and service dealerships and auto service centers in the City shall conform to this zoning ordinance. All auto related uses shall be constructed in the following manner: 
1.  All parts, accessories, etc., shall be stored within a fully enclosed structure. 
2.  Service and associated car storage areas shall be completely screened from public view. 
3.  All on-site lighting shall be stationary and directed away from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way. 
4.  All landscaping shall be installed and permanently maintained pursuant to the provisions of chapter 17.51. 
5.  All on-site signage shall comply with the provisions of chapter 17.61 Signs. 
6.  All loading and unloading of vehicles shall occur on-site and not in the adjoining streets or alleys. 
7.  All vehicles associated with the business shall be parked or stored on-site and not in adjoining streets, alleys or on landscaped areas (in contrast to planned, hardscape areas for display of vehicles). 
8.  Vehicles being repaired shall not be stored outdoors on site during non business hours beyond temporary vehicle staging and loading/unloading from a vehicle carrier or tow truck as long as the vehicle does not block property ingress/egress and create a safety hazard. 
9.  An adequate on-site queuing area for service customers shall be provided. Required parking spaces may not be counted as queuing spaces. 
10.  No vehicle service or repair work shall occur except within a fully enclosed structure. Service bays with individual access from the exterior of the structure shall not directly face or front on a public right-of-way. 
11.  All on-site parking shall comply with the provisions of chapter 17.60 (off-street parking standards). A parking plan shall be developed as a part of the permit review process. 
12.  Common access drives shall be spaced at least fifty (50) feet apart or as required in section 17.51 of this title. 
13.  Every parcel with a structure shall have a trash receptacle on the premises. The trash receptacle shall comply with adopted public works standards and be of sufficient size to accommodate the trash generated. The receptacles shall be screened from public view on at least three sides with gate access on the fourth side. All screening devices shall comply with City of Huron improvement standards for bin enclosures. 
D.  Convenience Stores. The retail sale of groceries, staples and sundry items and/or alcoholic beverages where the gross floor area is less than five thousand (5,000) square feet is subject to and shall comply with all of the following: 
1.  The minimum site area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
2.  The site shall have direct frontage along an arterial or collector street. 
3.  One access drive may be permitted for each street frontage. The design and location of the access drives) shall be subject to city engineer approval. 
4.  No convenience store shall have a point of entrance that is less than one thousand (1,000) feet from an existing or previously approved convenience store, or an entrance to an existing or planned elementary, junior high school or high school, as measured along public street frontages. 
5.  All on-site lighting shall be energy efficient, stationary and directed away from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way. 
6.  All on-site signage shall comply with provisions of Chapter 17.61 Signs including the prohibitions of fence mounted signs, window signs, and banner restrictions. 
7.  All landscaping shall be installed and permanently maintained in accordance with Chapter 17.51. 
8.  All on-site parking shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.60 (Off-Street Parking Standards). A parking plan shall be developed as part of the permit review process. 
9.  The premises shall be kept in a neat and orderly condition at all times. 
10.  Every parcel with a structure shall have a trash receptacle on the premises. The trash receptacle shall comply with adopted subdivision ordinance and be of sufficient size to accommodate the trash generated. The receptacles shall be screened from public view on at least three sides with gate access on the fourth side. All screening devices shall comply with City of Huron improvement standards for bin enclosures. 
11.  If on-site dispensing of automotive fuels is provided, the design, location and operation of these facilities shall be consistent with the provisions of subsection J of this section (Service Station Standards). Additionally, the cashier location shall provide direct visual access to the pump islands, the vehicles parked adjacent to the islands and propane storage area if applicable. 
12.  A bicycle rack shall be installed in a convenient location visible from the inside of the store. 
13.  Each convenience store shall provide a public restroom located within the store. 
14.  Public pay telephones provided on-site shall not be set up for incoming calls. Public telephones shall be featured with call out service only and shall be located in a well lighted area adjacent to the structure. 
15.  Video games may not be installed or operated on the premises. 
16.  A convenience store adjacent to any residentially designated district shall have a six-foot high decorative masonry wall and landscaping along the property lines adjacent to such districts. 
17.  All parking, loading, circulation aisles, and pump island bay areas shall be constructed with asphalt or concrete. 
E.  Day Care Facilities. Day care facilities for both children and/or adults that require a conditional use permit pursuant to Table 17-1 shall comply with the following provisions: 
1.  The activity shall conform to all property development standards of the land use district in which it is located. 
2.  Day care facilities shall be located no closer than five hundred (500) feet, in any direction, from an existing day care facility, measured from property line to property line except that they may be located no closer than two hundred fifty (250) feet measured from property line to property line from any existing day care facility not fronting on the same street. 
3.  The capacity specified on the license shall be the maximum number of children for whom care can be provided. 
4.  An outdoor play area of no less than seventy-five (75) square feet per child, but in no case less than four hundred fifty (450) square feet in area shall be provided. The outdoor play area shall be located in the rear area. Stationary play equipment shall not be located in required side and front yards. 
5.  All fences shall meet the requirements of the base zone district. Materials, colors, textures and design of the fence or wall shall be compatible with on-site development and adjacent properties. All fences or walls shall provide for safety with controlled points of entry. 
6.  All on-site parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.60 (Off-Street Parking Standards) sufficient off-street loading space shall be provided in addition to the required off-street parking to serve the dwelling. The required loading space may be located within the required front yard setback; however, it cannot impede access to the off-street parking required to serve the dwelling. 
7.  All on-site lighting shall be stationary, directed away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, and of an intensity that is consistent with a residential environment. 
8.  All on-site signage shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.61 (Signs). 
9.  The day care facility shall contain a fire extinguisher and smoke detector devices and meet all standards established by the Fresno County fire marshal. 
10.  Any conditional use permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked, modified or appealed pursuant to Chapter 17.75. 
11.  No day care facility shall be established until an application for a conditional use permit has been submitted to and approved by the planning department in accordance with the procedure set out in Chapter 17.70 of this title. 
F.  Drive-Through Restaurants. Drive-through restaurants shall comply with all of the following standards: 
1.  Establishments providing drive-through facilities may be permitted in the CBD and C-S zones and shall not be permitted in the C-P zone. 
2.  Pedestrian ways should not enter through drive aisles, but where they do, they shall have clear visibility, and they must be identified by special paving or striping. 
3.  Drive-through aisles shall be a minimum twelve (12) foot width on curves and a minimum eleven (11) foot width on straight sections. 
4.  Drive-through aisles shall provide sufficient stacking area behind the menu board to accommodate a minimum queue of six cars. 
5.  All service areas, restrooms and ground-mounted and roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from public view to the extent possible. 
6.  Landscaping shall screen drive-through or drive-in aisles from the public right-of-way and shall be used to minimize visual impact of readerboard signs and directional signs. 
7.  Drive-through aisles shall be constructed with asphalt or concrete or other material approved by the city engineer. 
8.  Parking areas and the drive-through aisle and structure shall be set back from the ultimate curb face a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. 
9.  Menu boards shall be a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet, with a maximum height of eight feet and shall face away from the street. 
10.  Drive-through restaurants within an integrated shopping center shall have an architectural style consistent with the theme established in the center. The architecture of any drive-through restaurant must provide compatibility with surrounding uses in form, materials, color, scale, etc. Structure plans shall have variation in depth and angle to create variety and interest in its basic form and silhouette. Articulation of structure surfaces shall be provided through the use of openings and recesses which create texture and shadow patterns. Structure entrances shall be well articulated and project a formal entrance through variation of architectural plane, pavement, surface treatment and landscape plaza. 
11.  No drive-through aisles shall exit directly onto a public right-of-way. 
12.  Every parcel with a structure shall have a trash receptacle on the premises. The trash receptacle shall comply with adopted public works standards and be of sufficient size to accommodate the trash generated. The receptacles shall be screened from public view on at least three sides with gate access on the fourth side. All screening devices shall comply with City of Huron improvement standards for bin enclosures. 
13.  Drive-through restaurant loudspeakers shall not be audible above sixty-five (65) dba at the edge of any adjacent property. 
G.  Mini-Malls. Mini-malls are defined as structures having three or more tenants under one roof, up to thirty thousand (30,000) square feet, and are subject to site plan review and shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The development shall provide external continuity, uniformity and compatibility relating to architectural design, vehicular and pedestrian access, and on-site provisions for landscaping, loading, parking and signage. 
2.  To the extent feasible, the on-site vehicular circulation system shall provide continuity with adjacent and similar commercial developments. 
3.  No outdoor displays or sale of merchandise shall be permitted. However, limited outdoor sales may be allowed subject to the issuance of a temporary use permit (T). 
4.  Every parcel with a structure shall have a trash receptacle on the premises. The trash receptacle shall comply with adopted public works standards and be of sufficient size to accommodate the trash generated. The receptacles shall be screened from public view on at least three sides with gate access on the fourth side. All screening devices shall comply with City of Huron improvement standards for bin enclosures. 
5.  All provisions of Chapter 17.60 (Off-Street Parking Standards); Chapter 17.51 (Design Districts); and Chapter 17.61 (Signs) shall be met. 
H.  Mini-Storage. Mini-storage facilities shall be constructed in the following manner: 
1.  The minimum site area shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
2.  The site shall be entirely paved, except for structures and landscaping (vehicular storage areas may have alternative paving surfaces subject to City approval in industrial zones only). 
3.  All on-site lighting shall be energy efficient, stationary and directed away from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way. 
4.  All landscaping shall be installed and permanently maintained pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.51. 
5.  All on-site signage shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.61 (Signs). 
6.  The site shall be completely enclosed within a six-foot high solid decorative masonry wall, except for points of ingress/egress (including emergency fire access) which shall be properly gated. The gates shall be maintained in good working order and shall remain closed except when in use. 
7.  No business activity shall be conducted other than the rental of the storage spaces for inactive storage use. 
8.  All storage shall be located within a fully enclosed structure(s). 
9.  No flammable or otherwise hazardous materials shall be stored on-site. 
10.  Residential quarters for a manager or caretaker may be provided in the development. 
11.  The development shall provide for two parking spaces for the manager/caretaker, and a minimum of two spaces located adjacent to or in a close proximity to the managers quarters for customer parking. 
12.  Aisle width shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet between buildings to provide unobstructed and safe circulation. 
13.  Trash receptacles shall be located on the premises in a quantity and manner approved by the City. The trash receptacle shall comply with adopted public works standards and be of sufficient size to accommodate the trash generated. The receptacles shall be screened from public view on at least three sides with gate access on the fourth side. All screening devices shall comply with City of Huron improvement standards for bin enclosures. 
14.  Storage facilities located adjacent to residential districts shall have their hours of operation restricted to seven a.m. to nine p.m., Monday through Saturday and nine a.m. to nine p.m. on Sundays. 
15.  The storage of vehicles including autos, boats and recreational vehicles may be permitted subject to approval of a conditional use permit (Chapter 17.70). 
I.  Recycling Facilities for Reusable Domestic Containers. Recycling facilities are permitted in accordance with Table 17-1 and include reverse vending machine(s), small collection, large collection, light processing, and heavy processing and are defined and permitted as follows: 
1.  Reference Chapter 17.03 for definitions. 
2.  The standards for recycling facilities are as follows: 
a.  Reverse vending machine(s) located within a commercial structure shall require a permit consistent with Table 17-1, shall not require additional parking spaces for recycling customers, and may be permitted in all commercial and industrial land use districts subject to compliance with the following standards: 
i.  Shall be installed as an accessory use to a commercial use which is in full compliance with all applicable provisions of this development code and municipal code; 
ii.  Shall be located within thirty (30) feet of the entrance to the commercial store and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation; 
iii.  Shall not occupy parking spaces required by the primary use; 
iv.  Shall not occupy more than fifty (50) square feet of floor space per installation, including any protective enclosure, and shall be no more than eight feet in height; 
v.  Shall be constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material; 
vi.  Shall be clearly marked to identify type of material to be deposited, operating instructions, and the identity and phone number of the operator or responsible person to call if the machine is inoperative; 
vii.  Shall have a sign area of a maximum of four square feet per machine, exclusive of operating instructions and shall be included in the overall allowable signage plan for the site; 
viii.  Shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary and litter-free condition on a daily basis; 
ix.  Operating hours shall be consistent with the operating hours of the primary use; 
x.  Shall be illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe operation if operating hours are between dusk and dawn; 
xi.  Shall maintain an adequate on-site refuse container for the disposal of nonhazardous waste; 
xii.  Shall be located in an area screened from public right-of-way and in a well lit, secure area. 
b.  Small collection facilities located within applicable commercial and industrial land use districts shall comply with the following standards: 
i.  Shall be allowed as an accessory use to an existing commercial use which is in full compliance with all applicable provisions of this title and the municipal code; 
ii.  Shall be no larger than five hundred (500) square feet and occupy no more than five parking spaces not including space that will be periodically needed for removal of materials or exchange of containers; 
iii.  Shall comply with the setbacks of the base zoning designation, and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation; 
iv.  Shall accept only glass, metals, plastic containers, papers and reusable items; 
v.  Shall use no power driven processing equipment except for reverse vending machines; 
vi.  Shall use containers that are constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material, covered when the site is not attended, secured from unauthorized entry or removal of material, and shall be of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected and collection schedule. Cargo containers are not permitted; 
vii.  Shall store all recyclable material in the mobile unit vehicle and shall not leave the materials outside the unit when the attendant is not present; 
viii.  Shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary manner free of litter and any other undesirable materials, including mobile facilities; 
ix.  Shall not exceed noise levels of sixty-five (65) dba as measured at the property line of adjacent residential land use districts; 
x.  Attended facilities shall not be located within one hundred (100) feet of any residential land use district; 
xi.  Collection containers, site fencing, and signage shall be of such color and design so as to be compatible with and to harmonize with the surrounding uses and neighborhood; 
xii.  Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material which may be deposited; the facility shall be clearly marked to identify the name and telephone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation and display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling container enclosure of containers; 
xiii.  Signs may be provided as follows: 
(A)  Recycling facilities may have identification signs with a maximum of fifteen (15) percent per side of a structure, or sixteen (16) square feet, whichever is greater. In the case of a wheeled facility, the side will be measured from the ground to the top of the container, 
(B)  Signs shall be consistent with the character of their location, 
(C)  Directional signs consistent with Chapter 17.61 (Signs), bearing no advertising message may be installed with the approval of the planning department if necessary to facilitate traffic circulation or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way; 
xiv.  The facility shall not impair the landscaping required by Chapter 17.51 for any concurrent use; 
xv.  No additional parking space shall be required for customers of a small collection facility located at the established parking lot of a primary use. One space shall be required for the attendant, if needed; 
xvi.  Mobile recycling units shall have an area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking during hours when the mobile unit is scheduled to be present; 
xvii.  Occupation of parking spaces by the facility and by the attendant shall not reduce available parking spaces below the minimum number required by the primary use unless all of the following conditions exist: 
(A)  A parking study shows that existing parking capacity is not already fully utilized during the time the recycling facility will be on the site, and 
(B)  The permit shall be reviewed at the end of eighteen (18) months. 
xviii.  Small collection facilities shall not operate between the hours of seven p.m. and seven a.m.; 
xix.  Small collection facilities shall be screened from the view of public right-of-way and adjacent residential land use districts with intensive mature landscaping and/or landscaping in conjunction with six-foot solid decorative masonry walls which are similar in character and architecturally compatible with the primary structure on-site; 
xx.  Shall maintain adequate refuse containers for the disposal of nonhazardous waste; 
xxi.  Small recycling facilities shall not be clustered and shall be located at least one-half mile from the nearest similar facility; 
xxii.  Conditions of approval for a small recycling facility shall be clearly visible on the site for the public's inspection at all times. 
c.  A large collection facility which is larger than five hundred (500) square feet, or on a separate parcel not accessory to a "primary" use, which has a permanent structure may be permitted in the industrial land use districts, and is subject to the following standards: 
i.  The facility shall not abut a parcel designated or planned for residential use. 
ii.  The facility shall be screened from the public right-of-way, within an enclosed structure. 
iii.  Structure setbacks and landscape requirements shall be those provided for in the land use district which the facility is located. 
iv.  All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers which are covered, secured, and maintained in good condition. Outdoor storage shall be screened by a six-foot, solid decorative masonry wall. No storage, excluding truck trailers shall be visible above the height of the wall. No outdoor storage shall be permitted in the land use districts which do not permit outdoor storage. 
v.  The site shall be maintained clean, sanitary and free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and will be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis. 
vi.  Space shall be provided on-site for six vehicles to circulate and to deposit recyclable materials. 
vii.  Parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.60 plus one parking space for each commercial vehicle operated by the recycling facility shall be provided for on-site. 
viii.  Noise levels shall not exceed sixty-five (65) dba as measured at the property boundary or any area planned for residential use. It shall not be in operation between the hours of seven p.m. and seven a.m. 
ix.  Any containers provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials shall be at least fifty (50) feet from any residential land use district, permanently located, of sturdy rustproof construction, and shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected and be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of materials. 
x.  Donation areas shall be kept litter free and of the undesirable material and the containers will be clearly marked to identify type of material that may be deposited. The facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers. 
xi.  The facility shall be clearly marked to identify the name and telephone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation; identification and informal signs shall meet the standards of the land use district; and directional signs bearing no advertising message may be installed with the approval of the planning department, if necessary to facilitate traffic circulation. 
xii.  Adequate refuse containers for the disposal of nonhazardous waste shall be maintained on the site. 
xiii.  Conditions of approval for a large recycling facility shall be clearly visible on the site for the public's inspection at all times. 
d.  Light processing facilities and large processors may be permitted and shall comply with the following standards: 
i.  Large processing facilities shall be subject to a conditional use permit and shall be located no closer than two miles from the nearest similar facility. 
ii.  The facility shall not abut a residentially designated parcel. 
iii.  In the I-L zone, the facility shall operate in a completely enclosed structure. 
iv.  Power driven processing shall be permitted provided all noise level requirements are met. Light processing facilities are limited to bailing, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding and sorting of source-separated recyclable materials and the repairing of reusable materials. 
v.  A light processing facility shall be no larger than forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet and shall have no more than an average of two outbound truck shipments of material per day and shall not shred, compact or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers. 
vi.  Structure setbacks and landscaping requirements shall be those provided for in the land use district in which the facility is located. 
vii.  All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers which are covered, secured, and maintained in good condition. Storage containers for flammable materials (allowed only in the I-H zone) shall be constructed of nonflammable material. No storage, excluding truck trailers shall be visible above the height of the wall. No outdoor storage shall be permitted in the land use districts which do not permit outdoor storage. 
viii.  The site shall be maintained clean, sanitary and free of litter and any other undesirable material(s). Loose debris shall be collected on a daily basis and the site shall be secured from unauthorized entry and removal of materials when attendants are not present. 
ix.  Space shall be provided on-site for the anticipated peak load of customers to circulate, park, and deposit recyclable materials. If the facility is open to the public, a parking area shall be provided for a minimum of eight customers at any one time. 
x.  Parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.60. 
xi.  Noise levels shall not exceed sixty-five (65) dba as measured at the property boundary or any area planned for residential land use districts. 
xii.  If the facility is located within five hundred (500) feet of property designated or planned for residential use, it shall not be in operation between seven p.m. and seven a.m. The facility shall be administered by on-site personnel during the hours the facility is open. 
xiii.  Any containers provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from any residential land use district permanently located, of sturdy rustproof construction, and shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected and be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of materials. 
xiv.  Donation areas shall be kept free of litter and any other undesirable material. The containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited. The facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers. 
xv.  Conditions of approval for light processing facilities and large processors shall be clearly visible on the site for the public's inspection at all times. 
xvi.  Signs shall be installed pursuant to Chapter 17.61 (Signs). Additionally, the facility shall be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation. 
xvii.  No dust, fumes, smoke, vibration, odor, or glare above ambient level shall be detectable from adjacent residentially designated parcels. 
xviii.  The facility shall maintain adequate on-site refuse containers for the disposal of nonhazardous waste. 
J.  Service Station (Gasoline) Standards. Service stations shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  New service stations shall be permitted only at the intersections of arterial, State highway and collector streets. A maximum of one service station shall be permitted at each intersection. The use shall not face a residential land use district. 
2.  The minimum parcel size shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet, with a minimum street frontage of one hundred (100) feet on each street. 
3.  All activities and operations shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure, except as follows: 
a.  The dispensing of petroleum products, water and air from pump islands; 
b.  The provision of emergency service of a minor nature; 
c.  The sale of items via vending machines shall be placed next to the main structure in an area not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet and shall be screened from public view. 
4.  Pump islands shall be located behind the front yard setback line, or twenty-five (25) feet from a street property line, whichever is greater, however, a canopy or roof structure over a pump island may encroach up to three feet in the required setbacks. The maximum number of points of ingress/egress to any one street shall be two; except in the case of State highways where a maximum of one shall be permitted. 
5.  There shall be a minimum distance of one hundred (100) feet between curb cuts along a street frontage. 
6.  No driveway shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet to the curb return, except in the case of a State highway where the minimum distance shall be one hundred (100) feet. 
7.  The width of a driveway shall comply with City of Huron improvement standards. 
8.  On-site parking shall comply with Chapter 17.60. 
9.  Outside storage of motor vehicles shall be prohibited. 
10.  No vehicles may be parked on sidewalks, parkways, driveways or alleys. 
11.  No vehicle may be parked on the premises for the purpose of offering same for sale. 
12.  Landscaping shall comprise a minimum of five percent of the service station site area, exclusive of required setbacks, and shall be provided and permanently maintained according regulations, as well as those contained in Chapter 17.51: 
a.  A minimum five-foot wide planter shall be provided along interior property lines, except for openings to facilitate vehicular circulation to adjacent properties. 
b.  A planter area of not less than two hundred (200) square feet shall be provided at the corner of two intersecting streets. Landscaping shall not obstruct views in an area between thirty (30) inches and six feet above ground level. 
c.  A minimum of fifty (50) square feet of planter area shall be located along those portions of the main structure fronting on a public street. 
d.  Additional landscaping may be required to screen the service station from adjacent properties. 
13.  All on-site signage shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.61 (Signs). 
14.  Openings of service bays shall not face public rights-of-way and shall be designed to minimize the visual intrusion onto adjoining properties. 
15.  No used or discarded automotive parts or equipment, or disabled, junked or wrecked vehicles may be located in any open area outside the main structure. 
16.  Every parcel with a structure shall have a trash receptacle on the premises. The trash receptacle shall comply with adopted public works standards and be of sufficient size to accommodate the trash generated. The receptacles shall be screened from public view on at least three sides with gate access on the fourth side. All screening devices shall comply with City of Huron improvement standards for bin enclosures. 
17.  Lighting shall comply with City of Huron improvement standards for on-site and off-site illumination; provided, however, that canopy luminaries, and lights in excess of one hundred fifty (150) watts shall not be permitted to directly illuminate the public right-of-way or adjoining properties. 
18.  Rest room entrances should be located within the structure, however, if access is from the outside of the structure, the view from adjacent properties or public rights-of-way shall be concealed by planters or decorative screening. 
19.  Noise from bells or loudspeakers shall not exceed sixty-five (65) decibels at the property line at any time. 
20.  All parking, loading, circulation aisles and pump island bay areas shall be constructed with concrete or asphalt. 
K.  Service Station Conversions. A structure originally constructed as a service station and which is proposed for conversion to another allowable use, regardless of current use, shall require upgrading and remodeling for such items as, but not limited to, removal of all gasoline appurtenances, removal of canopies, signage, removal of pump islands, removal of gas tank, removal of overhead doors, nonconforming structures, additional street improvements to conform to access regulations, exterior remodeling, and any additional standards as required by this zoning ordinance. 
L.  Office Conversions. A structure originally constructed as a single-family residence which is proposed for conversion to low intensity office use shall require the following: 
1.  The building elevations and the landscaping between the front property line and the building front shall be maintained in their residential character. 
2.  Parking shall be provided to the rear or side of the structure. 
3.  Any trees with a breast height diameter (BHD) of six inches or greater shall be preserved. If it becomes necessary to remove such tree, each tree removed shall be replaced with a thirty-six (36) inch box tree at a rate of three per one removed. 
4.  If the rear property line abuts an alley, access to parking shall be provided from the alley whenever possible. 
5.  Where two or more single-family residences adjacent to one another are converted to office uses, reciprocal access and parking may be required. 
6.  Parking spaces shall be provided as determined by Chapter 17.60 and at project review. Landscaping and/or parking requirements may be reduced in accordance with Chapter 17.72 upon the planning department's approval in order to preserve the character of the design district. 
7.  Tandem parking shall not be allowed. 
8.  Loading spaces shall not be required. 
9.  Signs shall be permitted in accordance with the C-O zone. 
10.  The structure shall be made to conform to the provisions of the Uniform Fire Code and the Uniform Building Code for commercial structures. 
11.  Trash receptacles shall be placed to the rear of structures and be screened from view. Location and size of receptacles will be determined at project review. 
M.  Single Room Occupancy (SRO) Facilities. SRO facilities are subject to the following standards: 
1.  SRO's shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of a parcel which has a school for children, adult bookstore or theater or liquor store. 
2.  SRO's shall be located within one-fourth mile of a bus stop and/or have an adequate bus/dial-a-ride turn-out bay adjacent to the site. 
3.  SRO's shall comply with the parking requirements set forth in Chapter 17.60. 
4.  Any design of an SRO project shall coordinate with and compliment the existing architectural style and standards of the surrounding land uses and local community. If a design theme has become established in an area (Chapter 17.51), this should be reflected in the design and scale of the SRO project. 
5.  An unrestricted drop-off/pick-up/loading/temporary parking area shall be provided near an entry located adjacent to front entry/desk area. 
6.  Exterior common areas and/or open courtyards shall be provided throughout the project. If common areas are made available, these areas should be designed to provide passive open space with tables, chairs, planters, or small garden spaces to make these areas useful and functional for the residents. Exterior common areas, including parking areas, should be illuminated. 
N.  Sign Program. All centers, mini-malls, parcels or sites with multiple tenants in which businesses and structures are designed in an integrated and interrelated development, shall develop a coordinated sign program for all tenants and uses in accordance with the requirements set forth in Section 17.61.030. 
All sign programs shall have signage that is uniform in color, design and placement for all tenant identification with the center. Sign programs shall include all proposed permanent signage and identify required landscape planter areas. A separate landscape and irrigation plan may be required by the planning department pursuant to Chapter 17.51. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 369 , § 1, 4-6-2016)  
Chapter 17.30 - LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (M-L) ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.30.010 - Purpose and application. 
This district is intended to reserve appropriately located areas for various types of processing, assembly, storage and manufacturing uses and related activities; protect such areas from intrusion by residential or inharmonious commercial uses; regulate and control hazardous or objectionable influences incidental to certain industrial uses; and provide areas with adequate space, access and separation from residential, commercial and public uses to promote modern industrial development. The development of any industrial use which utilizes or processes liquids or solids that are obnoxious or are hazardous shall be subject to a conditional use permit. Automobile wrecking yards and incidental auto sales attached to automobile wrecking yards are also subject to a conditional use permit. The light industrial zone is intended for uses such as fabricating, assembly, research and development, electronics assembly, warehousing and other such similar uses which do not involve the manufacturing of finished product from raw materials. Installation and operation of solar panels for public and private use is conditionally permitted in the light manufacturing zone. All work, materials, and equipment storage is generally conducted indoors so that noise, dust, fumes, odors, smoke or gas will not be emitted beyond the confines of the building. Light industrial is also appropriate as a buffer between heavy industrial and nonindustrial uses and where the site is visible from residential areas or major streets. Special landscaping, enclosures, screening and other site development standards are applicable in the light industrial zone. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 369 , § 1, 4-6-2016)  
17.30.020 - Permitted uses. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-1 and all other determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 17.73.030 are permitted in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 17.51 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.30.030 - Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-1 as conditioned and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 17.73.030 are permitted in accordance with the standards set out in Chapter 17.51 and subject to securing a conditional use permit in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 17.70 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.30.040 - Prohibited uses. 
All other uses not permitted by Sections 17.30.020 and 17.30.030 are prohibited. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.30.050 - Minimum lot size. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.30.060 - Yards and setbacks. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.30.070 - Height limits. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.30.080 - Minimum distance between structures. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.30.090 - Parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.60 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.30.100 - Signs. 
The following signs are permitted in accordance with Chapter 17.61 of this title. 
A.  Temporary real estate signs (not to exceed eight square feet); 
B.  Temporary subdivision signs; 
C.  Temporary construction signs; 
D.  Temporary political signs; 
E.  Wall signs (on-site identification only) not to exceed five percent of the primary street frontage; 
F.  One monument sign not to exceed five feet in height and thirty-five (35) square feet, of total copy area advertising on-site businesses only. 
The maximum permitted area of all signs shall not exceed two square feet for each lineal foot of street frontage. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.30.110 - Landscaping. 
Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.51 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.30.120 - Special review procedures and development standards. 
A.  Outdoor industrial storage yards shall be completely enclosed by a solid screening fence not less than six feet in height. The design and materials proposed shall be approved by the planning department. 
B.  All development in the M-L zone shall comply with the minimum standards set out in Chapter 17.51 of this title. 
C.  Development in the M-L zone shall also comply with the interpretations and provisions of Chapter 17.73 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.31 - HEAVY MANUFACTURING (M-H) ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.31.010 - Purpose and application. 
The M-H general industrial district is intended to provide for the establishment of industrial uses essential to the development of a balanced economic base. The heavy industrial zone allows for a range of activities including manufacturing, wholesale distribution, storage and industrial uses involved in the manufacturing of finished product from raw material. Installation and operation of solar panels for public and private use is permitted as well in the heavy manufacturing zone. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 369 , § 1, 4-6-2016)  
17.31.020 - Permitted uses. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-1 and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 17.73.030 are permitted in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 17.51 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.31.030 - Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-1 as conditioned and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 17.73.030 are permitted in accordance with the standards set out in Chapter 17.51 and subject to securing a conditional use permit in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 17.70 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.31.040 - Prohibited uses. 
All other uses not permitted by Sections 17.31.020 and 17.31.030 are prohibited. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.31.050 - Minimum lot size. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.31.060 - Yards and setbacks. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.31.070 - Height limits. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.31.080 - Minimum distance between structures. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.31.090 - Parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.60 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.31.100 - Signs. 
The following signs are permitted in accordance with Chapter 17.61 of this title: 
A.  Temporary real estate signs (not to exceed eight square feet); 
B.  Temporary subdivision signs; 
C.  Temporary construction signs; 
D.  Temporary political signs; 
E.  Wall signs (advertising on-site businesses only) not to exceed five percent of building frontage area; 
F.  One monument sign not to exceed ten feet in height and sixty-four (64) square feet of total copy area, (advertising on-site businesses only). 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.31.110 - Landscaping. 
Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.51 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.31.120 - Special review procedures and development standards. 
A.  All development in the M-H zone shall be done in conformance with all applicable standards set out in Chapter 17.70 of this title. 
B.  Development in the M-H zone shall comply with the interpretation and provisions of Chapter 17.73 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.41 - PUBLIC FACILITIES (P-F) ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.41.010 - Purpose and application. 
This designation includes areas owned and maintained by public or institutional agencies such as the city, schools, hospitals, and other special districts, including but not limited to solar power generation facility districts. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 369 , § 1, 4-6-2016)  
17.41.020 - Permitted uses. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-1 and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 17.73.030 are permitted in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 17.51 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.41.030 - Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-1 as conditioned and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 17.73.030 are subject to securing a conditional use permit in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 17.70 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.41.040 - Prohibited uses. 
All others uses not permitted by Sections 17.41.020 and 17.41.030 are prohibited. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.41.050 - Minimum lot size. 
None required. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.41.060 - Yards and setbacks. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.41.070 - Height limits. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.41.080 - Minimum distance between structures. 
See Table 17-2. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.41.090 - Parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.60 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.41.100 - Signs. 
Signs are permitted in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.61 of this title. 
A.  Temporary real estate signs (not to exceed eight square feet); 
B.  Temporary construction signs; 
C.  One monument sign for each use located on the site up to sixteen (16) square feet per sign face. The maximum height of the sign shall be five feet with thirty-two (32) square feet of permitted sign area; 
D.  Wall signs not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in area for each use located on the site. 
The aggregate amount of signage shall not exceed one square foot for each lineal foot of street frontage. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.41.110 - Landscaping. 
Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.51 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.41.120 - Special review procedures and development standards. 
A.  All development in the P-F zone shall comply with the interpretations and provisions of Chapter 17.73 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.42 - RECREATION, PARKS AND OPEN SPACE (O) ZONE 
Sections: 
 
17.42.010 - Purpose and application. 
This district is intended primarily for application to those areas of the City where it is necessary and desirable to (A) provide permanent open spaces, whether public or private, which are necessary to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the people; (B) provide spaces for the location and preservation of public facilities such as parks, playgrounds and other public uses or private uses of a similar nature; and (C) reserve, in a substantially undeveloped state, the areas planned for future urban use where, because of locations lacking public services and facilities or because need for such urban expansion is not immediate, it is necessary to prevent uses or structures from being developed which might be inappropriate or premature to their eventual zoning classification. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.42.020 - Permitted uses. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-1 and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 17.73.030 are permitted in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 17.51 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.42.030 - Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. 
The uses as shown in Table 17-1 as conditioned and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 17.73.030 are permitted in accordance with the standards set out in Chapter 17.51 and subject to securing a conditional use permit in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 17.70 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.42.040 - Prohibited uses. 
All others uses not permitted by Sections 17.42.020 and 17.42.030 are prohibited. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.42.050 - Minimum lot size. 
None required. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.42.060 - Yards and setbacks. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.42.070 - Height limits. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.42.080 - Minimum distance between structures. 
See Table 17-4. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.42.090 - Parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.60 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.42.100 - Signs. 
Signs are permitted in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.61 of this title. 
A.  Temporary real estate signs (not to exceed eight square feet); 
B.  Temporary construction signs; 
C.  One monument sign for each public facility/institution up to sixteen (16) square feet per sign face and the maximum height of sign shall be five feet with thirty-two (32) square feet of permitted sign area; 
D.  Wall signs not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in area. 
The aggregate amount of signage shall not exceed one square foot for each lineal foot of street frontage. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.42.110 - Landscaping. 
Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.51 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.42.120 - Special review procedures and development standards. 
A.  All development in the O zone shall comply with the interpretations and provisions of Chapter 17.73 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.43 - SPECIFIC PLAN (S-P) DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.43.010 - Purpose and application. 
The purpose of the specific plan (SP) combining district is to provide for the special regulations in areas where environmental economic opportunities or constraints require the creative and innovative use of land which may be otherwise limited or prohibited by the standard provisions of other parts of this title. The specific plan district is designed to allow diversity in the relationship between buildings and open spaces so as to create unique and interesting physical environments, to maximize usable open space while at the same time preserves the public health, safety and welfare. All development in the specific plan district shall be in conformance with the general plan. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.43.020 - Permitted uses. 
Any use consistent with the general plan land use category which is applicable to the subject property and which will not be in conflict with the public health, safety and welfare. These uses are permitted in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Sections 17.43.120 and 17.43.130 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.43.030 - Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. 
Those conditional uses permitted in the base zone unless superseded by an S-P district. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.43.040 - Prohibited uses. 
Uses inconsistent with the applicable general plan land use category and any uses which would jeopardize the health, safety and welfare are prohibited. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.43.050 - Minimum lot size. 
As established in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Sections 17.43.120 and 17.43.130 of this chapter, or as determined by the specific plan. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.43.060 - Yards and setbacks. 
As established in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Section 17.43.130 of this chapter, or as determined by the specific plan. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.43.070 - Height limits. 
As established in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Section 17.43.130 of this chapter, or as may be determined by the specific plan. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.43.080 - Minimum distance between structures. 
As established in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Section 17.43.130 of this chapter, or as may be determined by the specific plan. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.43.090 - Parking. 
As established in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Section 17.43.130 of this chapter, or as may be determined by the specific plan. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.43.100 - Signs. 
As established in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Section 17.43.130 of this chapter, or as may be determined by the specific plan. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.43.110 - Landscaping. 
As established in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Section 17.43.130 of this chapter, or as may be determined by the specific plan. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.43.120 - Special review procedures. 
The special planning district may be initiated by the City, or the property owner or an authorized representative. An S-P district shall be established by ordinance in accordance with the procedures set out in Chapter 17.76. An application shall include all the information required by Section 65451 of the California Government Code, including, but not limited to the following: 
A.  Name(s) and address(es) of applicant(s); 
B.  Name(s) and address(es) of property owner(s); 
C.  APN (assessor's parcel number); 
D.  Legal description of property; 
E.  A site plan drawn at the scale specified by the planning department which includes the following information: 
1.  Topography of the lot(s), 
2.  Proposed street system and parking areas, 
3.  Location of all buildings, 
4.  Location of all proposed use areas, 
5.  Proposed setbacks, 
6.  Areas to be used for parks, schools, public or quasi-public buildings, 
7.  Proposed landscaping, 
8.  Water supply and distribution, 
9.  Sewage disposal system, 
10.  Drainage system, 
11.  North arrow; 
F.  Acres of each proposed land use; 
G.  Number of dwelling units per acre (if applicable); 
H.  A narrative description of the proposed development including: 
1.  An explanation of the proposed deviations from the standards which would otherwise apply to the proposed uses and why the deviations are necessary or desirable, 
2.  Phasing or development schedule. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.43.130 - Development standards. 
Development in the specific plan district shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  All development shall be consistent with the goals and policies of the general plan and with the uses, density and intensity standards of the general plan land use category applicable. 
B.  Development in the district shall be demonstratively superior to any other development that could occur without the special planning designation. In making this determination the following factors shall be considered: 
1.  Appropriateness of the use at the proposed location; 
2.  The mix of housing styles and costs; 
3.  Provisions of units affordable to persons of low and moderate income; 
4.  Provisions of infrastructure: improvements, including water distribution and sewage collection; 
5.  Provisions of open space; 
6.  Compatibility of proposed use(s) with surrounding area; 
7.  Use of innovative technology and materials; 
8.  Use of innovative architectural design; 
9.  Overall contribution to the enhancement of the environment within the City; 
10.  Creativity in design and land use. 
C.  The special planning district may only be applied to projects consisting of five or more acres. 
If development approved pursuant to this chapter has not commenced within three years of the approval, the city council may initiate a reclassification of the property in accordance with the procedures set out in Chapter 17.76 of this title, unless: 
1.  Building permits for approved development have been issued within six months of the development expiration date. 
2.  A valid tentative subdivision or parcel map for proposed development has been approved. 
3.  A written request for extension has been filed before the expiration of the three-year period. Such extension shall be approved by the city council and shall not exceed three years in length. In any event, development approved in accordance with this chapter shall be commenced or necessary final subdivision maps be recorded within six years of the original approval. 
D.  If the time limits specified herein are not met, the city council may initiate reclassification of the property to a zone(s) consistent with the general plan in accordance with the procedures set out in Chapter 17.76 of this title. 
The planning department may approve minor plan modifications to an approved special planning district site development plan in accordance with the procedures set out in Section 17.75.020 if the planning department determines that the requested modification(s) does not constitute a substantial change in the approved project. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.50 - AIRPORT COMPATIBILITY (A-A) COMBINING DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.50.010 - Purpose and application. 
The purpose of the airport compatibility (A-A) combining district is to minimize aviation hazards by limiting the height of buildings, structures, trees and plants and limiting dwelling unit and population densities in the adopted airport compatibility zones around airports and airfields. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.50.020 - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted by the base zone with which the A-A district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.50.030 - Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. 
Conditional uses permitted by the base district with which the A-A district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.50.040 - Prohibited uses. 
Uses prohibited by the base district, and uses which are classified in "prohibited uses" or uses which exceed the limits on development intensity. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.50.050 - Minimum lot size. 
Per the requirements of the base district with which the A-A zone is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.50.060 - Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. 
Per the requirements of the base zone with which the A-A zone is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.50.070 - Yards and setbacks. 
Per the requirements of the base zone with which the A-A zone is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.50.080 - Height limits. 
No building, structure, tree or plant shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.50.090 - Minimum distance between structures. 
Per the requirements of the base zone with which the A-A zone is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.50.100 - Parking. 
Per the requirements of the base district with which the A-A zone is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.50.110 - Signs. 
Per the requirements of the base district with which the A-A zone is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.50.120 - Landscaping. 
Per the requirements of the base district with which the A-A zone is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.50.130 - Fences (including walls and hedges). 
Per the requirements of the base zone with which the A-A zone is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.50.140 - Special review procedures and development standards. 
No use shall be established, no development shall occur, and no building or grading permit shall be issued for any use or development in the A-A district until an application for site development plan review has been submitted to and approved by the planning department in accordance with the procedures set out in Section 17.75.030, or submitted to and approved by the planning commission in accordance with the procedures set out in Section 17.75.050 when submitted in conjunction with an application for a change of zone classification or with a tentative subdivision map. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.51 - DESIGN DISTRICTS 
Sections: 
 
17.51.010 - Purpose and application. 
Although zoning primarily regulates the type and location of various uses, it also regulates the physical design standards for many uses. While it is the intent of the zoning ordinance to locate various uses to conform to the general plan, the physical design needs of various areas do not necessarily conform to the locations needs. In order to apply design standards, design districts have been established (see Design District Boundaries, Figure 17.51-1). 
The use of design districts will allow the uniform application of design standards within an area regardless of zoning designation. The main purpose of the design districts is to obtain harmonious relationship of various uses, buildings, structures, lot sizes and open spaces, regardless of zone district, while still maintaining the economic viability of a parcel of property. The development standards that follow in Sections 17.51.020 through 17.51.060 shall be all properties where new development will occur or when there is a substantial increase in development as defined herein, and shall be incorporated into the plans which are submitted to the planning department for approval as outlined in Chapter 17.75. The planning commission may grant variances to these rules in accordance with the procedures and required findings in Chapter 17.71, and the planning department may permit modification in accordance with Chapter 17.72. Where there is a conflict between the design district standards and basic zone standards, the design district in which the property is located pursuant to Figure 17.51-1 shall apply and/or the more restrictive application as determined by the planning department. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007) 
Figure 17.51-1 
Design District Boundaries 
  
17.51.020 - (DD1) General design district. 
The following standards are applicable to all properties in the City of Huron unless specifically in another design district (Sections 17.51.030 through 17.51.060). 
A.  Site Area. The minimum parcel size for each design district varies according to the base zone or design district standards. However, this section shall not preclude parcels of less than the required minimum which exist at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, from securing planned development and building permits. Parcels of less than the required minimum size may be created upon approval of an acceptable cluster district or specific plan by the planning commission. 
B.  Setback. The minimum building setbacks shall conform to the requirements set forth in the base zoning district. However, the planning commission may grant an exception to the required standards based on the uniqueness of the property or the specific design needs of the project. 
C.  Landscaping. If landscaping is required, landscape and irrigation plans shall be submitted as a part of the building plans. The following design standards shall apply, unless superseded by a design district listed in Sections 17.51.030 through 17.51.050, or by the requirements of Section 17.19.010(N). 
1.  General Landscaping Requirements. 
a.  All areas within a required setback shall contain living groundcover or a combination of living and nonliving ground coverings (nonliving to be a maximum of twenty (20) percent). Parking shall not be allowed within the front or street side setback in any zone including mobilehome space setbacks, and shall be fully landscaped as set forth herein. All plants within required setbacks to be of species suited to Sunset Western Garden Book Climate Zones 8 and 9. The use of low water varieties, grouped by similar water usage is required. 
i.  Definition. "Living groundcover" means low-growing plants or shrubs that after being planted will grow together to form a solid cover in one year or less. To achieve desired coverage, low growing groundcover plants taken from flats shall be planted a maximum of twelve (12) inches on center. Low growing, shrub type groundcovers in one-gallon cans shall be planted a maximum of two feet on center. Spacing may be increased to three feet on center for fast growing plants as approved by the planning division. 
In areas susceptible to foot traffic, the use of long-lived low growing shrubs and groundcovers such as Dwarf Coyote Bush, Lantana and Junipers are preferred. Other groundcovers that do not last as long, such as Baby Tears, Gazania, African Daisy, and annual or perennial flowers must be limited to fifteen (15) percent of the total living groundcover area. 
ii.  Definition. "Nonliving groundcover" means forest humus or walk-on bark, rock and other similar materials. Use shall require permission of the planning department. 
iii.  All soil surfaces are to be covered by plant materials or nonliving groundcovers as defined in subsection (C)(5)(b) of this section. At least two inches of nonliving materials shall be applied to all planting areas except turf. 
b.  Islands of a minimum area of eighty (80) square feet shall be established at a maximum separation of ten continuous parking stalls. The islands shall be landscaped with groundcovers and with a minimum of one fifteen (15) gallon tree planted in each island. Actual numbers of trees will be based on the size of the project as determined by the planning department. 
c.  All landscaping as required in this chapter shall be reviewed by the planning department as to the type, density of planting and size of plants intended for use. All landscaped areas shall be permanently maintained by the property owner. 
d.  All landscaped areas in commercial, industrial, and multifamily projects shall be surrounded with six-inch high concrete curbing, unless waived by the planning department. 
e.  All landscaping on public property and parks shall conform to standards adopted by the Huron Park and Recreation District. 
f.  Buffer planting shall occur along major arterials in order to visually screen uses and provide noise reduction. The landscaping shall be in addition to screening requirements set forth in this chapter. 
2.  Trees. 
a.  Spacing of trees to be variable depending on type and eventual size, but that there be a general minimum standard of one fifteen (15) gallon tree for each twenty (20) feet of frontage of a required landscaped setback, exclusive of vehicular site lines. 
b.  Trees to be used in parking lots to be of a type that will form a full head on a single trunk, i.e., Chinese Elm, Chinese Pistache, Golden Rain, Valley Oak or other approved species. All trees planted within public right-of-way shall be consistent with the City Street Tree Master Plan. 
c.  Where trees are planted in paved areas which are unprotected by curbs they shall have a protective tree grate or equivalent device. Tree grates shall be cast iron with a natural finish. A deep root-directing device shall also be used. 
d.  Landscape setback areas, (excluding driveway approaches, maneuvering areas, and public sidewalks) shall be landscaped. Within this area, trees shall not be planted more than twenty (20) feet apart, and shall not be planted within five feet of any curb, sidewalk or driveway unless a root directing device is used. No plant that will grow to a height of more than eighteen (18) inches shall be planted in the street right-of-way or with sight triangles unless approved as a street tree consistent with the City Street Tree Master Plan. 
e.  Tree planters located in parking areas shall be sufficiently large and protected so that a parked car does not extend into the minimum four-foot by four-foot tree planting area which shall be landscaped with groundcover, shrubs and/or climbing plants. 
3.  Shrubs. 
a.  At least seventy-five (75) percent of shrubs planted shall be of five-gallon minimum size. One-gallon plants may be used if planted with approved low water-using varieties. 
b.  Shrubs within a required setback shall be spaced in such a way so that at maturity the plants will provide eighty (80) percent ground coverage. 
4.  Mounding. 
a.  Mounding or low growing shrub areas along street frontages may be used to screen parking areas and shall not exceed a 1:7 slope and shrubs shall be low-growing varieties with a mature height of four feet or less. Steeper slopes may be allowed if irrigated by drip systems. 
b.  Mounding shall not be required for landscape areas which are ten feet, or less, in width. 
c.  Mounds shall be compacted prior to planting to prevent excessive settlement. 
d.  Black plastic shall not be used under wood chips on mounds, or slopes in general. 
e.  Turf on mounds requires slope rates of 1:10 or less. Mounds with groundcovers require slope rates of 1:5 or less. 
f.  Mounds may not be used within site triangles, or in areas that will create hazards to pedestrians or motorists. 
5.  Parking Lots. 
a.  Trees shall be planted in all parking lots at a 1:3 ratio of trees, to parking stalls. 
b.  Such tree planters shall contain approved trees on twenty (20) foot centers or in such a manner as to have fifty (50) percent shade coverage of the parking lot in ten years. 
c.  Shrubs and trees to be arranged in such a way as to avoid damage from the front of parked cars extending into the planter areas. 
d.  All landscaped areas shall be irrigated. 
6.  Turf. 
a.  Turf shall be limited to forty (40) percent of the total landscape area and use low water-using varieties. Public parks, golf courses, cemeteries, schools, properties within a historic district, and residential office conversions are to be reviewed for exemptions on a project by project basis. 
b.  No turf will be allowed: 
i.  In traffic medians on arterials, 
ii.  Parkways or planting areas narrower than five feet, 
iii.  Storm drainage ponds with slopes in excess of 1:6, 
iv.  On mounds or slopes exceeding 1:10, 
v.  Exceptions to turf in parkways may be granted by the planning division in cases where pedestrian access is necessary across parkways. 
7.  Irrigation Plans. 
a.  Irrigation plans shall be required to be submitted along with landscape plans. Irrigation plans must show an irrigation conformance calculation with a ten percent safety margin. If the landscape is required as the result of a request for building permit, the landscape and irrigation plans shall be submitted as a part of the building plans. 
b.  Water efficient systems (drip, mini-spray, bubbler type, etc., shall be used whenever feasible. 
c.  All irrigation systems shall be equipped with an automatic controller capable of dual or multiple programming. Controllers must have multiple cycle capabilities and a flexible calendar program. 
d.  Separate valves shall be installed based on water use of planting and exposures on irrigation systems with seven or more valves. Turf areas should be on separate valve from nonturf areas on all irrigation systems regardless of size. 
e.  Sprinkler heads must have matched precipitation rates within each control valve. 
f.  Sprinkler head spacing shall be designed for head-to-head coverage and placed at a maximum of fifty (50) percent of the diameter of throw. 
g.  Overhead sprays shall not throw water onto hardscaped or other nonplanted, or bare ground areas, including sidewalks between landscaped areas. 
h.  All sprinklers must be designed and installed to clear all plant material at maturity and obstacles in its throw zone. 
i.  Serviceable check valves or separate valves according to water zones are required where elevation differential may cause low head drainage. 
j.  Drip or bubbler irrigation systems are required on all trees and shrubs regardless if planted alone, in groundcover or turf areas. 
k.  Automatic rain shut-off devices shall be required on all irrigation systems with seven or more valves. 
D.  Parking and Loading. Parking requirements shall conform to Chapter 17.60 "Off-Street Parking Standards." 
E.  Screening and Storage. The following shall apply to all developments. 
1.  All roof-mounted air conditioners, roof vents, etc. should be screened from view from ground level whenever possible. Such screening must be of a style and material such that it is an integral part of the building architecture. 
2.  Where commercial or industrial property adjoins a residential zone, a concrete block or masonry wall to a height recommended by the planning department shall be located on the property line except in a required front yard, or the street side setback of a corner lot. This requirement may be waived if an alternative landscaped buffer is provided and approved by the planning commission as an exception. 
3.  Approved uses that are not conducted entirely within a completely enclosed structure, on a site across a street or alley from a residential district shall be screened by a concrete block or masonry wall and be landscaped along the frontage of the wall to a height to be determined by the planning department. No materials or equipment shall be stored to a height greater than that of the wall or fence. 
4.  In a C-O, CBD, C-H and C-S district all businesses, services and processes shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed structure, except for off-street parking and loading areas, gasoline service stations, outdoor dining areas, nurseries, garden shops, bus depots and transit stations and electric distribution substations where permitted. 
5.  Where commercial or office uses are so situated abutting property zoned for single-family residential use, the second story of the structure to be occupied as a commercial or office use shall be designed to limit visibility onto the adjacent residential property. 
F.  Curb Cuts. Curb cuts for proposed developments shall be limited to the extent that access is provided to the site with minimum of ingress and egress points so as to protect the safe traffic flow of Huron's arterial and collector streets. Unless an exception is granted by the planning commission, drive access points in commercial and industrial zones shall be shared access easements unless it is not feasible to do so. 
G.  Lighting. No on-site lighting shall directly or indirectly illuminate adjacent properties or the public street which provides access. The lights and standards to be used shall be approved by the planning department. 
H.  Auto Traffic Easements. When deemed necessary for the traffic safety of the community, the director shall have the right to require as a condition of granting approval of a planning entitlement, that a parcel provide an easement for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
I.  Residential Architectural Design Criteria. All subdivisions shall comply with Section 17.19.010(N) of this title. 
J.  Residential Landscaping Requirements. All new residential developments shall comply with Section 17.19.010(N) of this title. 
K.  General Standards. All development shall comply with the following standards. 
1.  Street and road dedications shall be made to the City, in a manner prescribed by the City of Huron public works department, for all existing or proposed local, collector, and arterial streets. The required dedication shall be consistent with the requirements of the circulation element of the City of Huron. 
2.  All developments within the City of Huron shall provide road or street improvements pursuant to the Huron subdivision ordinance. Street improvements shall include base and pavement ties to existing pavement. 
3.  Obstructions within street rights-of-way shall be removed. 
4.  Curb, gutter, and sidewalk shall be constructed as required by the City of Huron subdivision ordinance when required as part of street improvements. 
5.  All access drives, parking areas, and vehicle maneuvering areas shall be surfaced with a minimum of two inches of asphaltic concrete paving or material of higher quality. 
6.  All new on-site utility services shall be placed underground. 
7.  Prior to the issuance of any building permits, a plan for the disposal of drainage waters originating on-site and from adjacent road rights-of-way shall be approved by the City of Huron public works department, if required. Easements or grant deeds shall be given to the City of Huron for drainage purposes or access thereto, as necessary. 
8.  The method of water supply and sewage disposal shall be as required and approved by the City of Huron and Kern County health department. 
9.  Fire flows and fire protection facilities shall be as required and approved by the Kern County fire department. 
10.  When commercial or industrial property is adjacent to property zoned for single-family residential purposes, a six-foot high solid masonry wall set in a planter of minimum five-foot width with trees spaced at twenty (20) foot intervals shall be constructed between the proposed development and the adjacent property along the rear and side property lines. The design and materials proposed shall be approved by the planning department prior to construction of said wall. 
 
11.  When multifamily residential, commercial or industrial construction in excess of one story is proposed adjacent to property zoned for residential uses, structures shall be situated so that windows above the first story do not have direct views of other residential areas, collectors and arterials, or noise producing equipment or activities. 
12.  All exterior lighting shall be directed away from adjacent properties. 
13.  All trash receptacles shall be screened so that they are not visually obtrusive from any off-site location. The location and method of screening for all trash receptacles shall be approved by the planning department. 
 
14.  Architectural design and materials of all proposed buildings shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
15.  Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.60 of this title. 
16.  Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
17.  Signs may be provided as specified by the applicable zoning district regulation and Chapter 17.61 of this title. 
18.  During all on-site grading and construction activities, adequate measures shall be implemented to control fugitive dust. 
19.  For industrial developments utilizing outside storage, the areas devoted to outside storage shall be treated with a dust binder or other dust control measure, as approved by the planning department. Screening, if required by the base district regulations, shall also be provided. 
20.  Street improvements and construction of curb, gutter, and sidewalks shall be required for additions to development existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, unless waived in accordance with Chapter 17.75. 
L.  The planning department may waive any of the above-listed requirements where a documented hardship, not involving economics, exists or where there are unusual circumstances that prevent compliance with any of the required development standards. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.51.030 - (DD2) CBD design district. 
A.  The purpose of DD2 is to preserve and promote the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Huron, and to express the commitment of the City toward the continued vitality and stabilization of regional retail commercial activity within the area traditionally known as Downtown Huron. This district seeks to: 
1.  Protect and enhance existing buildings and improvements in the downtown area; 
2.  Enhance the character and physical environment of the downtown area by establishing specific design compatibility criteria for new and remodeled buildings within the district; 
3.  Ensure that new development is compatible with existing and future plans for the area; 
4.  Involve both design professionals and area residents, property owners and merchants, in the implementation of the Huron plan and the continued viability of the downtown retail economy. 
B.  Ordinary Maintenance and Repair. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance or repair of any structure within DD2. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition of any feature which in the view of the proper authority acting lawfully is required for the public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition. 
C.  Severability. The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be severable, and if any of its provision shall be held unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of the court shall not impair any of the remaining provisions. 
D.  The following design and development standards apply to property located within DD2: 
1.  Building height: as prescribed in Table 17-2 and Table 17-4; 
2.  Required yards: as prescribed in Table 17-2 and Table 17-4; 
3.  Parking: as prescribed in Chapter 17.60 with the exception of CBD zone where on-site parking requirements are waived. Any expansion of existing structures or intensity of use in the CBD zone shall require the project applicant, as a condition of approval, to deposit a fee in lieu equal to the cost of providing the required additional number of spaces as approved by the city engineer; 
4.  Minimum site area: as prescribed in Table 17-2 and Table 17-4; 
5.  Landscaping: as prescribed in Section 17.51.020(C) and Table 17-4, Section 17.51.030(B) and Section 17.51.020 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.51.040 - (DD6) Industrial design district. 
The following development standards apply to property located within DD6: 
A.  The purpose of DD6 is to promote public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Huron and to promote the aesthetics and land use compatibility of industrial land uses with other design districts. This design district seeks to: 
1.  Protect and enhance future viability of industrial land uses and ensure compatibility of industrial growth with adjacent more sensitive land uses; 
2.  Enhance the character of the industrial district through street trees, requiring buffers between industrial and less sensitive land uses; 
3.  Ensure that new development is compatible with future plans for the area; 
B.  The following development standards shall apply to property located in DD6: 
1.  Building height: as prescribed in Table 17-2; 
2.  Required yards: 
a.  Front: twenty-five (25) feet minimum, 
b.  Side (interior): none required, 
c.  Side (street/corner): ten feet minimum, 
d.  Side yards abutting residential zoning districts: fifteen (15) feet minimum, 
e.  Rear: ten feet minimum when adjacent to residential districts, otherwise five feet minimum; 
3.  Parking: in addition to the parking as prescribed in Chapter 17.60, one on-site truck parking space shall be provided for each one-fourth acre or fraction thereof. Each truck parking space shall accommodate a tractor trailer, or a motorhome, and shall be designed so that vehicles can easily and safely enter and exit the property; 
4.  Minimum site area: as prescribed in Table 17-2; 
5.  Landscaping: 
a.  Front: twenty-five (25) feet minimum, 
b.  Side (interior): none required, 
c.  Side (street/corner): ten feet minimum landscaping required, 
d.  Rear: ten feet landscaping when adjacent to residential districts, otherwise five feet minimum landscaped setback required, 
e.  Where industrial zoning abuts any residential land designation, a ten-foot wide landscape easement shall be maintained on the portion of the lot nearest the residential designation. The ten-foot landscape easement shall be privately maintained and include the following: 
i.  One fifteen (15) gallon evergreen tree spaced at twenty (20) feet intervals, 
ii.  Decorative fencing shall be used and shall include vines and other shrubbery to screen the wall, 
iii.  No outdoor storage of materials shall be visible from any residential zone, 
iv.  All outdoor storage shall be screened from public view in a manner approved by the planning department. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.51.050 - Development in conformance with officially adopted master plans and specific plans. 
Where the city council has adopted an official master plan, as specified by general plan policies, or adopts a specific plan pursuant to the Huron Municipal Code, the specific development requirement of the master plan or specific plan shall be applied as a condition to the granting of a planned development permit for subdivision approval for a project or a project area which is encumbered by the master plan or a specific plan. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.52 - CLUSTER (C-L) COMBINING DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.52.010 - Purpose and application. 
The purpose of the cluster (C-L) combining district is to promote development of imaginative well designed residential and commercial developments which may have special setback, design or other features to preserve open space, promote desirable and/or affordable housing, preserve agricultural lands, and maximize the use of shared public and private recreational facilities. The regulations of the C-L district shall be in addition to the base district with which the C-L district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.52.020 - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted by the base district with which the C-L district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.52.030 - Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. 
Conditional uses permitted by the base district with which the C-L district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.52.040 - Prohibited uses. 
Uses prohibited by the base district with which the C-L district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.52.050 - Minimum lot size. 
There is no minimum lot size where a base district is combined with the C-L district. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.52.060 - Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. 
None, except the overall project density shall not exceed the overall density as established by the general plan land use category applicable to the area in which the property is located. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.52.070 - Yards and setbacks. 
Per the requirements of the base district and design district with which the C-L district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.52.080 - Height limits. 
Per the requirements of the base district with which the C-L district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.52.090 - Minimum distance between structures. 
Per the requirements of the base district with which the C-L district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.52.100 - Parking. 
Per the requirements of the base district with which the C-L district is combined and pursuant to Chapter 17.60. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.52.110 - Signs. 
Per the requirements of the base district with which the C-L district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.52.120 - Landscaping. 
Per the requirements of the base district with which the C-L district is combined and pursuant to Chapter 17.51. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.52.130 - Fences (including walls and hedges). 
Per the requirements of the base district with which the C-L district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.52.140 - Special review procedures and development standards. 
No use shall be established, no development shall occur, and no building or grading permit shall be issued for any use or development in the C-L district until an application for site development plan review has been submitted to and approved by the planning department in accordance with the procedures set out in Section 17.75.030, or submitted to and approved by the planning commission in accordance with the procedures set out in Section 17.75.050 when submitted in conjunction with an application for a change of zone classification or with a tentative subdivision map. 
A.  Application Contents. An application for a site development plan review shall include the following: 
1.  Name(s) and address(es) of applicant(s); 
2.  Name(s) and address(es) of property owner(s); 
3.  APN(s) (assessor's parcel number); 
4.  A site development plan drawn at the scale specified by the planning department which includes the following: 
a.  Topography of the lot(s), 
b.  Proposed street system and parking areas, 
c.  Lot design, 
d.  Location of all buildings, 
e.  Location of all proposed use areas, 
f.  Proposed setbacks, 
g.  Areas to be reserved for parks, schools, or other public or quasi-public facilities, 
h.  Proposed landscaping, 
i.  Water distribution and supply, 
j.  Sewage disposal system, 
k.  Drainage system, 
l.  North arrow; 
5.  Number of dwelling units per acre; 
6.  Proposed method of ownership and maintenance of commonly held open spaces, if any; 
7.  A narrative description of the development including an explanation of the proposed deviations from the regulations otherwise applicable to the property; 
8.  Phasing or development schedule. 
B.  Development Standards and Conditions. Development in the C-L district shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  All development shall be consistent with the goals and policies of the general plan and with the general plan land use designation applicable to the area where the proposed project is located. 
2.  Development within the C-L district shall be demonstratively superior to the development that could occur under the base district regulations applicable to the property. In making this determination, the following factors shall be considered: 
a.  The provisions of open space, 
b.  Overall enhancement of the community environment, 
c.  Compatibility to other uses existing in the surrounding area, 
3.  All development within the C-L district shall be consistent with the guidelines established in the applicable design district in which the property is located. 
C.  Time Limit on Approval. 
1.  If development approved in accordance with this chapter has not commenced within two years of approval, the approval shall become null and void and of no effect, unless an extension of time has been granted by the planning department, upon the written request for an extension anytime before the expiration of the two-year period. This provision shall not apply to any applications approved in conjunction with a tentative parcel map or a tentative tract map. In such case, the expiration period shall coincide with that of the approved tentative parcel map or the tentative tract map as applicable. 
D.  Minor Plan Modifications. The planning department may approve minor plan modifications to an approved C-L site development plan in accordance with the procedures set out in Chapter 17.72, if the planning department determines that the modifications do not constitute a substantial change in the approved project. 
E.  Permit Revocation and Modification. Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked or modified pursuant to Section 17.75.060 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.53 - GEOLOGICAL HAZARD (G-H) COMBINING DISTRICT 
Sections: 
 
17.53.010 - Purpose and application. 
The purpose of the geological hazard (G-H) combining district is to protect the public's health, safety and minimizing property damage by designating areas that are subject to or are potentially subject to surface faulting ground shaking, ground failure or other geologic hazards by establishing reasonable restrictions on land use in such areas. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.53.020 - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted by the base zone with which the G-H district is combined, except as modified in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Section 17.53.130. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.53.030 - Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. 
Conditional uses permitted by the base zone with which the G-H district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.53.040 - Prohibited uses. 
Uses prohibited by the base zone with which the (G-H) district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.53.050 - Minimum lot size. 
Per the requirements of the base zone with which the G-H district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.53.060 - Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. 
Per the requirements of the base zone with which the G-H district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.53.070 - Yards and setbacks. 
Per the requirements of the base zone with which the G-H district is combined, except as modified in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Section 17.53.130. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.53.080 - Height limits. 
Per the requirements of the base zone with which the G-H district is combined, except as modified in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Section 17.53.130. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.53.090 - Minimum distance between structures. 
Per the requirements of the base zone with which the G-H district is combined, except as modified in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Section 17.53.130. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.53.100 - Parking. 
Per the requirements of the base zone with which the G-H district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.53.110 - Signs. 
Per the requirements of the base zone with which the G-H district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.53.120 - Landscaping. 
Per the requirements of the base zone with which the G-H district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.53.130 - Special review procedures and development standards. 
No use shall be established, no development shall occur or grading permit shall be issued for any use or development in the G-H district until an application for a site development plan review has been submitted to and approved by the planning department, city engineer, and planning commission. 
A.  Application Contents. 
1.  Name(s) and address(es) of applicant(s); 
2.  Name(s) and address(es) of property owner(s); 
3.  APN (assessor's parcel number(s)); 
4.  Legal description of property; 
5.  A site development plan drawn at the scale specified by the planning department, which includes the following information: 
a.  Topography and proposed grading, 
b.  Location and extent of all geologic hazards including area subject to surface faulting, ground shaking, ground failure and other geologic hazards, 
c.  Location of all proposed buildings and structures, 
d.  Location of proposed streets, roads, and parking areas, 
e.  Proposed drainage improvements, 
f.  North arrow; 
6.  A geological report prepared by a qualified engineering geologist, certified by the State of California, which includes the following information: 
a.  The original signature and certification, number of the responsible geologist, 
b.  An index map showing the regional setting of the study area, 
c.  A description of the study methods used; the methods may include (but are not limited to) field traverses and inspections, test pits or trenches, drill holes, geophysical investigation, aerial photo analysis, and review of previously published or unpublished maps and reports, 
d.  On an appropriate topographic base an original geological map of the site and as much of the surrounding area as is practical. The scale shall be one inch to one hundred (100) feet for complementary geologic maps emphasizing special features or hazards, 
e.  One or more geologic structure sections showing actual or probable subsurface relations and clearly labeled as to which relations are conjectural, 
f.  A statement of conclusions and recommendations regarding suitability of proposed uses, including (but not limited to) buildings, structures, roads, and sewer systems in relation to the existing or potential geologic hazards and recommended mitigation measures with respect to the following: 
i.  Location of buildings, structures, roads, and septic systems in relation to identified geologic hazard or hazards, 
ii.  Method of construction, 
iii.  Grading, 
iv.  Removal of native vegetation and replanting, 
v.  Any other, aspect of construction or site development that has a clear relationship to the identified geologic hazard or hazards, 
7.  A list of references of geologic literature used in evaluating the site. 
B.  Development Standards and Conditions. Development in the G-H district shall comply with the mitigation measures recommended in the geological report required by subsection A of this section as approved by the City of Huron city engineer. In any event, structures for human occupancy shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from any active fault trace or one hundred (100) feet from any fault trace which cannot be precisely located or is depicted as "inferred" on the Kern County seismic hazard atlas. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.54 - PRECISE DEVELOPMENT (P-D) COMBINING DISTRICT/PERMIT REVIEW GUIDELINES 
Sections: 
 
17.54.010 - Purpose and application. 
The purpose of the precise development (P-D) district is to designate areas with unique site characteristics, sensitive environmental conditions, areas surrounded by sensitive land use or other conditions not otherwise addressed elsewhere herein to ensure that developments in such areas are compatible with those constraints. All development in the P-D combining district shall be subject to site development plan review. The P-D district may be combined with any base zone or other combining zone. All P-D regulations will be in addition to those of the zone with which the P-D district is combined. The purpose of this chapter shall also be used to describe the content and format for permits processed under Chapter 17.75 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.54.020 - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted by the base zone, or other combining zone with which the P-D district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.54.030 - Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. 
Conditional uses permitted by the base zone with which the P-D district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.54.040 - Prohibited uses. 
Uses prohibited by the base zone with which the P-D district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.54.050 - Minimum lot size. 
Per the base zone requirements with which the P-D district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.54.060 - Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. 
Per the requirements of the base zone with which the P-D district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.54.070 - Yards and setbacks. 
Per the requirements of the base district with which the P-D district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.54.080 - Height limits. 
Per the requirements of the base district with which the P-D district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.54.090 - Minimum distance between structures. 
Per the requirements of the base district with which the P-D district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.54.100 - Parking. 
Per the requirements of the base district with which the P-D district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.54.110 - Signs. 
Per the requirements of the base district with which the P-D district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.54.120 - Landscaping. 
Per the requirements of the base district with which the P-D district is combined. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.54.130 - Special review procedures and development standards. 
No use shall be established, no development shall occur or grading permit shall be issued for any use or development in the P-D district until an application has been submitted to and approved by the planning department in accordance with the procedures set out in Section 17.75.030 of this title. 
A.  Application Contents. An application for site development review shall include the following: 
1.  Name(s) and address(es) of applicant(s); 
2.  Name(s) and address(es) of property owner(s); 
3.  APN (assessor's parcel number(s)); 
4.  Legal description of property; 
5.  A site development plan drawn at the scale specified by the planning department, which includes the following information: 
a.  Topography and proposed grading, 
b.  Proposed development in relationship to all previously approved and projected P-D site development plans, 
c.  The width, location, and names of all surrounding streets, 
d.  The location, uses and setbacks on adjacent properties, 
e.  The location, dimension and ground floor area, and uses of all existing and proposed buildings and structures on the subject property, 
f.  Proposed landscaping, 
g.  Streets and parking areas, 
h.  Existing and proposed signs, including location, size and height, 
i.  Proposed dedications and improvements in accordance with applicable subdivision improvement standards for the area, 
j.  Location, height, and materials of walls and fences, 
k.  Other specified uses of the property, 
l.  North arrow, 
m.  Existing and proposed driveways and curb cuts, 
n.  Existing and proposed utility connections (locations of utility connections); 
6.  A narrative description of the proposed development including the following: 
a.  Acreage and square footage of the property (net), 
b.  Height, ground floor area, and total area of each building, 
c.  Number of dwelling units in each building, 
d.  Building coverage expressed as a percent of the total area of the property, 
e.  Area of land devoted to landscaping and/or open space usable for recreation purposes and it's percentage of the total land area, 
f.  Method of sewage disposal, 
g.  Method of water supply, domestic and fire, 
h.  Proposed on-site drainage facilities, 
i.  Methods of floor control, where appropriate. 
B.  Development Standards. Development in the P-D district shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  All development shall be consistent with the goals and policies of the general plan and with the uses and density and intensity standards of the general plan land use category applicable to the area in which the property is located. 
2.  All development shall comply with any conditions deemed necessary or appropriate by the planning department or planning commission to promote the public health, safety and welfare. 
C.  Time Limit on Approval. If development approved in accordance with this chapter had not commenced within two years of the approval, the approval shall become null and void and of no effect, unless an extension has been requested and granted by the planning department. All requests for extensions must be in written form and must be received by the planning department. This provision shall also apply to any applications approved in conjunction with a tentative parcel map or a tentative tract map. In such case, the expiration period shall coincide with that of the approved tentative parcel map or the tentative tract map, as applicable. 
D.  Temporary Uses. Notwithstanding other portions of this chapter to the combining subsections A and B of this section, when a P-D district has been established the planning department is authorized to approve a temporary use of the property consistent with the uses authorized by the base zone within which the P-D district is combined. However this temporary use may not involve construction of any permanent buildings or structures and is subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Such temporary use shall not affect the public health, safety and welfare as determined by the planning department. 
2.  The planning department shall have authority to defer the filing of a formal P-D plan for temporary use. 
3.  Authorization for a temporary use shall be evidenced by a temporary use permit approved by the planning department in accordance with the procedures set out in Section 17.75.020 of this title. 
4.  Such temporary use permit shall be revoked by the planning department at any time if in the exercise of his or her reasonable discretion it can be determined that continued temporary use of such property without the safeguards provided by an approved P-D site development plan would be harmful to the public health, safety and welfare. 
5.  No temporary use permit shall ever be considered a permanent right of legal nonconforming use. 
6.  Prior to the approval (or disapproval) of a formal site development plan for permanent improvements the temporary use permit shall become null and void and the premises shall be completely vacated and restored to it's original condition if approval is not granted. 
E.  Minor Plan Modifications. The planning department may approve minor plan modifications to an approved P-D site development plan in accordance with the procedures set out in Section 17.75.020 of this title, but only if the planning department can determine that the requested modification(s) do not constitute a substantial change in the approved project. 
F.  Permit Revocation and Modifications. Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked or modified pursuant to Section 17.75.060 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.60 - OFF-STREET PARKING STANDARDS 
Sections: 
 
17.60.010 - Purpose and application. 
The purpose of this chapter is to reduce street congestion and promote parking for the safety and convenience of the residents of the City of Huron by requiring adequate requirements and well-designed parking areas. Parking required by this chapter shall be provided prior to the occupancy of a new building or structure is erected, the enlargement or intensification of a structure, or when use is established, changed or expanded. Projects which involve an increase or intensive of use shall comply with these standards for the expansion or intensification. The standards of this chapter are minimum standards. These regulations and standards of this chapter are intended to achieve the following: 
A.  To provide accessible, attractive, secure, properly lighted, and well-maintained and screened off-street parking facilities; 
B.  To reduce traffic congestion and hazards; 
C.  To protect neighborhoods from the effects of vehicular noise and traffic generated by adjacent nonresidential land use districts; 
D.  To assure the maneuverability of emergency vehicles; 
E.  To provide appropriately designated parking facilities in proportion to the needs generated by varying types of land use. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.60.020 - Required parking spaces. 
Uses permitted by this title shall provide off-street parking spaces according to Table 17-5. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.60.030 - Parking space dimensions. 
A.  All parking spaces shall comply with City adopted improvement standards in Chapter 16 of the municipal code. 
B.  Up to thirty (30) percent of the spaces in a parking facility with ten or more spaces may be designed and designated for compact cars. 
C.  Parking structures may be subject to dimensional adjustments based on utilization (i.e.: public or private garage with or without an attendant), but in no case shall the stall width be less than eight feet. Reductions in design standards shall be subject to approval by the city engineer. 
D.  All parking spaces shall be clearly marked. 
E.  Parking spaces which require backing onto a street or road right-of-way are prohibited except in the case of driveways for single-family and duplex residential dwellings which are adjacent to a street which permits ditch access. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.60.040 - Handicapped parking. 
Handicapped parking spaces shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 2.71 of Title 24 of the California Administrative Code. Handicapped parking requirements herein shall be established by the State of California. Any change in the State's handicapped parking requirements shall preempt the affected requirements of this section. 
A.  Handicapped parking for residential uses shall be provided at the rate of one space for each dwelling unit that is designed for occupancy by the handicapped. 
B.  Handicapped parking spaces shall be provided for all uses other than residential at the following rate: 
TOTAL NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES PROVIDED 	NUMBER OF HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACES REQUIRED 
1—40 	1 
41—80 	2 
81—120 	3 
121—160 	4 
161—300 	5 
301—400 	6 
401—500 	7 
Over 500 	7 + 1 for each 200 additional parking spaces provided 
 
C.  Handicapped parking spaces shall be designed in a manner consistent with the City standard drawings approved by the city engineer. 
D.  When less than five parking spaces are provided, at structures and uses subject to these regulations, one space shall be fourteen (14) feet wide and striped to provide a nine-foot parking area and a five-foot loading and unloading area. However, there is no requirement that the space be reserved exclusively or identified for handicapped use only. 
 
E.  Handicapped parking spaces required by this section shall count toward fulfilling off-street parking requirements. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.60.050 - Off-street loading spaces. 
Except in the DD2 and DD3 districts, for every building or facility which requires the receipt or distribution of vehicles or merchandise and which are engaged in the following: manufacturing, storage, warehouse, wholesale or retail store, market, passenger terminal, theater, hotel, motel, restaurant, hospital, laundry, dry cleaning plant, or other similar use, adequate space for standing, loading, and unloading shall be provided and maintained on the same lot in addition to the automobile parking required by Section 17.60.020. 
These provisions establish comprehensive standards to regulate the number, design and location of off-street loading areas, in a manner which ensures the following: 
A.  Accessible, attractive, secure and well-maintained loading and delivery facilities; 
B.  Reduced potential for traffic congestion and hazards; 
C.  Protection for adjacent parcels and surrounding neighborhoods from the effects of vehicular noise and traffic generated from the anticipated land use and long dock activities; 
D.  Loading and delivery services in proportion to the needs generated by the proposed land use which are clearly compatible with adjacent parcels and the surrounding neighborhood; 
E.  Every nonresidential land use shall have permanently maintained off-street loading areas pursuant to the following provisions. 
1.  Number of Spaces Required. Off-street freight and equipment loading spaces shall be provided for all offices, hospitals, institutions, hotels, seniors group housing, schools, day care centers, and other commercial and industrial land uses. 
The following minimum number of loading spaces shall be provided for each use: 
Commercial, industrial, office, institutional, hospital, hotels and schools: 
GROSS FLOOR AREA 	SPACES REQUIRED 
Less than 25,000 sf. of gross floor area 	1 
25,001 + sf. gross floor area 	1+ additional as required by director 
 
Requirements for uses not specifically listed shall be determined by the director based upon the requirements for compatible uses and upon the particular characteristics of the proposed use, pursuant to Section 17.73.030 (Determination of similar use). 
2.  Design Standards. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided in the following manner (See Figure 2): 
a.  Access. When the lot upon which the loading space is located abuts an alley, the loading space shall have access from the alley. 
b.  Dimensions. Required freight and equipment loading spaces shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in length or as determined by the planning department, with fourteen (14) feet of vertical clearance. 
c.  Lighting. Loading areas shall have lighting capable of providing adequate illumination for security and safety. Lighting standards shall be energy efficient and in scale with the height and use of the structure. Any illumination, including security lighting, shall be directed away from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way. 
d.  Location. Loading spaces shall be located and designed as follows: (i) adjacent to, or as close as possible to the main structure; (ii) situated to ensure that all loading and unloading takes place on-site and in no case within adjacent public rights-of-way, or other traffic areas on-site; (iii) situated to ensure that all vehicular maneuvers occur on-site. 
e.  Passenger Loading. Passenger loading spaces shall be provided in addition to any required freight and equipment loading spaces whenever required by a development permit. Passenger loading spaces shall not be less than ten feet wide and twenty (20) feet long, shall be located in close proximity to the structure entrance, and shall not require pedestrians to cross a driveway, parking aisle, alley or street in order to reach the structure entrance. Required spaces shall not count as required parking spaces. 
f.  Screening. All loading areas abutting residentially designated property shall have architectural screening similar to the primary structure and of a height that is adequate to screen noise and parking areas. In addition, along the outer sound wall of the loading area, adequate area shall be provided to accommodate a permanently maintained and irrigated landscaped area. The required landscaping shall include trees. 
g.  Security. All loading facilities shall be designed, constructed, and maintained with security as a priority to protect safety of users. 
h.  Striping. Loading and unloading areas shall be striped indicating the loading spaces and identifying the spaces for loading only. The striping shall be permanently maintained in a clear and visible manner. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007) 
 
Figure 2 Off-Street Spaces—Design Standards 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.60.060 - Location of parking. 
A.  Required residential off-street parking facilities shall be located on the premises they are intended to serve. 
1.  Temporary Accessory Parking Structure. 
a.  Definition. A temporary accessory parking structure shall mean a non-porous covering fastened to vertical and/or horizontal poles fastened to vertical poles integral to the covering material. Vertical poles shall be firmly fastened to the paved surface of the driveway by fixtures easily removed and are not permanently affixed in or to the ground by footings or other means. The occupant of the property shall only use the temporary accessory parking structure for providing shade to only one private operational vehicle. The temporary accessory parking structure shall not substitute for the covered parking required in a residential district. 
b.  Ministerial Permit for a Temporary Accessory Parking Structure Required. Prior to assembling, installing, erecting or configuring a temporary accessory parking structure, a property owner or occupant with the written permission of the property owner shall make an application and obtain a ministerial permit from the City of Huron Planning Department for the installation of a temporary accessory parking structure in accordance with Section 17.75.02. The applicant shall provide a set of plans clearly showing the structural dimensions of the temporary accessory parking structure and the anchoring requirements with the application. The plans for the temporary accessory parking structure shall fully describe the covering material and method of attachment to the basic structure. 
c.  Annual Inspection of Temporary Accessory Parking Structure. As a condition of issuing a permit, at least once per year the City of Huron Planning Department shall conduct an inspection of the condition and use of the temporary accessory parking structure. The inspection shall determine if the conditions for the temporary accessory parking structure are in compliance. Failure to maintain the temporary accessory parking structure will lead to the requirement to repair or remove the temporary accessory parking structure within fourteen (14) days from the date such notice is served on the occupant and/or owner of the property. Failure of the property owner to repair or remove the temporary parking structure will result in Property Maintenance Code enforcement and abatement procedures as defined in Chapter 17.79 of the Municipal Code. 
The City may make additional inspections based on complaints from the surrounding neighborhood regarding the condition, use, or appearance of the temporary accessory parking structure. 
d.  Fees for Application and Inspection. The city council shall establish a fee by resolution for the taking, processing an application and issuing approval to construct a temporary accessory parking structure. The applicant must pay the application fee at the time of the application. The property owner must pay the inspection fee annually and the City will be collect the City as a charge on the monthly utility bill for the property on which the temporary accessory parking structure is located. The City will discontinue the annual inspection fee upon notice from the City's Code Enforcement Officer that the property owner has repaired or removed the temporary accessory parking structure. 
e.  Number. There shall be no more than one temporary accessory parking/structure per parcel of residential property. 
f.  Location. The City may allow a temporary accessory parking structure within yards and setback areas in the following manner: 
1.  Interior side yard - A temporary accessory parking structure may be placed in an interior side yard if the temporary accessory parking structure and/or supporting structure(s) is no closer than five feet from the side property line. The occupant shall maintain a five-foot ingress/egress into the backyard if located adjacent to private gate for fire access. 
2.  Rear yard - A temporary accessory parking structure may be placed in a rear yard provided the temporary accessory parking structure and/or supporting structure(s) is no closer than five feet from the rear property line and the rear yard access is accessible by an alley. 
3.  Front yard - A temporary accessory parking structure may be placed in a front yard provided the lot is not a corner lot, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The temporary accessory parking structure and/or supporting structure(s) shall be no closer than five feet from the back edge of sidewalk or back of curb, whichever is greater. 
b.  In no event shall a temporary accessory parking structure encroach into a public right-of-way or interfere with the purposes of a public utility easement. 
c.  A five-foot ingress/egress to and/or in front of rear yard, garage and/or dwelling structure shall be maintained if located adjacent to private gate, garage and/or dwelling access. 
d.  The temporary accessory parking structures shall comply with City standards pertaining to driveway and street line of sight requirements. Variances to driveway or street line of sight standards are not permitted. 
e.  The temporary accessory parking structure shall not block or restrict access to the covered parking (garage) access to the main structure. 
g.  Footprint. In no event shall a temporary accessory parking structure provide more than one hundred twenty (120) square feet of temporary accessory parking structure area. 
h.  Coverage. In no event shall the erection, configuration and/or use of a temporary accessory parking structure result in exceeding the maximum lot coverage restrictions for the zone district in which it is located. 
i.  Height. Height of a temporary accessory parking structure, in general, may not exceed twelve (12) feet in height or exceed the height of the primary structure, whichever is less. Height of a temporary accessory parking structure may increase by one foot for every one foot increase in setback the nearest part of the temporary accessory parking structure from the back edge of sidewalk or back of curb, whichever is greater. 
j.  Enclosure. In no event shall a temporary accessory parking structure be enclosed in any manner nor have appended to the structure any fabric material blocking the interior visibility of the structure. 
In no event shall vines or plant material be allowed to climb the structure or otherwise obscure the interior visibility of the structure. 
k.  Advertisement. Temporary accessory parking structure shall not contain any advertising signage, writing or lettering of any type. 
l.  Use of Structure. The property occupant shall only use the temporary accessory parking structure for the temporary parking of one operational vehicle. Not allowed within the temporary accessory parking structure: 
1.  Inoperable vehicles; 
2.  Maintenance or repair of vehicles; 
3.  Storage of trailers or recreational vehicles; 
4.  Storage of waste, debris, lumber, containers of any kind; 
5.  Storage of household appliances, furniture, play apparatus, tools or implements; 
6.  Conduct of yard sales or household goods for sale; 
7.  Storage of any other materials not commonly allowed in front yards. 
m.  Maintenance of Structure. The temporary accessory parking structure shall be free of all tears and rips, and shall not be torn or tattered in any way. Supporting poles or elements shall not be bent or fractured in any manner and remain securely anchored to the paved surface. 
n.  Construction and Anchorage Requirements. The temporary accessory parking structure shall be assembled to comply with the manufacturer's instructions and specifications and shall not be fastened to the primary structure and shall be anchored to the earth in compliance with the one of the following methods: 
1.  One continuous eight-inch wide by twelve-inch deep concrete footing along on each longitudinal side of the canopy with threaded anchor bolts embedded to match the canopy manufacturer's recommended anchorage spacing. 
2.  A twelve-inch round or square by eighteen-inch deep concrete anchorage footing with threaded anchor bolts embedded in the anchorage to match the canopy manufacturer's recommend anchorage spacing. 
3.  A four-inch thick concrete slab that extends twelve (12) inches beyond the perimeter of the canopy in each direction with threaded anchor bolts embedded in the slab to match the canopy manufacturer's recommended anchorage spacing. 
4.  Guy wires are not acceptable in any instance. 
6.  Surface under temporary accessory parking structure shall be of concrete or similar noncombustible and nonabsorbent materials, or asphalt, and be sloped to facilitate movement of liquids to drain towards the street or alley vehicle entryway. 
o.  Maintenance of Residential Covered Parking Requirement. The temporary accessory parking structure shall not replace the covered parking requirement for the residential district. The covered parking requirement shall be available for use and be unobstructed during the time that the temporary accessory parking structure is place. 
p.  Removal. The temporary accessory parking structure shall be removed upon the sale or transfer of property title to a new owner. A new owner may apply for a ministerial permit for an existing temporary accessory parking structure prior to its removal. 
q.  Existing Temporary Accessory Parking Structures - Time of Compliance. Existing parking structures whether known as car covers, parking canopies, cool covers, parking tents, or similar descriptions that are located in the front yard of single-family residential units, whether erected with or without a permit from the City shall make application for a temporary accessory parking structure and be granted a ministerial permit no later than six months after the effective date of this ordinance amendment. 
Failure to comply with the requirement to obtain a ministerial permit for a temporary accessory parking structure shall be a violation of Section 17.19.03 of the Huron Municipal Code. 
Fees for a temporary accessory parking structure ministerial permit application shall be reduced by fifty percent (50%) of the fee for all new applications. Annual inspection fees shall remain the same as all other temporary accessory parking structures with a ministerial permit. 
B.  Off-street parking for other than residential uses shall be located on the premises they are intended to serve within the DD2 and DD6 these facilities may be located onsite or within five hundred (500) feet thereof. Where required parking is provided on a site other than that of the principal use, the property owner shall file on a form provided by the City of Huron planning department with the Fresno County recorder's office a covenant approved by the planning department that provides for the maintenance of the parking facility as long as the associated principal use is maintained. 
C.  All parking areas shall provide suitable maneuvering room so that all vehicles may enter an abutting street in a forward direction. The planning department may approve exceptions for single-family homes and other residential projects. 
D.  No parking space shall be located so that a vehicle will maneuver within twenty (20) feet of a vehicular entrance measured from the face of the curb. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 362, § 2, 11-16-11)  
17.60.070 - Joint use of parking areas. 
If more than one user required to provide parking spaces in accordance with this chapter occupies the same or adjacent buildings, off-street parking shall be provided in an amount equal to the total number of spaces required for the separate uses, provided, however, that upon written request the planning department may reduce the number of spaces required in such cases by up to fifty (50) percent if it can be determined based on substantial evidence that the combination of uses in the same or adjacent buildings or premises will, at periods of peak weekly hour use, necessitate provision of a lower number of parking spaces than if the uses were developed independently. 
Parking facilities may be shared if multiple uses cooperatively establish and operate the facilities and if these uses generate parking demands primarily during hours when the remaining uses are not in operation. The applicant shall have the burden of proof for a reduction in the total number of required off-street parking spaces, and documentation shall be submitted substantiating their reasons for the requested parking reduction. Public rights-of-way and/or on street parking shall not be used or counted to reduce the number of shared on-site parking spaces. Shared parking may only be approved if: 
A.  A sufficient number of spaces are provided to meet the greater parking demand of the participating uses; 
B.  Satisfactory evidence, as deemed so by the director, has been submitted by the parties operating the shared parking facility, describing the nature of the uses and the times when the uses operate as to demonstrate the lack of potential conflict between them; and 
C.  Additional documents, covenants, deed restrictions, or other agreements as may be deemed necessary by the director are executed to assure that the required parking spaces provided are maintained and uses with similar hours and parking requirements as those uses sharing the parking facilities remain for the life of the commercial/industrial development. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.60.080 - Parking area design and development standards. 
Off-street parking areas required to be provided by this chapter shall be designed and developed in accordance with Table 17-5 and the following standards: 
A.  All off-street parking areas and ingress and egress to parking areas, including areas occupied by automobile sales lots, service stations, drive-in establishments, residential, recreation, entertainment and tourist facilities, commercial, industrial, institutional, and other high intensity uses, parking areas shall be surfaced in a manner to achieve a Traffic Index of 4, unless a higher index is determined to be necessary by the city engineer. 
B.  Parking aisles shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
Arrangements 	Minimum Aisle Width 
30 degree, single row 	11 feet 
45 degree, single or multiple row 	14 feet 
60 degree, single or multiple row 	18 feet 
90 degree, single or multiple row 	25 feet, except where parking is perpendicular to and abuts an alley 
 
C.  All spaces shall be clearly marked. 
D.  Off-street parking facilities shall be designed so that each space can function independently of any other space. Tandem space shall not be permitted. 
E.  Driveways for residential developments shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width with fifteen (15) feet of unobstructed vertical clearance. Driveways for commercial and industrial developments shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width with a minimum of fifteen (15) feet of vertical clearance. 
F.  Where a parking facility containing five or more spaces abuts property zoned for residential, the parking facility shall be separated from the abutting property by a solid masonry wall four feet in height, except that portion of the wall which utilizes a four feet high conformation of vegetation and earthen berms. 
 
G.  For all parking lots containing six or more spaces, at least five percent of the total parking area shall be landscaped. This landscaping shall be in addition to any other landscaping required pursuant to Chapter 17.51. Trees shall be planted and maintained throughout the parking area at a minimum ratio of one tree per three parking spaces to achieve a fifty (50) percent shade coverage of the parking area within ten years of installation. A landscaped planter of at least eighty (80) square feet shall be provided at least every ten parking spaces. Minimum tree size shall be twenty-five (25) gallon container (or three inches trunk diameter). Landscaping materials and trees shall be selected from a list of approved trees as may be established by the planning department. 
 
H.  Where a parking facility containing five or more spaces includes diagonal and/or perpendicular parking spaces that abut public street or road, an ornamental fence, wall, vegetation and/or earth berm of not more than four feet in height shall be erected between the parking facility and the street so as to eliminate headlight glare. 
 
I.  Lights used to illuminate parking areas shall be directed away from any adjacent properties and/or streets. 
 
J.  Where parking areas adjoin a public right-of-way, a ten-foot landscaped planting strip shall be established and continuously maintained between the public right-of-way and parking area. Any planting, sign, or other structure within safety sight-distance of a driveway shall not be higher than thirty (30) inches in height or lower than sixty (60) inches (in the case of tree canopies) similar to defined site triangles. 
 
K.  All areas in parking lot not used for driveways, maneuvering areas, parking spaces or walks shall be permanently landscaped with suitable materials and permanently maintained. 
L.  A permanent automatic irrigation system shall be installed and permanently maintained in all landscaped areas. The system shall employ state of the art water conservation technology, and recognize differing irrigation needs of various plant materials. 
M.  The landscaping plan shall be provided consistent with Chapter 17.51 and shall include a variety of plant materials, with an emphasis on drought-tolerant species, for the appropriate climate zone. This plan shall be subject to approval by the planning department. 
N.  To increase parking lot landscaped area, a maximum of three feet of the parking stall depth may be landscaped in lieu of asphalt while maintaining the required parking dimensions. 
O.  All parking structures shall be subject to approval by the planning department, and shall have a continuous ten-foot perimeter landscaping with trees every thirty (30) lineal feet; points of ingress/egress shall include a minimum six-foot wide landscaped island with accent paving in driveway; landscaping shall be permanently irrigated and maintained; and, lighting for the above ground deck shall not exceed four feet in height. 
 
P.  A recreational vehicle may only be parked on a lot behind the front line of the house or in the case of a corner lot, behind the front line facing each street right-of-way, and shall be screened to a height of six feet from view of any public or private right-of-way. A recreational vehicle used as daily transportation may be parked overnight in driveways if it does not extend into the public right-of-way. 
Q.  Recreational vehicles may be temporarily parked on private or public rights-of-way in front of residences for not more than forty-eight (48) continuous hours for the purposes of loading and unloading. 
R.  Customer or employee parking spaces for a automobile service or repair facility shall not be used to store inoperable vehicles at any time. Vehicles in the process of service or repair can be parked in these spaces during normal business hours as long as a required number of parking spots for customers and/or employees (as per Table 17-5) remain available and no repairs or servicing activities are implemented in the parking area. Inoperable vehicles or vehicles in the process of service or repair shall not be parked or stored in alleys. Vehicles in the process of service or repair can be parked in areas within the subject parcel temporarily for vehicle staging (for purposes of vehicle arrangement in the shop) and/or loading or unloading of vehicles from a vehicle carrier or tow truck as long as on-site traffic patterns are not significantly disturbed or ingress/egress blocked (e.g. customers and employees can not enter or exit the property safely). No repair or maintenance services shall be preformed outside of the enclosed shop area. This includes but not limited to, engine and/or any portion of the vehicles drive or running gear installation or removal, body and fender work including but not limited to paint prep, sanding and painting, tire changing or any other major or minor repair or maintenance service. 
S.  Tow trucks can be parked on-site as long as they do not interfere with ingress/egress and on-site traffic patterns in a way that affects the safety of customers, employees and the general public. 
T.  Security. All parking facilities shall be designed, constructed maintained with security as a priority to protect the safety of the users. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 369 , § 1, 4-6-2016)  
17.60.090 - Bicycle parking requirements. 
Bicycle parking shall be required for certain land and structural uses in order to eliminate bicycles from becoming obstacles in designated pedestrian areas. Bicycle parking spaces in the form of bicycle racks shall be provided in the following manner: 
Use 	Required Number of Bicycle Parking Spaces 
Residential Uses: 	
For residential amenities such as swimming pools, clubhouses, playgrounds and other recreational uses. 	As required by the planning department 
Fraternities/Sororities 	As required by the appropriate review authority 
SRO, boarding house, residential hotel, dormitory 	As required by the appropriate review authority 
Amusement/Recreational Facilities: 	
Auditoriums, convention halls and theaters, clubs, lodges and meeting halls 	1 space per 50 seats 
Billiard hall 	1 space per 5 tables 
Bowling Alley 	1 space per lane 
Golf—Miniature golf course 	1 space per hole 
Movie theater 	1 space per 50 seats 
Tennis/racquetball courts 	1 space per court 
Video arcade/go-carts 	1 bike rack per 25 video machines 
Bookstores 	1 space per 2,000 sf. of gfa. 
Convenience stores 	1 space per 2,000 sf. of gfa. 
Mini-malls 	1 space per 2,000 sf. of gfa. or as required by the appropriate review authority 
Dance schools/karate or artist studio 	1 space per 15 students at maximum capacity 
Health athletic clubs 	1 space per 5,000 sf. of gfa. 
Government offices 	1 space per 5,000 sf. of gfa. 
Hospitals 	1 space per 5,000 sf. of gfa. 
Libraries, museums, art galleries 	1 space per 5,000 sf. of gfa. 
Post office 	1 space per 5,000 sf. of gfa. 
Religious facilities 	1 space per 5,000 sf. of gfa. 
Schools: 	
Elementary/junior high 	5 spaces per classroom 
High school 	2 space per classroom 
Community/college/university 	To be determined at project review 
Trade/technical schools 	1 space per classroom 
All other uses not listed above 	To be determined by planning department 
 
A.  Bicycle Parking Requirements. 
1.  Bicycle parking area shall be clearly marked. 
2.  Bicycle parking areas shall be located away from vehicular maneuvering areas and away from blind curves and driveway entrances. 
3.  Bicycle parking may not be located in public rights-of-way unless approved by the appropriate review authority. Under no circumstance shall bicycle parking be located in pedestrian or vehicular travel paths. 
4.  All bicycle parking spaces shall be located on the same parcel as the structure or use, unless approved otherwise by the review authority. 
5.  Bicycle parking spaces shall be located within one hundred (100) feet from the primary entrance for which the parking space is provided. 
6.  Bicycle parking shall be provided by approved, industrial quality bicycle parking racks, shall not be obtrusive, and shall be compatible in architectural character (color, materials, etc.) with the primary structures on the parcel. 
7.  All bicycle parking facilities shall be designed, constructed, and maintained with security as a priority to protect safety of users. 
8.  Bicycle parking areas shall be clearly visible and permanently maintained. 
9.  Bicycle parking shall be located so that it reduces the potential for traffic interference and hazards. 
10.  Bicycle parking areas shall have lighting capable of providing adequate illumination for security and safety. Lighting standards shall be energy efficient and in scale with the height and use of the structure. Any illumination, including security lighting, shall be directed away from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way. 
11.  All required parking facilities shall be permanently maintained, free of litter, debris and graffiti. 
B.  Shared Bicycle Parking. Bicycle parking facilities may be shared if multiple uses cooperatively establish and operate the facilities and if these uses generate parking demands primarily during hours when the remaining uses are not in operation. (For example, if one use operates during evenings or weekdays only). The applicant shall have the burden of proof for a reduction in the total number of required bicycle parking spaces, and documentation shall be submitted substantiating their reasons for the requested parking reduction. 
1.  A sufficient number of spaces are provided to meet the greater parking demand of the participating uses. 
2.  Satisfactory evidence, as deemed so by the planning department, has been submitted by the parties operating the shared parking facility, describing the nature of the uses and the times when the uses operate as to demonstrate the lack of potential conflict between them. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.60.100 - Off-street parking plot plan review and approval. 
No use shall be established or changed, no development shall occur or be expanded, and no building or grading permit or business license for any use or development shall be issued until an application for off-street parking plot plan review has been submitted to and approved by the planning department. 
A.  Application Contents. 
1.  Name and address of applicant; 
2.  Name and address of property owner; 
3.  Assessor's parcel number(s); 
4.  Legal description of the property; 
5.  A plot plan drawn (at the scale specified by the planning department) including the following: 
a.  Topography and proposed grading specifications, 
b.  Location of existing buildings and structures which are to remain, 
c.  Location of proposed buildings and structures, 
d.  Proposed uses of all buildings and structures, 
e.  Dimensions of the existing and proposed structures and other information (e.g., seating capacity) which will allow planning department to determine the parking needs in accordance with Section 17.51.020, 
f.  Layout proposed parking lot, including location of parking spaces, internal circulation pattern, and ingress and egress points, 
g.  Dimensions of parking stalls and aisles, 
h.  Location of landscaping and irrigation system, including identification of plant materials to be used, 
i.  Location of lighting, 
j.  North arrow. 
B.  Review and Approval. 
1.  Where a discretionary or ministerial approval is required for the use or uses for which the parking is being provided, the off-street parking plot plan application shall be reviewed and approved in conjunction with that discretionary or ministerial approval process. 
2.  Off-street parking plot plan application shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 17.75 of this title. 
3.  No use shall be established or changed, no development shall occur or be expanded, and no building or grading permit or business license for any use or development shall be issued until an application for off-street parking plot plan review has been submitted to and approved by the appropriate review authority. 
4.  No structures shall be permitted or constructed unless off-street parking spaces are provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
5.  The word "use" shall mean both type and intensity of use, and that a change in use shall be subject to all the requirements of this chapter. 
6.  When a structure is enlarged or increased in parking intensity, additional parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Adequate spaces shall be provided for the expanded area, and the intensification of use. In the C-D land use district an in lieu fee may be collected in an amount as specified in the downtown overlay zone. 
C.  Permit Revocation and Modification. 
1.  Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked or modified pursuant to Section 17.75.050 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.61 - SIGNS 
Sections: 
 
17.61.010 - Purpose and application. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the orderly and attractive construction, placement, and display of signs throughout the City of Huron. It is City policy that the primary purpose of signs is identification and public information. Signs that cause distraction and represent potential safety hazards, as well as aesthetic problems are prohibited. These general provisions serve as specific development standards to be applied in addition to any provisions within each base or combining zone. 
No signs shall be erected or maintained in any land use district established by this title, except those signs specifically enumerated in this chapter. The number and area of signs as outlined in this chapter are intended to be maximum standards. In addition to the enumerated standards, consideration shall be given to a sign's relationship to the overall appearance of the subject property as well as the surrounding community. Compatible design, simplicity, and sign effectiveness are to be used in establishing guidelines for sign approval, but shall not limit maximum standards for signs. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.61.020 - Definitions. 
The terms used in this chapter are defined in Chapter 17.03. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.61.030 - Procedures. 
A.  Permit Required. Except as otherwise noted within this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to erect, relocate, or alter electrically or structurally, any sign in the city without first obtaining a valid sign permit and building permit, if required. No permit is required for the following signs: 
1.  Window lettering covering no more than ten percent or three square feet, whichever is less, of the aggregate window area on a single wall and stating the name, business type, hours and address of business only; 
2.  Exempted signs in Section 17.61.050; 
3.  Temporary subdivision signs subject to the provisions of Section 17.61.070. 
B.  Application for Sign Permit. 
1.  Application for sign permits shall be made upon forms provided by the City and shall include the following information: 
a.  Two copies of a plan showing the position of sign and its relation to adjacent buildings or structures, and the design and size, colors proposed, and proposed location on the premises of such signs or sign structure, 
b.  A statement showing the sizes and dimensions of all signs existing on the premises at the time of making such application, 
c.  A fee, as established by resolution of the city council, 
d.  Such other information as the planning department may require to show full compliance with this chapter and all other ordinances of the City; 
2.  The application shall be filed at the planning department of the City. 
C.  Upon filing the application, every applicant shall pay to the City an application fee and before the issuance of a sign permit, a sign permit fee, in accordance with fee schedules adopted from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
D.  Review of Sign Application and Issuance of Permit. 
1.  The planning department shall review the application and supporting information for the sign permit and notify the applicant if it does not comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
2.  If the proposed sign is to be located within a shopping center, the provisions of Section 17.61.040 must be complied with before the planning department can process a sign permit application. 
3.  All sign permit applications shall be reviewed by the planning department. The planning department may approve, approve with modification, or deny any application subject to the criteria of this section. Any decision by the director that the applicant believes to be in error may be appealed to the planning commission in conformance with Section 17.75.030. Any decision by the planning commission may be appealed to the city council. Any appeal must be filed in writing, together with any fee established by resolution of the city council, within fourteen (14) days after the decision is made. The planning department and/or commission shall apply all the following criteria as the basis for action. 
a.  The sign is consistent with this chapter, 
b.  The sign does not constitute a detriment to public health, safety and welfare, 
c.  Size, shape, color and placement of the sign is compatible with and bears a harmonious relationship to the building and/or site which it identifies, 
d.  Both the location of the proposed sign and the design of its visual elements, lettering, colors, decorative motifs, spacing and proportions are legible under normal viewing conditions prevailing where the sign is to be installed, 
e.  The location and design of the proposed sign does not obscure from view or unduly detract from existing adjacent signs, 
f.  The location and design of the proposed sign, its size, shape and color will not detract from or cause depreciation of the value of adjacent developed properties, 
g.  The location and design of a proposed sign in commercial district which is in close proximity to any residential districts does not have any adverse effect on the value and character of the adjacent residential district. 
4.  Upon a finding by the director/building inspector/official that the proposed sign is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all applicable city building and electrical codes, the building inspector/official shall issue a sign permit. 
5.  Every sign erected in the City shall be subject to inspection by the building inspector for compliance with applicable City codes and ordinances. 
E.  Variances. 
1.  Variance Purposes. The planning commission may grant variances to this title in order to prevent unnecessary hardships that would result from a strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of certain regulations prescribed by this chapter. A practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship may result from the size, shape or dimensions of a site or the location of existing structures thereon, from geographic, topographic or other physical conditions on the site or in the immediate vicinity, or from street locations or traffic conditions in the immediate vicinity that would affect the signing of said site or building. Such variances shall be in accordance with the procedures and findings prescribed in Chapter 17.71. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.61.040 - General provisions. 
A.  All signs shall be fabricated, constructed, erected or installed and maintained in such a manner as will comply with all ordinances of the City and the approved permit. 
B.  No signs shall project over public right-of-way with the exception of pedestrian signs in the CBD zone and as follows: 
1.  Exceptions to the requirements of limiting a projecting sign may be granted by the planning department where cases of hardship exist for structures existing prior to the effective date of this chapter, or where a hardship is created by existing development not conforming to current development standards. 
2.  Signs may be placed on canopies, architectural features of a building, awnings and other building appendages (regardless of project over public right-of-way) upon review and approval of the planning department, as part of the sign permit process. The proposed sign shall be subject to review and approval, conditional approval or denial by the planning department. 
C.  Illuminated Signs. Lighting for externally illuminated signs shall be so arranged and maintained so that the light source is not directly visible from a public right-of-way or adjacent property. Internally illuminated signs shall be designed with an opaque, semi-opaque, or matte finish background on the sign face, and shall not exceed fifteen (15) foot candles of light per square foot of sign area. 
D.  Billboards and other nonaccessory signs are prohibited. 
E.  No portion of a building sign shall exceed the height of the roofline or parapet wall upon which it is mounted. The horizontal dimension of a building sign shall not exceed eighty (80) percent of the surface upon which it is mounted. 
F.  Directional and/or information signs bearing no advertising message and located on the site may be erected when necessary to facilitate circulation within the site, facilitate egress and ingress or facilitate a public need, such as identification of restrooms, public telephones, walkways and similar features and facilities. 
G.  Time and temperature devices, located on private property and bearing no advertising message shall be approved only through the conditional use permit procedure. Sign area used for the device shall be deducted from the permitted sign area for the occupancy. No additional sign area will be granted for the time and temperature device. 
H.  Signing for public and quasi-public uses of an education or religious type, public and private charitable institutions and public uses of an administrative, recreational, public service or cultural type approved through the conditional use permit procedure shall be approved as part of the conditional use permit. In the case of existing uses specified above, signing shall be reviewed and approved by the planning department. 
I.  Each commercial use which has direct pedestrian access through an exterior building wall which is visible from public right-of-way, shall be allowed at least sixteen (16) square feet of building sign area, regardless of building occupancy frontage. Commercial uses having a sole access from the interior of any building or from an enclosed lobby or court shall not be allowed the minimum building wall sign area referred to in this section. 
J.  Signs in the form of banners shall be allowed to be displayed a maximum total of thirty (30) days during a calendar year. 
K.  Any sign (except those specifically exempt or not requiring a permit) which was legally erected prior to the effective date of this chapter and which does not meet the requirements and standards of this chapter can remain subject to the provisions of this section. Existing businesses may make structural alterations to their existing nonconforming sign if they do not increase the nonconformance. 
L.  If a commercial use vacates its premises due to the cessation of its operation or relocation, all signs on the premises which do not conform to the provisions of this chapter shall be removed within thirty (30) days from notification by the planning department. 
M.  Design criteria for signs to be located within a shopping center or a mall type development shall be approved by the planning department before any individual building permit application is processed by the building official. Such review is to ensure that signs located within a shopping center be designed to be harmonious and of compatible design. 
N.  Signs located in the interior of any building or within an enclosed lobby or court of a building or group of buildings and which are not visible from any public right-of-way shall not be subject to the size or location criteria within this chapter. However, signs which require electrical connections or engineered supports shall be required to obtain a building permit. 
O.  Variances and exceptions may be granted to the provisions of this chapter, as provided in Chapter 17.71. 
P.  Signs which do not conform to the provisions of this chapter and are erected after its effective date without obtaining the permit required thereby are declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. All signs declared to be unlawful by this section and all persons erecting or maintaining them shall be subject to the terms of Chapter 17.78 and all amendments thereof. The planning department shall forthwith take all necessary actions or proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment pursuant of said sections of the Huron Municipal Code. The remedies provided for in this section are cumulative and nonexclusive. 
Q.  Murals which contain no advertising copy and which do not function as an advertisement are subject to review and approval by the planning department. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.61.050 - Exempt signs. 
The provisions and regulations of this chapter shall not apply to the following signs, nor shall the area of such signs be included in the computation of sign copy allowed for any site or use; nor shall any permit be required for the erections of such signs: 
A.  The following signs shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
1.  Window signs not exceeding three square feet and limited to business identification, hours of operation, address, and emergency information including use permit information (neon signs of any size require a permit, if allowed in that particular zone designation); 
2.  Signs within a structure not visible from the outside; 
3.  Memorial signs and plaques installed by a civic organization recognized by council; 
4.  Official and legal notices issued by a court or governmental agency; 
5.  Official flags of the United States, State of California, and other flags of the nations, counties, municipalities; official flags of foreign nations, and nationally or internationally recognized organizations; 
6.  Identification Signs on Construction Sites. Such signs shall be limited to one directory or pictorial display sign per street frontage or entrance, up to a maximum of two signs, identifying all contractors and other parties (including lender, realtor, subcontractors, etc.). Each sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and eight feet in height. Each sign shall be removed prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy; 
7.  Political signs, in compliance with this section; 
8.  Residential real estate signs for residential sales shall be one sign per street frontage not exceeding four square feet in area and six feet in height, provided it is unlit and is removed within fifteen (15) days after the close of escrow or the rental or lease has been accomplished. Open house signs, for the purpose of selling a single house or condominium and not exceeding four square feet in area and six feet in height, are permitted for directing prospective buyers to property offered for sale; 
9.  Commercial and industrial real estate signs for the initial sale, rental, or lease of commercial and industrial premises: one sign per street frontage not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area to advertise the sale, lease or rent of the premises. No such sign shall exceed a height of eight feet and shall be removed upon sale, lease or rental of the premises or twenty-four (24) months, whichever comes first. Thereafter, one sign per premise not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet in size and five feet in height is permitted for the sale, lease or rent of the premise; 
10.  Future Tenant Identification Signs. One wall or freestanding sign may be placed on vacant or developing property to advertise the future use of an approved project on the property and where information may be obtained. Such sign shall be limited to one sign per street frontage, and a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet in area and eight feet in overall height. Any such signs shall be single faced and shall be removed upon the granting of occupancy by the City; 
11.  Incidental signs for automobile repair stores, gasoline service stations, automobile dealers with service repairs, motels and hotels, showing notices of services provided or required by law, trade affiliations, credit cards accepted, and the like, attached to the structure of the building; provided that all of the following conditions exist: 
a.  The signs number no more than four, 
b.  No such sign project beyond the property line, 
c.  No such sign shall exceed an area per face of three square feet, 
d.  Signs may be double faced; 
12.  Copy applied to fuel pumps or dispensers such as fuel identification, station logo, and other signs required by State or federal law; 
13.  Agricultural signs, either wall or freestanding types, nonilluminated, and not exceeding four square feet for lots two acres or less and sixteen (16) square feet for lots greater than two acres, identifying only the agricultural products grown on the premises. The number of signs shall be one per street frontage or a maximum of two, with wall signs to be located below the roofline and freestanding signs no higher than eight feet; 
14.  Directional signs to aid vehicle or pedestrian traffic provided that such signs are located on site, have a maximum area which does not exceed three square feet, have a maximum overall height of four feet above grade, and are mounted on a monument or decorative pole. Such signs may be located in the required setback provided that a minimum distance of five feet from any property line is maintained. Maximum height of any sign within the required sight triangle at an intersection is thirty (30) inches; 
15.  Traffic regulations: traffic or other signs of governmental agencies, signs required by law or contract with a governmental agency, railroad crossing signs, legal notices, and such temporary, emergency or nonadvertising signs as may be authorized by the city council; 
16.  Warning signs: signs of public utility companies, law enforcement or public agencies indicating danger or which serve as an aid to public safety or which show the location of underground facilities or of public telephones; 
17.  Holiday signs: decorations to celebrate nationally recognized holidays and local celebrations; 
18.  Public notices and announcement authorized by courts or public officials. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.61.060 - Prohibited signs. 
A.  The following signs are prohibited: 
1.  Abandoned signs and nonconforming signs and sign structures associated with an activity, business, project or service which has not been sold, produced, provided or conducted on the premises for a period of ninety (90) days; 
2.  Animated, moving, flashing, blinking, reflecting, revolving or any other similar sign, except electronic message boards and barber poles; 
3.  Banners, flags and pennants, except as may be approved as part of a specific plan, or combining district; 
4.  Bench signs; 
5.  Chalkboards or blackboards; 
6.  Changeable copy signs and electronic message boards, except as allowed with for movie theaters, arenas, stadiums, or auto malls in the appropriate land use district; 
7.  Advertising signs which include any of the words "Stop," "Look" or "Listen" or any other word, phrase, symbol, lights, motion, sound, fumes, mist or other effluent that may interfere with, mislead or confuse the driving public; 
8.  Permanent sale or come-on signs; 
9.  Portable signs or A-frame signs; 
10.  Roof signs; 
11.  Signs on public property, except for traffic regulatory, informational signs, signs required by a government agency, and model home tour signs; 
12.  Signs painted on roofs or fences; 
13.  Balloons or other inflatable devices or signs designed to attract attention; 
14.  Signs so located as to prevent free ingress and egress from any door, window or fire escape; 
15.  Signs erected at or near the intersections of public and/or private rights-of-way in such a manner as to create a safety hazard by obstructing clear view of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Signs which by color, wording, design, location or illumination resemble or conflict with any traffic control device; 
16.  Signs containing statements, words or characters of an obscene, indecent or immoral character such as will offend public morals or decency; 
17.  Signs emitting sound; 
18.  Murals which contain advertising copy or which function as an advertisement; 
19.  Any advertising device attached to a fence, pole, building or vehicle not specifically authorized by this chapter. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.61.070 - Temporary signs. 
A.  Temporary window signs may be permitted on the inside of windows facing out which do not cover more than fifteen (15) percent of the individual window surface for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days use during any sixty (60) day period; no permit required. 
B.  Special event signs and civic event signs may be approved by the planning department for a limited period of time as a means of publicizing special events such as grand openings, carnivals, parades, and charitable events. Such special event signs shall be limited to the following provisions: 
1.  No special event signs shall be erected without a sign permit; 
2.  Special event signs shall be limited to thirty (30) days per event from the date of erection or date of the permit, whichever occurs first; 
3.  Special event signs shall not include promotional sales signs; 
4.  Special event signs may include balloons, inflatable devices, search lights, beacons, pennants and streamers. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.61.080 - Political signs. 
Political or campaign signs shall be erected in accordance with the following provisions (no permit required): 
A.  Any such sign shall be erected not earlier than eighty-eight (88) days prior to the election and shall be removed within fifteen (15) days after such election. Candidates successful in a primary election are subject to the same provisions and shall remove signs fifteen (15) days following the primary election and may erect signs not earlier than eighty-eight (88) days prior to the general election. 
B.  1.  Each candidate is allowed one political sign per parcel. On a residential site, the sign may be a maximum of sixteen (16) square feet in area and erected to a maximum height of six feet. On commercial or vacant sites, the sign may be a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet in area and erected to a maximum height of six feet except as provided in subsection D of this section. 
2.  For the purpose of this provision, "residential site" means a lot or parcel which has a residential use or structure built on it and "commercial site" means a lot or parcel which has a commercial use or site on it. Residential or commercial sites are not intended to reflect the zoning of the property. 
C.  Political or campaign signs may not be attached to trees, fence posts or utility poles except on private property where written permission from the property owners has been obtained. 
D.  Portable or temporary A-frame signs are prohibited. V-shaped signs (two surfaces with two edges connected and the other two edges spread apart so that the faces read from different directions) are permitted subject to the criteria that they are supported with a maximum of three posts placed with an interior angle of not more than ninety (90) degrees. 
E.  No political or campaign signs shall be attached and erected on public property or within the public right-of-way and shall not obstruct sight line visibility at intersections. 
F.  In cases where political or campaign signs are not removed within the specified time period, the City planning department shall cause to be removed those signs which remain and the cost and expense of such activity shall be paid by the candidate. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.61.090 - Nonconforming signs. 
A.  The provisions of this section shall apply to all signs in the incorporated City not otherwise regulated by State or federal law. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any sign lawfully in use on the effective date of this chapter but made nonconforming thereby may continue to be used until such a time that substantial improvements are made to said sign (defined as exceeding twenty-five (25) percent of the assessed valuation) and the sign is not: 
1.  Structurally altered so as to extend its useful life. 
2.  Expanded, moved or relocated. 
B.  Nonconforming signs in existence beyond what provisions are provided for in Section 17.61.090(A), are hereby declared illegal signs and a public nuisance and shall be abated as provided for in Chapter 17.78 (Enforcement and Penalties) of this chapter. 
C.  A requirement for a nonconforming sign to be removed or altered so as to comply with the requirements of this title may be imposed as a condition on the approval of a subdivision, conditional use permit, variance, or other discretionary development approval. In addition, ministerial approval may also require removal or alteration of the nonconforming sign as a condition of approval when in conjunction with a substantial improvement of said property. 
D.  Sign copy and sign faces may be changed on nonconforming signs when there is no change in use of the site or when only a portion of a multiple tenant sign is being changed. 
E.  Legal nonconforming wall signs shall not prevent the installation of conforming freestanding signs, nor shall legal nonconforming freestanding signs prevent the installation of conforming wall signs. 
F.  Nonconforming signs shall be made to conform to this chapter when there is an improvement or expansion of twenty-five (25) percent of the assessed valuation of the site on which the sign is located. 
G.  The following signs shall be removed or made to conform to the provisions of this title within thirty (30) days of notification by the planning department: 
1.  Portable signs; 
2.  Banners. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.61.100 - Off-site signs. 
A.  Billboard Signs. 
1.  Any company owning an off-site legal nonconforming billboard sign may replace such sign copy on the same site with another in accordance with this chapter. However, no new billboards shall be permitted in any zone. If the property owner of a parcel upon which a billboard exists seeks further permits for development upon said property, removal of said billboard and/or an amortization schedule for removal shall be a condition of approval of said project. 
2.  The advertising display area of any billboard sign shall not exceed the display area greater than two hundred fifty (250) square feet per face with a maximum of two faces. Display area does not include decor or pole covers. 
3.  The commission may require the removal of more than one off-site billboard or painted bulletin by the company in exchange for the right to locate one new replacement sign on the same site. 
B.  Off-site Residential Subdivision Directional Signs. The following shall regulate and establish a standardized program of off-site residential subdivision directional kiosk signs for the City. For the purposes of this subsection, a residential subdivision is defined as a housing project within a recorded tract where five or more structures or dwelling units are concurrently undergoing construction. 
1.  No kiosk sign structure shall be located less than three hundred (300) feet from an existing or previously approved kiosk site, except in the case of signs on different corners of an intersection. 
2.  The placement of each kiosk structure shall be reviewed and approved by the planning department. 
3.  All kiosk signs shall be placed on private property with written consent of the property owner or on City right-of-way pursuant to a City encroachment permit. 
4.  A kiosk sign location plan shall be prepared, showing the site of each kiosk direction sign, and shall be approved by the planning department prior to the issuance of a sign permit. 
a.  There shall be no additions, tag signs, streamers, devices, display boards, or appurtenances, added to the kiosk signs as originally approved, no other nonpermitted directional signs, such as posters or trailer signs may be used. 
b.  All nonconforming subdivision kiosk directional signs associated with the kiosk in question must be removed prior to the placement of directional kiosk sign(s). 
c.  Kiosk signs shall be removed when the subdivision is sold out. The entity administering the program will be responsible for removal of panels and structures no longer needed. 
C.  Off-Site Signs on Public Property. Private advertising signs may be placed on structures in the public right-of-way, such as bus shelters, if there is a licensing agreement approved by the mayor and city council authorizing such off-site signs on public property. An application for a sign permit must be approved prior to the construction of off-site signs on public property and the applicant and the owner of the sign shall comply with the provisions of this title regarding sign construction and maintenance standards. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.61.110 - Sign regulations by land use category. 
Table 17-6 identifies the signs permitted in each of the land use districts. In addition to Table 17-6, all signs must be in compliance with all other provisions of this chapter pertaining to signs. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.62 - ANTENNA AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES 
Sections: 
 
17.62.010 - Purpose and application. 
This chapter establishes standards for the appropriate siting and change in location of any telecommunications antenna and related facility, including, but not limited to antennas for wireless telecommunications facilities and amateur radio installations. These standards are adopted to promote the following objectives: 
A.  Protect against the potentially adverse effects of telecommunications antenna and facility installation; 
B.  Protect against visual blight which may result from unregulated installation of antennas and other telecommunications facilities; 
C.  Protect the environmental resources of Huron; 
D.  Insure that a competitive and broad range of telecommunications services and high quality telecommunications infrastructure are provided; and 
E.  Create and preserve telecommunications facilities that will serve as an important and effective part of Huron's emergency response network. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.62.020 - Definitions. 
This chapter establishes standards for the appropriate siting and change in location of any telecommunications antenna and related facility, including, but not limited to antennas for wireless telecommunications facilities and amateur radio installations. These standards are adopted to promote the following objectives: 
"Co-location of telecommunication antennas (co-location)" means the siting of two or more providers' wireless communication antennas on the same telecommunication tower. 
"Geographic antenna coverage area" means the general vicinity within which an antenna serves the transmission requirements of a cellular or other broadcasting network. 
"Telecommunication antenna" means a structure intended to radiate and/or receive a source of nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER) and accessory equipment related to broadcast services, private radio services, pagers, beepers, data and common carriers (as regulated by the FCC) including AM, FM, two-way radio, fixed point microwave, commercial satellite, cellular and PCS communication antennas. 
"Telecommunications accessory equipment structure" means a building or cabinet-like structure located adjacent to, or in the immediate vicinity of a wireless telecommunications tower or antenna to house equipment incidental to the receiving or transmitting of wireless broadcasts, cellular telephone calls, voice messaging and paging services. 
"Tower, monopole" means a slender self-supporting tower used to support telecommunications equipment. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.62.030 - General requirements. 
This chapter establishes standards for the appropriate siting and change in location of any telecommunications antenna and related facility, including, but not limited to antennas for wireless telecommunications facilities and amateur radio installations. 
A.  Use Guidelines and Dimensional Requirements. 
1.  Location. 
a.  Co-location of telecommunication antennas shall be required, whenever possible. For towers up to one hundred fifty (150) feet in height, the structure and fenced compound shall be designated to accommodate at least two providers; higher towers, up to two hundred (200) feet, at least three providers. 
b.  All co-located (and multiple user) telecommunications antenna shall be designed to promote facility and site sharing. To this end, telecommunication towers and necessary appurtenances, including but not limited to parking areas, access roads, utilities, and equipment buildings shall be shared by site users when in determination of the planning department, as appropriate, will minimize the overall visual impact to the community. Each telecommunications carrier applicant shall provide a letter to the planning department stating willingness to allow other carriers to co-locate on their facilities wherever feasible or a written explanation why the subject facility is not a candidate for co-location. 
c.  An existing use or structure on the same lot shall not preclude the siting of an antenna or tower on that lot. To establish compliance with setback and other zoning requirements, the dimensions of the entire lots shall determine if an antenna or tower may be located there. 
d.  The minimum distance between wireless communication facilities shall be at least one-half mile radius from any other wireless communication facility in the geographic antenna coverage area. 
2.  Height. 
a.  Maximum tower height, including antenna and other attachments, shall not exceed two hundred (200) feet, measured vertically from the pre-disturbance ground level at the center of the tower. 
b.  In no case shall a wireless communication facility, tower or antenna exceed the minimum height necessary to accomplish the purpose it is proposed to serve. 
3.  Permitted Structures. Monopoles shall be the only type of telecommunication towers permitted in Huron. Neither guyed towers nor lattice type towers shall be permitted. 
4.  Setbacks. 
a.  Telecommunication towers shall be set back from each bordering property line or right-of-way a minimum distance equal to one-half of the tower's height measured vertically from ground level at the center of the tower to its highest point. 
b.  Accessory equipment structures or component cabinets shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from all property lines and rights-of-way. 
5.  General Aesthetics. 
a.  Towers and/or antennas shall be constructed and maintained to minimize visual obtrusiveness in color or finish. 
b.  Support buildings and related structures at tower sites shall be of such design, materials and colors to blend with surrounding structures. 
c.  Outdoor storage of equipment or related items shall be prohibited on tower sites. 
d.  Electrical and telephone lines extended to serve a wireless communication facility shall be installed underground. 
e.  Sound emissions, such as alarm bells, buzzers and the like, shall not be permitted. 
6.  Fencing. All towers and their accessory equipment structures for any wireless communications facility shall be enclosed by chain link fencing, not less than six feet in height. Such fences may be equipped with anti-climbing devices. The gate into the fenced area shall be located so that it is not easily visible from a street or adjacent property. 
7.  Screening/Landscaping (Buffer). 
a.  The base of a telecommunications tower, to a minimum height of ten feet above average grade at the tower base, shall not be visible from any public right-of-way. 
b.  Screening is required along all exterior sides of the fence described above excluding the gate. Screening shall be a minimum width of twenty (20) feet with two rows of planting material placed ten feet on center, that are a minimum of five feet in height when planted, and that are expected to reach a height of eight feet within three years. Suitable plant types shall be those recommended by the planning department to ten feet. 
8.  Lighting. 
a.  Telecommunication towers shall be lighted only if specifically required by the FAA, in which case, FAA minimum lighting requirements shall be applied. 
b.  When lighting is required by FAA, strobe lights shall be avoided unless specifically required by FAA. When strobe lights are required on telecommunication towers, a dual lighting system of white strobes for daytime lighting and a red flashing light atop the tower for nighttime lighting shall be used. 
c.  Except for lighting described in subsection (A)(8)(b) above, all lighting at a wireless telecommunications facility shall be shielded from view of adjacent properties. 
9.  Signage. Wireless communication facilities shall not display signage, logos, symbols or any messages of a commercial or noncommercial nature on towers, support structures or the fence-securing tower. A sign, not visible from a public right-of-way or adjacent residences, shall be posted on the fence gate identifying the current owner of the tower, emergency contact person or agency, and applicable contact numbers. 
B.  Application Requirements. The following shall be submitted at the time of application. 
1.  Documentation prepared and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the State of California stating that it is technically or practically impossible to provide a reasonable level of service by co-locating the tower or antenna on an existing structure. 
Technical documentation shall include a map of the search area, all potential co-location sites stating why each is unsuitable, and the total number of towers the service provider currently owns and plans to construct within the geographic antenna coverage area of the City within the next two years. 
The applicant must submit, in writing, a declaration from owners of all technically feasible co-location sites that they are unwilling to negotiate space or evidence that the applicant has tried, in good faith to negotiate reasonable terms for co-location and failed. 
2.  A scaled site plan, scaled elevation view, and supporting drawings, calculations and other documentation, prepared and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals, showing the location and dimensions of all improvements including topography, tower height requirements, setbacks, access driveways or easements, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses and any other information necessary to assess compliance with this title and compatibility with surrounding uses. 
3.  Documentation that FCC's minimum lighting standards have been applied. 
4.  No telecommunications antenna or related facility shall be sited or operated in such a manner that it poses, either by itself or in combination with other such facilities, a potential threat to public health. To that end, any telecommunications antenna and related facilities operating alone or in conjunction with other telecommunications facilities shall not generate electromagnetic frequency (EMF) radiation in excess of the standards for permissible human exposure to EMF as established by the California Public Utility Commission (CPUC) General Order 159, the Federal Communications Act of 1996, and/or including any other standards adopted by the FCC that may come henceforth, be adopted or amended. 
A radio frequency radiation (RFR) report from a licensed radio frequency engineer and a copy of the most recent EMF and RFR reports and certifications required by the Federal Communications Commission shall be provided by the carrier at the time any application required by this article is submitted to the director, which documents the proposed facility's anticipated RFR levels. 
Documentation that the proposed tower, antennas and equipment comply with all applicable FCC regulations to protect the public from unnecessary exposure to electromagnetic radiation, documentation shall be provided that power density levels do not exceed those permitted by FCC. 
5.  In addition, all broadcast radio and television facilities and wireless telecommunications facilities where three or more telecommunications antenna or facilities are co-located on the same structure or on a parcel or on a separate parcel of land within three hundred (300) feet of another telecommunications antenna or facilities antenna shall prepare and submit an annual RFR monitoring report and a copy of any RFR reports or certifications required by the CPUC and FCC. The report shall address the cumulative field measurements of radio frequency emissions of all antennas installed at the subject site or location. The report shall quantify the radio frequency emissions and compare the results with either the most current American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standards, or other standards adopted by the FCC or CPUC. Said report shall be subject to review and approval of the director and shall clearly identify the cumulative field measurements and compare these measurements to the most current ANSI, PCC and CPUC standards for consistency with the accepted standards. If the City finds that the wireless telecommunications facilities service providers do not meet these standards, the service providers shall bring the entire site into compliance with said standards, or be subject to review before the planning commission at a public hearing where the operation permit may be modified or revoked. 
Documentation prepared and sealed by a professional engineer registered in California that the proposed tower and attached antennas do not exceed the minimum height necessary to accomplish the purpose for which they are constructed. 
6.  A notarized statement by the owner or CEO of the tower specifying the number of co-location sites the owner will make available on the proposed tower and a declaration that such sites will be negotiated in good faith at reasonable terms to other service providers. 
7.  Documentation, prepared and sealed by a professional engineer registered in California, to demonstrate that the telecommunication tower has sufficient structural integrity for its intended uses. All towers and attached antennas shall be capable of withstanding winds of at least one hundred fifty (150) miles per hour, and an earthquake in Zone No. 4. 
8.  If the proposed tower or antenna is to be located on lands owned by a party other than the applicant or the City, a copy of the lease agreement with the property owner. 
9.  Documentation consisting of a certificate of insurance verifying a general liability coverage of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) at no cost to the City of Huron. The certificate shall contain a requirement that the insurance company shall notify the City thirty (30) days prior to the cancellation, modification, or failure to renew the insurance coverage required. 
10.  A copy of the approved National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA) compliance report for all towers, antennas, accessory structures or equipment proposed for the site. 
11.  A memo of understanding regarding removal of abandoned antennas and towers. Any tower or antenna that is not operated for one hundred eighty (180) continuous days in a twelve (12) month period shall be considered abandoned. The owner of such antenna(s) or tower shall be responsible for its removal within ninety (90) days of receipt of such notification by the City. Failure to remove abandoned equipment will result in its removal by the City at the owner's expense. 
C.  Review Process. The planning department will use the following criteria in its review of an application for any wireless telecommunication antenna, tower or accessory structure. 
1.  The use is a public necessity. 
2.  The facility will not materially endanger the public health or safety if located where proposed and developed according to the plan submitted. 
3.  The required conditions, specifications, and actions described in this chapter have been met. 
4.  The value of adjoining property will not be reduced. 
5.  The location and character of the facility will be in harmony with the area in which it is to be located. 
6.  Should a court of competent jurisdiction declare this section or any part thereof to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the remaining provisions of this chapter nor the zoning ordinance of the City of Huron which shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.62.040 - Satellite dish requirements. 
All satellite dish antennae shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  Prior to installation of a satellite dish antenna in excess of thirty-six (36) inches, all appropriate permits must be obtained from the planning department of the City of Huron. 
B.  Satellite dish antennae shall be considered as accessory structures and as such shall comply with all height and setback requirements for buildings in the zone in which they are located. 
C.  All satellite dish antennae shall be located on the back half of the lot as ground-mounted units only, unless said dish is less than thirty-six (36) inches diameter. All ground-mounted dishes shall have trees and landscaping to screen the dish from adjacent properties. Under no circumstance shall the height of the dish exceed the height of the roof of the primary structure. 
D.  Satellite dishes less than thirty-six (36) inches in diameter and mounted on structures shall not be visible from public right-of-way and shall be located on the back half of the lot. 
E.  Antennae may be ground-mounted, roof-mounted or aboveground pole mounted and shall be located on the back half of the lot and comply with the height restrictions as set forth in this title. 
F.  In commercial and industrial zones, all roof-mounted antennae and satellite dishes shall be located on a flat portion of the roof with parapets and/or an architecturally matching screening plan. 
G.  No commercial advertising of any kind shall be allowed on satellite dish antennae. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.62.050 - Satellite and antenna development standards. 
All satellite dish and antennae shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  The planning department and/or planning commission may add any conditions to a permit necessary to achieve the compatibility of a satellite dish antenna with its neighborhood. 
B.  All satellite dish antennae located in residential and commercial districts shall be located to minimize the visual impact on surrounding residential properties and from public rights-of-way and adjacent properties by use of screens, fences and/or landscaping without impending the efficiency of the dish, to the approval of the planning department or planning commission. 
C.  Satellite dish antennae shall be painted to blend with their surroundings and shall not be unnecessarily bright, shiny, garish, or reflective. 
D.  Prior to installation of a satellite dish antenna, all appropriate permits must be obtained from the planning department. 
E.  All proposals for roof-mounted antennae shall be designed by a registered architect, or civil or structural engineer. 
F.  The installation of all satellite dish antennae shall be subject to the design of footings, anchorage, and fasteners by a California registered architect, civil or structural engineer, to meet the current City of Huron Uniform Building Code. 
G.  The electrical system shall be designed and installed in accordance with the City of Huron's current National Electrical Code. 
H.  All electrical wiring associated with antennae shall be installed underground. 
I.  A satellite dish antennae shall be maintained in a safe and aesthetically acceptable condition for the duration of the time it exists on the property. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.62.060 - Limitation. 
Certain parcels of land in the City may not be able to accommodate satellite dish antennae because of unique terrain problems and/or adverse effects on the surrounding neighborhood. In such instances, the planning department may withhold approval to construct, install and/or maintain a satellite dish antenna. Decisions may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 17.75. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.62.070 - Permit revocation and modification. 
Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked or modified pursuant to Section 17.75.050 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.70 - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS 
Sections: 
 
17.70.010 - Purpose and application. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures and general standards for the review and approval of conditional use permits authorized by various chapters of this title. Whenever a use is listed in any chapter of this title as a use permitted subject to securing a conditional use permit, it shall be approved only if it is consistent with the general plan and meets all requirements of this title and subject to any conditions deemed appropriate by the decision making authority. 
Conditional use permits are unique and their effect on the surrounding environment cannot be determined in advance of the use being proposed for a particular location. At the time of application, a review of the location, design, configuration, and potential impact of the proposed use shall be conducted by comparing the use of the established development standards and design guidelines. This review shall determine whether the proposed use should be permitted by weighing the public need for and the benefit to be derived from the use against the impact which it may cause. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.70.020 - Application contents. 
An application for a conditional use permit shall include the following: 
A.  Name and address of applicant; 
B.  Name(s) and address(es) of the property owner(s); 
C.  Assessor's parcel number(s); 
D.  Legal description of the property; 
E.  A site development plan (three copies) drawn at the scale specified by the planning department, which includes the following information: 
1.  Location of all existing buildings, structures, and improvements on the property, 
2.  Location, size, height, and proposed use of all proposed buildings, structures, and improvements on the property, 
3.  Existing and proposed streets and highways bordering and within the boundaries of the property, 
4.  Location (and dimensions) of existing and proposed parking areas, lighting, signs, walls or fences, 
5.  Proposed landscaping, 
6.  North arrow; 
F.  Elevations of proposed buildings or structures related to the conditional use permit; 
G.  A narrative description of the proposed use of development including: 
1.  Description of the nature of the proposed use or development, 
2.  Identification of the applicable zoning district or districts and the chapter of this title under which the conditional use permit is requested, 
3.  Reasons applicant feels justify the granting of the conditional use permit; 
H.  Application processing fees as adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.70.030 - Review and approval procedures. 
Verification: the city administrator shall verify the accuracy and completeness of the application. The date of verification shall be noted on the application. Such verification shall be made within ten days of the filing of such application. Formal acceptance: if the application is found to be accurate and complete, it shall be formally accepted. The date of formal acceptance shall be noted on the application. Acceptance of the application shall not constitute an indication of approval. The application for a conditional use permit shall be reviewed and approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the planning commission in accordance with the procedures set out in Chapter 17.75 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.70.040 - Basis for approval (findings). 
Following a hearing, the commission shall record the decision in writing and shall recite therein the findings upon which the decision is based. The commission may approve and/or modify a conditional use permit application in whole or in part, with or without conditions, only if all of the following findings are made: 
A.  The proposed use is conditionally permitted within, and would not impair the integrity and character of the subject land use district and complies with all of the applicable provisions of this zoning ordinance; 
B.  The proposed use is consistent with the goals and policies in the general plan; 
C.  The approval of the conditional use permit for the proposed use is in compliance with the requirements of the California Environmental Act (CEQA), this title, and other applicable codes and ordinances; 
D.  There will be no potentially significant negative impacts upon environmental quality and natural resources that could not be properly mitigated and monitored; 
E.  The location, size, design, and operating characteristics of the proposed use are compatible with the existing and future land uses within the general area in which the proposed use is to be located and will not create significant noise, traffic, or other conditions or situations that may be objectionable or detrimental to other permitted uses in the vicinity or adverse to the public interest, health, safety, convenience, or welfare of the City; 
F.  The subject site is physically suitable for the type and density/intensity of the use being proposed; 
G.  There are adequate provisions for public access, water, sanitation, and public utilities and services to ensure that the proposed use would not be detrimental to public health and safety; and 
H.  The proposed use meets the minimum requirements of this title applicable to the use and complies with all other applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations of the City of Huron and the State of California. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.70.050 - Terms and conditions. 
A.  Any conditional use permit may include such terms and conditions as deemed appropriate or necessary by the decision making authority to make the findings specified in this section. If no terms or conditions are specified, the use permit shall be considered unconditional and valid for a five-year period. 
B.  Within two years of conditional use permit approval, commencement of construction shall have occurred or the conditional use permit shall become null and void. In addition, if after commencement of construction, work is discontinued for a period of one year, then the conditional use permit shall become null and void. Projects may be built in phases if preapproved by the review authority. If a project is built in preapproved phases, each subsequent phase shall have a timeline as determined reasonable by the planning commission. 
C.  All conditions of approval shall be final, and a request to delete or modify a condition to make it less restrictive shall only be considered at a properly noticed public hearing, unless said conditions are appealed pursuant to Chapter 17.75. 
D.  The commission may, upon an application being filed thirty (30) days prior to expiration and for good cause, grant a time extension not to exceed twelve (12) months. Upon granting of an extension, the commission shall ensure that the conditional use permit complies with all current development code provisions. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.70.060 - Permit revocation and modification. 
The commission may hold a hearing to revoke or modify a conditional use permit granted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.75. Ten days prior to the hearing, notice shall be delivered in writing to the applicant and/or owner of the property for which such conditional use permit was granted. Notice shall be deemed delivered two days after being mailed, first class postage paid, to the owner as shown on the current tax rolls of the County of Fresno, and/or the project applicant. 
A conditional use permit may be revoked or modified by the commission if any one of the following findings can be made: 
A.  That circumstances have changed so that one or more of the findings contained in Section 17.70.040 (Basis for Approval) can no longer be made; 
B.  That the conditional use permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud; 
C.  That the use for which the conditional use permit was granted has ceased or was suspended for six or more consecutive calendar months; 
D.  That one or more of the conditions of the conditional use permit have not been met; 
E.  That the use is in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or regulation; and 
F.  That the use permitted by the conditional use permit is detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare constitutes a nuisance. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.70.070 - Conditional use permit to run with the land. 
A conditional use permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall continue to be valid upon change of ownership of the site, the business, the service, use, or structure which was the subject of the permit application. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.70.080 - Performance guarantee. 
A developer may be conditioned to provide performance security in a manner similar to the requirements of the subdivision ordinance for the faithful performance of any or all conditions of approval. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.70.090 - Mapping. 
Within thirty (30) days after the granting of a conditional use permit the city administrator shall indicate on the zone map the lots affected by such conditional use permit. Such indication shall show the file number of such permit. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.71 - VARIANCES 
Sections: 
 
17.71.010 - Purpose and application. 
Where special physical circumstances exist limiting the development of a particular property in accordance with development standards of a zoning district, relief from the development standards may be secured by the granting of a variance from those standards. The granting or denial of a variance will be based on whether the particular circumstances conform to the standards of this chapter. Under no circumstances will a variance for permitted or conditionally permitted uses be considered or granted. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.71.020 - Application contents. 
An application for a variance shall include the following: 
A.  Name and address of applicant; 
B.  Name(s) and address(es) of the property owner(s); 
C.  Assessor's parcel number(s); 
D.  Legal description of the property; 
E.  Site development plan drawn at a scale specified by the planning department, which includes the following information: 
1.  Location of all existing buildings, structures, and improvements on the property, 
2.  Location of all proposed buildings, structures, and improvements on the property, 
3.  North arrow; 
F.  Elevations of all buildings or structures related to the variance sought; 
G.  A narrative description of the proposed use or development, including: 
1.  Description of the nature of the proposed use or development, 
2.  Identification of the applicable zoning district or districts and chapter(s) of this title containing the standards from which variance is sought, 
3.  Explanation of the variance sought, 
4.  Reasons applicant feels justify the granting of the variance; 
H.  Applicable application processing fees as established by the city council. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.71.030 - Review and approval procedures. 
The city administrator shall investigate the facts bearing on each case to provide the information necessary for action consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter. If the application is found to be accurate and complete, it shall be formally accepted. The date of formal acceptance shall be noted on the application. Acceptance of the application shall not constitute an indication of approval. The application for a variance shall be reviewed and approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the planning commission in accordance with the procedures set out in Section 17.75.030 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.71.040 - Basis for approval. 
The planning commission may approve or conditionally approve an application for a variance if it finds all of the following: 
A.  Special circumstances exist applicable to the subject property, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, such that the strict application of the zoning ordinance deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and in the same zoning district or districts. 
B.  The granting of the variance does not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zoning districts in which such property is located. 
C.  The granting of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or to property or residents in the vicinity. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.71.050 - Terms and conditions. 
A.  Any variance granted may include such terms and conditions as deemed necessary or appropriate by the decision making authority to effect the purpose of the chapter. If no additional terms or conditions are specified, the variance shall be considered unconditional and valid for an indefinite period. 
B.  If the development for which a variance has been approved pursuant to this chapter has not commenced, or permits for each development have not been issued, within one year of the granting of the variance, the variance shall become null and void and of no effect, unless an extension has been granted by the decision making authority, upon the written request for an extension before the expiration of the one-year period. This provision shall not apply to applications approved in conjunction with another discretionary permit. In such cases, the expiration period shall coincide with that of the associated permit. 
C.  All conditions of approval shall be final, and a request to delete or to modify a condition to make it less restrictive shall only be considered at a properly noticed public hearing, unless said conditions are appealed pursuant to Chapter 17.75. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.71.060 - Variance revocation and modification. 
Any variance issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked or modified pursuant to Section 17.75.05 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.71.070 - Reasonable accommodation under the Fair Housing Amendments Act. 
A.  Purpose. It is the policy of the City of Huron, pursuant to the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, to provide people with disabilities, reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices and procedures that may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing. The purpose of these provisions is to provide a process for making requests for reasonable accommodation to land use and zoning decisions and procedures regulating the siting, funding, development and use of housing for people with disabilities. In these regulations, "use of housing" includes, but is not limited to, housing related services and the use and enjoyment of the property. 
B.  Definitions. As used in this chapter: 
"Act" means the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988. 
"Applicant" means the individual making the request for reasonable accommodation pursuant to these regulations. 
"Code" means the municipal zoning code or ordinance which sets forth the jurisdiction's land use and zoning regulations. 
"Department(s)" means the department(s) within the jurisdiction responsible for administering requests for reasonable accommodation pursuant to these regulations. 
"Designee" or "appeals designee" means the person(s), commission or other group of persons designated to make determinations on fair housing accommodation requests pursuant to these regulations. 
"Disability" means any person who has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities; anyone who is regarded as having such impairment or, anyone who has a record of such impairment. People who are currently using illegal substances are not covered under the Act, unless they have a separate disability. 
C.  Notice to the Public of Availability of Accommodation Process. At all counters where application is made for a permit, license or other authorization for the siting, funding, development or use of housing, notice in the form set forth in Appendix A shall be prominently displayed advising applicants that they may request a reasonable accommodation of existing rules, policies, practices and procedures. Forms for requesting an accommodation shall be available in all departments where decisions are made regulating the siting, funding, development and use of housing. 
D.  Requesting Reasonable Accommodation. 
1.  In order to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability, any person may request a reasonable accommodation in the rules, policies, practices and procedures regulating the siting, funding, development or use of housing by completing the "Fair Housing Accommodation Request" form (Appendix B) and filing it with the department. 
2.  If an individual needs assistance in making the request for reasonable accommodation, the department shall provide the assistance necessary to ensure that the process is accessible to the applicant. 
3.  A request for reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices and/or procedures may be filed at any time that the accommodation may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing; at the outset or during the approval process. 
E.  Review of Requests for Reasonable Accommodation. 
1.  When a request for reasonable accommodation is filed with the department, it is referred to the designee for review and consideration. The designee shall issue a written decision within thirty (30) days of the date of the application and may grant the reasonable accommodation request or deny the request. See Notice of Decision on Fair Housing Accommodation Request form (Appendix C) for designee's use. 
2.  If necessary to reach a decision on the request for reasonable accommodation, the designee may request further information from the applicant consistent with the Act, specifying in detail what information is required. 
3.  Not more than thirty (30) days after receiving a written request for reasonable accommodation, the designee shall issue a written decision on the request; provided that, in the event that the designee requests further information pursuant to the above paragraph, the running of this period shall be stopped until the applicant responds to the request. 
F.  Factors for Considering Requests for Reasonable Accommodation. The designee shall consider the following criteria when deciding whether a requested accommodation is reasonable: 
Is the housing, which is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation, to be used by an individual protected under the Act? 
Is the request for accommodation necessary to make specific housing available to an individual protected under the Act? 
Whether the requested accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the jurisdiction? 
Whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of a program? 
G.  Written Decision on the Request for Reasonable Accommodation. 
1.  The designee's written decision on the request for reasonable accommodation shall explain in detail the basis of the decision, including the designee's findings on the criteria set forth in subsection F above. All written decisions shall give notice of the right to appeal and to request reasonable accommodation in the appeals process as set forth below. The designee's notice of decision shall be sent to the applicant be certified mail. 
2.  If the designee fails to render a written decision on the request for reasonable accommodation within the time period allotted by subsection E, above, the request shall be deemed granted. 
H.  Appeals. 
1.  Within thirty (30) days of the date of the designee's written decision, the applicant may appeal an adverse decision by filing the Appeal of Denial of Fair Housing Accommodation Request form (Appendix D). 
2.  An applicant may request reasonable accommodation in the procedure by which an appeal will be conducted. If an applicant needs assistance in filing an appeal, the department shall provide the assistance that is necessary to ensure that the appeal process is accessible to the applicant. 
3.  All appeals shall contain a statement of the grounds for the appeal. 
4.  Nothing in these regulations shall preclude an aggrieved individual from seeking any other state or federal remedy available. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.72 - ZONE MODIFICATIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.72.010 - Purpose and application. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide limited administrative relief from the application of development requirements specified in this title where the granting of the modification would promote uniform development or relieve an unreasonable hardship, but would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or to property or residents in the area. A zone modification shall not be granted where the relief sought should more appropriately be sought through the variance procedure. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.72.020 - Application contents. 
An application for a modification shall include the following: 
A.  Name and address of applicant; 
B.  Name(s) and address(es) of the property owner(s); 
C.  Assessor's parcel number(s); 
D.  Legal description of the property; 
E.  Site development plan drawn at a scale specified by the planning department, which includes the following information: 
1.  Location of all existing buildings, structures, and improvements on the property, 
2.  Location of all proposed buildings, structures, and improvements on the property, 
3.  North arrow; 
F.  Elevations of all buildings or structures related to the variance sought; 
G.  A narrative description of the proposed use or development, including: 
1.  Description of the nature of the proposed use or development, 
2.  Identification of the applicable zoning district or districts and chapter(s) of this title containing the standards from which variance is sought, 
3.  Explanation of the variance sought, 
4.  Reasons applicant feels justify the granting of the variance; 
H.  Applicable application processing fees as established by the city council. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.72.030 - Review and approval procedures. 
Applications which meet the criteria specified in Section 17.72.040 are permitted under the provisions of this chapter. All other applications for a modification shall be reviewed and approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the planning commission in accordance with the procedures set out in Chapter 17.71 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.72.040 - Development standards subject to modification. 
The planning department may approve a reduction of up to ten percent for any setback, height, or other dimension. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.72.050 - Basis for approval. 
The planning department may approve or conditionally approve an application for modification if it finds all of the following: 
A.  The modification does not exceed the limits specified in Section 17.72.040. 
B.  The granting of the modification will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or to property or residents in the vicinity. 
C.  Either of the following: 
1.  The modification would promote uniformity in development on the lot or in the area. 
2.  The modification would alleviate an unreasonable hardship on the property owner or applicant by the strict application of the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.72.060 - Terms and conditions. 
A.  Any zone modification granted may include such terms and conditions as deemed necessary or appropriate by the decision making authority to effect the purpose of this chapter. If no additional terms or conditions are specified, the zone modification shall be considered unconditional and valid for an indefinite period. 
B.  If the development for which a zone modification has been approved pursuant to this chapter has not commenced, or permits for such development have not been issued, within one year of the granting of the zone modification, the zone modification shall become null and void and of no effect, unless an extension has been granted by the decision making authority upon the written request for an extension before the expiration of the one-year period. This provision shall not apply to applications approved in conjunction with another discretionary permit. In such cases, the expiration period shall coincide with that of the associated permit. 
C.  All conditions of approval shall be final, and a request to delete or to modify a condition to make it less restrictive shall only be considered at a properly noticed public hearing, unless said conditions are appealed pursuant to Chapter 17.75. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.72.070 - Zone modification revocation and modification. 
Any zone modification issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked or modified pursuant to Section 17.75.050 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.73 - INTERPRETATIONS AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.73.010 - Purpose and application. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish guidelines for the interpretations of this title and to enumerate miscellaneous requirements applicable generally to the matters included in this chapter. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.73.020 - Boundaries of zoning districts. 
Where uncertainty exists as to the official zoning maps, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following street, highway, and alley lines or lot lines, such lines, shall be construed as extending to the centerline of such street, highway, or alley. 
B.  In unsubdivided property or where a zoning district boundary divides a lot, the location of district boundary, unless specified by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map. 
C.  In case any uncertainty exists, the planning department shall determine the location of district boundaries. 
D.  Where any public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to abutting property shall apply to the vacated or abandoned street or alley. 
E.  Where any private right-of-way or easement of any railroad, railway, canal, transportation, or pubic utility company is vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to abutting property shall apply to the centerline of such vacated or abandoned property, unless said right-of-way or easement has been previously zoned. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.73.030 - Determination of similar use. 
When a property owner or applicant, proposes or contemplates a use of property not expressly authorized as a permitted use or as a conditional use by the regulations of the applicable zoning district or districts, he or she may apply for a determination of similar use in accordance with the procedures set out in this section. 
A.  Application Contents. An application for similar use shall be in writing on forms provided by the planning department and shall include the following: 
1.  Name of applicant; 
2.  Description of the proposed or contemplated use; 
3.  Identification of the zoning district or districts in which the use is proposed or contemplated; 
4.  Identification of the use or uses listed as permitted uses or conditional uses that most nearly resemble the proposed or contemplated use; 
5.  Explanation of why the property owner, applicant, or potential applicant feels the proposed or contemplated use, meets the criteria in subsection E of this section for determination of similar use. 
B.  Time of Application. An application for similar use may be submitted in conjunction with an application for a ministerial or discretionary permit described in this chapter or at any other time as may be convenient to the applicant. 
C.  Determination of Similar Use by the Planning Department. Where an application for similar use is submitted in conjunction with an application for a ministerial permit or if a proposed or contemplated use is asserted to be similar to a permitted use in the applicable zoning district or districts where no permit application is submitted, the planning department shall make the determination of similar use. Such determination shall be made in accordance with the following procedures: 
1.  The determination shall be made in conjunction with the ministerial or discretionary decision on the application submitted in accordance with the procedures set out in Section 17.73.020 or 17.75.030 or, where no ministerial or discretionary permit is involved, within forty-five (45) calendar days of submission of the application. 
2.  Written notice of such determination shall be given by mail within a timely manner after the date of the determination to the applicant and any person filing a written request for notice of the determination. 
3.  The decision of the planning department shall be final on the expiration of seven calendar days from and including the date of mailing of notice of the decision, as required by subsection (C)(2) of this section, unless a notice of appeal is filed with the planning department pursuant to Chapter 17.75 within such time. 
D.  Appeal. The determination of similar use by the planning department shall be subject to appeal to the planning commission: 
1.  The applicant for the determination may appeal from the decision of the planning department on the application for determination of similar use by filing a written notice of appeal with the planning department prior to the time the decision becomes final. 
2.  The planning commission may affirm or modify the determination of similar use by the planning department. 
E.  Basis for Determination of Similar Use. The determination of similar use shall constitute a ministerial action. In making a determination of similar use, the planning department, acting on an appeal, shall determine that a proposed or contemplated use is similar to a use or uses expressly authorized in the applicable zoning district or districts if the proposed or contemplated use meets the following criteria: 
1.  The use resembles or is of the same basic nature as a use or uses expressly authorized in the applicable zoning district or districts in terms of the following: 
a.  The activities involved in or equipment or materials employed in the use, 
b.  The effects of the use on the surrounding area, such as traffic impacts, noise, dust, odors, vibrations, and appearance; 
2.  The use is consistent with the stated purpose of the applicable district or districts. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.73.040 - City review of public utility uses. 
The provisions of this title shall not be construed to apply to the construction, installation, operation, and maintenance of public utility distribution and transmission lines, towers, and poles and underground facilities for providing gas, water, electricity, or telephone and telegraph services by public utility companies under the jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission; provided, however, before any right-of-way for transmission lines is acquired for regional or interstate facilities, the proposed route shall be submitted for planning department review and recommendations. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.73.050 - Interpretation of minimum lot sizes. 
For the purpose of complying with the minimum lot size and minimum lot area per dwelling unit requirements, and other provisions of this chapter, the lot sizes or lot areas shall be net lot area and based on fractions or multiples of one acre equal to forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.73.060 - Determination of accessory uses and structures. 
If any question arises as whether any particular uses or structure is accessory to the primary use or structure in question, it shall be resolved based on the definitions of accessory building or structure or accessory use found in Section 17.03.020 of this title and the following criteria: 
A.  Nature and size of the primary use or structure; 
B.  Nature and size of the accessory use or structure; 
C.  Relationship of the accessory use or structure to the primary use or structure. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.73.070 - Front yard setback exception (setback averaging). 
Notwithstanding any of the minimum front yard setbacks required in all of the residential districts, the front-yard minimum setback specified in these districts may be reduced where lots comprising forty (40) percent or more of the frontage on one side of a street between intersecting streets are developed with buildings having an average front yard with a variation of not more than ten feet. 
In such cases, no building newly erected or structurally altered may project beyond the average front yard line established by the existing building. In making this determination, buildings located more than thirty-five (35) feet from the front property line or buildings facing a side street on a corner lot shall not be counted. In no case shall any building or structure be located within any planned future right-of-way. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.73.080 - Less restrictive uses prohibited. 
The express enumeration and authorization in this title of a particular class of building, structure, premises, or use in a designated zoning district shall be deemed a prohibition of such building, structure, premises, or use in all zoning districts of more restrictive classification, except as otherwise specified. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.73.090 - Location of dwellings. 
Except where otherwise provided for in this title, every dwelling shall face or have frontage upon a street or permanent means of access to a street by way of a public or private easement or passageway other than the alley. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.73.100 - Height of buildings. 
No penthouse or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment, towers, steeples, roof signs, or other structures shall exceed the height limit provided in this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.73.110 - Height of structures. 
Radio and television mast, flagpoles, chimneys, and smokestacks shall extend not more than fifteen (15) feet above the height limit specified in this title, unless otherwise exempt. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.73.120 - Accessory buildings. 
The following regulations shall apply to the location of accessory buildings unless otherwise provided in this title. 
A.  Accessory buildings on a reverse corner lot shall be set back to the front yard depth on the lot to the rear. 
B.  No accessory buildings or structures shall be located within a required front, side or rear yard setback (exception: carports and garages only, are permitted within the rear yard setback). 
C.  Accessory buildings may be considered a part of the main building if connected by a common wall of not less than five feet in length, or if not more than twenty (20) feet from the main building and connected thereto by a roof of not less than five feet in width. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.73.130 - Through lots. 
On through lots, either line separating the lot from a public thoroughfare may be designated by the owner as the front yard; however, the rear-yard setback shall be the same as the front yard setback required on adjacent lots. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.73.140 - Yard encroachments. 
Where yards are required by this chapter, those yards shall not be less in depth or width than the minimum dimension specified for any part, and they shall be at every point open and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as follows: 
A.  Cornices, canopies, eaves, or other similar architectural features not providing additional floor space within the building may extend into a required front, side, or rear yard no more than three feet. 
B.  Open, unenclosed, covered porches, platforms, or landing places or other structures which are open on two or more sides which do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building may extend into any front yard not more than six feet, provided, however, that an open work railing, not more than thirty-six (36) inches in height, be installed or constructed on any such porch, platform, or landing place. No variance may be granted for enclosure of these porches, platforms or landings. 
C.  Stairwells and connected platforms or landings extending above the level of the first floor of a building may protrude into a required front yard no more than six feet. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.73.150 - Fences, walls and hedges. 
A.  In all residential zones, no fence, wall, or hedge located in the rear or side yard shall exceed a height of six feet. 
B.  In all residential zones, no fence, wall, or hedge located in the required front yard shall exceed a height of three and one-half feet. Chain link fences are not permitted. 
C.  Maximum fence, wall, or hedge height shall be measured from the finished interior grade. That portion of a wall or fence functioning as a retaining wall shall not be counted in determining overall fence or wall height. 
D.  In the residential and commercial zones, no barbed or concertina wire shall be used or maintained as part or on any fence, wall, or hedge located along the front, side, or rear lines of any lot, or within three feet of said lines, and no sharp wire or points shall project at the top of any fence or wall less than six feet in height. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.73.160 - Building across property lines. 
Provided legal parcels of record are owned by the same property owner(s), a building or buildings that establish the main use may be developed across property lines to merge the properties into one parcel for the determination of property development standards. A lot merger or lot line adjustment shall be required as a condition of approval. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.73.170 - Residential garage capacity. 
The capacity of single-family residential garages, whether attached or detached to the main dwelling unit, shall not be less than one car and shall not exceed three automobiles with the exception of garages in the R-R zone. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.73.180 - Site plan. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the site plan is to enable the planning commission to make a finding that the proposed development is in conformity with the intent and purpose of this title and to guide the department of public works in the issuance of permits. 
B.  Application—Contents. Application shall be made in the number of copies designated by the city administrator and shall be filed in the office of the city administrator in conformance with the schedule of information as hereinafter required by this chapter and approved by the planning commission. Applications at the time of filing shall be accompanied by a legal description of the property involved, plot plan, drawings, photographs, and other pertinent information as may be required by the city administrator. The material listed in subsections (B)(1) through (B)(23) of this section shall be submitted with the application for site plan review. 
1.  Access, pedestrian, vehicular and service, points of ingress and egress and internal circulation; 
2.  Adjacent public right-of-way, including median island detail where applicable; 
3.  All buildings and structures and their location, elevations, size, height and proposed use; 
4.  Any phasing of a project shall be included as a part of the application; 
5.  Composition of material comprising exterior surfaces; 
6.  Environmental assessment; 
7.  Existing utilities to the site; 
8.  Generally the locations, size and height of signs; 
9.  Lighting and its locations and general nature and hooding devices; 
10.  Lading and its locations, dimensions, number of spaces and internal circulation; 
11.  Location of address and mail delivery system; 
12.  Location of irrigation systems for landscaping; 
13.  Location, species, and maturity of landscaping and irrigation system; 
14.  Location of trash pickup facilities and screening; 
15.  Lot dimensions; 
16.  Off-street parking and its locations, number of spaces and dimensions of parking area and internal circulation pattern; 
17.  Preliminary title or lot book report for the parcel; 
18.  Proposed drainage of the site; 
19.  Proposed surfacing of all paved areas; 
20.  Roof-mounted equipment and screening, existing and proposed; 
21.  Street dedications and improvements as provided in Chapter 17.70; 
22.  Walls and fences and their location, height and materials; 
23.  Yards and space between buildings. 
C.  Administrative Review. When reviewing a request for a special permit, the city administrator may: 
1.  Require that the applicant submit to the city administrator, of such type and in such form as he may specify, such additional information as he may deem relevant to the application; 
2.  Require that the matter be heard before the city administrator at a department hearing in accordance with such procedure as the city administrator may establish; 
3.  Extend, for reasonable periods, the time within which the city administrator is required to give his decision pursuant to Chapter 17.70. 
D.  Administrative Action. Within twenty (20) days after initiation of a proceeding, the city administrator, based upon such information as may be available to him, shall in writing grant, grant in modified form, or deny the requested special permit. 
E.  Notice of Decisions. The city administrator shall give notice of his decision as follows: 
1.  Denial: if his action is to deny; 
2.  Grant: if his action is to grant a special permit in any form. 
F.  Effect of Decision. The decision of the city administrator shall be final, subject to appeal to the commission within the period of time prescribed. 
G.  Appeals. When a proper appeal has been filed, the decision of the city administrator shall be set aside, and public hearing upon the matter shall be set before the commission. 
H.  Commission Action on Appeal. On appeal the commission may grant, grant in modified form, or deny the requested special permit. 
I.  Finality of Decision. The decision of the commission shall be final. 
J.  Acknowledgment and Acceptance of Conditions. The applicant shall, upon receipt of the approved copy of the site plan with attached conditions, execute an acknowledgment and acceptance of conditions agreement with the City, certifying the acceptance of the conditions. 
K.  Time Limit of Approval. Site plan approval granted under the authority of this chapter shall extend for a period of one year. Site plans for which one year approval period shall be deemed to have expired. Extensions for additional six-month periods, up to one year may be granted by the city administrator. 
L.  Signatures—Copy to Applicant. The approved site plan, with any conditions shown thereon or attached thereto, and a dated copy of the acknowledgment and acceptance of conditions agreement bearing the signature of the city administrator and the applicant shall be mailed to the applicant. 
M.  Revisions to Approved Site Plan. Revisions, requested by an applicant, to and approved site plan as determined by the city administrator to be minor modifications may be approved as a change to the original site plan. Any requested revision in an approved site plan, other than a minor modification, shall be processed as an original filing. 
N.  Compliance with Conditions. All conditions of site plan approval shall be fully complied with prior to occupancy. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, occupy or maintain any building, facility or site without fully complying with all of the conditions of site plan approval or any other applicable requirement of this title. 
O.  Street Dedications and Improvements Required. Because of changes that may occur in the local neighborhood due to increases in vehicular traffic generated by facilities requiring site plan review, and upon the principle that such developments should be required to provide street dedications and improvements as near as practicable in proportion to such increased vehicular traffic but should not be required to provide such street facilities for nonrelated traffic, the following dedications and improvements may be deemed necessary by the city administrator any may be required by him as a condition to the approval of any site plan. 
1.  When the development borders or is traversed by an existing street: 
a.  Minor Streets, Local Streets and Cul-De-Sacs. Dedicate all necessary rights-of-way to widen the street to its ultimate width as shown on any master or precise plan of streets and highways, install curbs, gutters, drainage, sidewalks, street trees, street signs, street lights, and required utilities, and grade and improve from the curb to the existing pavements; 
b.  Major and Collector Streets. Dedicate all necessary rights-of-way to widen the street to its ultimate width as established on any precise plan, precise plan of streets and highways, or where the ultimate right-of-way lines are otherwise determinable and the grades have been established or can be determined, install curbs, gutters, drainage facilities, sidewalks, street trees, signs, street lights, and required utilities, and grade and improve the shoulder and one traffic lane abutting the development. In no case shall a person be required to dedicate or improve the right-of-way for a distance in excess of thirty (30) feet as measured from said ultimate right-of-way lines; and 
C.  Major Thoroughfares (Expressways, Freeways and State Highways). Set back all facilities the required distance from the ultimate property line as shown on any master of precise plan of streets and highways and install curbs, gutters, drainage, sidewalks, street trees, street signs, street lights, and required utilities. No other dedication or improvements shall be required. 
2.  Frontage and Other New Roads. All frontage roads or new roads of any class made necessary by the development shall be dedicated and fully graded and improved with curbs, gutters, drainage, sidewalks, street trees, street signs, street lights, required utilities, grading and paving; provided, however, where the street involved is indicated as an eventual major street or major thoroughfare upon any master or precise plan of streets and highways, the amount of grading and paving shall not exceed that required by such existing streets. Where a frontage road is provided and improved, the improvements will not be required. 
3.  Standards. All improvements shall be to City standards as adopted by ordinance. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.74 - NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES, USES, LOTS. AND SIGNS 
Sections: 
 
17.74.010 - Purpose and application. 
This chapter is intended to limit the number and extent of nonconforming uses by prohibiting their enlargement, reestablishment after abandonment, and restoration and destruction. Within the zoning districts established by this title, or as subsequently amended, there exist structures, uses, lots, and signs which were lawful before the ordinance codified in this title was passed or amended but which would be prohibited or restricted under the conditions of this title or future amendments. The city council of Huron declares that nonconforming structures, uses, lots, and signs are incompatible with permitted uses in the zoning districts involved and such nonconforming uses, lots, and signs shall not be enlarged, expanded, or extended. Such nonconforming structures, uses, and signs shall not be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited by this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.74.020 - Nonconforming structures. 
A.  A nonconforming structure shall not be enlarged in area, space, or volume that will result in an increase in the degree of nonconformity. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.74.030 - Nonconforming uses of structures. 
A.  Any nonconforming use may be maintained and continued provided there is no increase or enlargement of the area, space, volume occupied, use or trips generated by the facility to such nonconforming use, except as otherwise provided in this title. 
B.  Any part of a permanent building, structure, or land occupied by a nonconforming use that is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the provisions of this title shall not thereafter be used or occupied by a nonconforming use. 
C.  Any part of a building, structure, or land occupied by a nonconforming use that has been abandoned for a period of one year or more shall not again be used or occupied for a nonconforming use. 
D.  If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a building may be changed to a similar or less intense nonconforming use. 
E.  Whenever a nonconforming use or structure shall be destroyed by fire or other calamity, by an act of God, or by the public enemy to the extent of less than sixty (60) percent the structure may be restored and the nonconforming use may be resumed, provided that restoration is started within six months and diligently pursued to completion. Whenever a nonconforming use or structure is so destroyed or damaged to the extent of sixty (60) percent, or more, or is razed, either voluntarily or as required by law, the structure shall not be restored except in full conformity with the regulations for the district in which it is located, and the nonconforming use shall not be resumed. The extent of damage to any structure or use shall be as determined by the building official. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.74.040 - Nonconforming uses of land. 
A.  A nonconforming use of land shall not be expanded or extended in any way. 
B.  A nonconforming use of land shall not be changed to or replaced by any other use except a use that complies with the regulations of the zoning district in which the subject property lies. 
C.  Any nonconforming use of land that has been abandoned for a period of one year or more shall not be reestablished. 
D.  Any nonconforming uses of land where no main building has been established or a nonconforming use occupying a structure having an assessed valuation of less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00); or a nonconforming sign or outdoor advertising structure; or a nonconforming sign intruding into the public right-of-way shall be completely removed upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be discontinued within three years of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
1.  Other nonconforming uses and structures shall be completely removed or altered and converted to a conforming status in accordance with the following schedule: 
Type of Construction (Uniform Building Code, 1961 Edition): Type I and II; time period, forty (40) years; 
Type of Construction (Uniform Building Code, 1961 Edition): Type II and IV; time period, thirty (30) years; 
Type of Construction (Uniform Building Code, 1961 Edition): Type V; time period, twenty-five (25) years; 
Fences, hedges and walls: time period, six months. 
2.  When such nonconforming use is removed, at or before the end of the specified time period, every future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this title. Repairs necessary to maintain a nonconforming use, and minor alterations not exceeding an assessed valuation of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall not be construed as lengthening the allowed time period for compliance. 
3.  The time period shall begin on the date the use first became nonconforming on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Whenever a use or structure becomes nonconforming because of a change of zoning district boundaries or a change of regulations for the district in which the site is located, the period of time prescribed shall be computed from the effective date of the change of district or regulations. 
4.  Records and Notification of Nonconforming Uses and Structures. Within six months after the effective date of said ordinance and amendments thereto, the planning official shall compile a list and description of all structures or uses which shall have become nonconforming by the adoption of said ordinance or amendments. This list shall be recorded in the office of the Fresno County recorder. 
5.  Within one year after the effective date of said ordinance or amendments thereto, the planning official shall notify in writing the owners of all nonconforming structures or uses of the nonconforming status of their property and the date when such structure or use shall be removed or made conforming by said owners, if such removal for conformance is required by the provisions of this title. 
6.  Continuing Nonconforming Uses or Structures. Nothing in this title shall be construed to exempt a use or structure which became nonconforming under the provisions of a previous ordinance and which continues to be nonconforming under the provisions of this title. Such continuing nonconforming uses or structures shall be discontinued or eliminated within the schedule and under the provisions of the ordinance in force when they first became nonconforming or within the schedule and under the provisions of this title from the date of its enactment, whichever is more restrictive. 
7.  Nonconforming Yards. Existing structures which are nonconforming solely because of the lack of required yards but which are within sixty (60) percent of conformance shall be exempted from this section and shall be exempted from making alterations to improve the existing structure, but shall otherwise be subject to the provisions governing nonconforming structures. 
E.  The exploration for or development or production of oil, gas, or other hydrocarbon substances shall not be considered nonconforming uses of land. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.74.050 - Nonconforming lots. 
Any lot which was legally recorded prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title may be used in conformance with the uses permitted by the zoning district in which it is located, provided that all other zoning ordinance and general plan requirements are met. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.74.060 - Determination of nonconforming status. 
Where there is doubt regarding the legal nonconforming status of structures, uses of structures, uses of land, parcel size, or signs, documentation shall be submitted to the planning department to establish legal nonconforming status. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.74.070 - Existing conditional uses. 
Any existing structure or use which is a conditional use in the district in which it is located shall be considered as a permitted use for the purposes of this title; provided, however, that any expansion, alteration or change of such use or structure shall be subject to approval of the planning commission in accordance with the provisions prescribed in Chapter 17.88. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.75 - PERMIT PROCEDURES 
Sections: 
 
17.75.010 - Purpose and application. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish review and approval procedures for ministerial and discretionary permits provided for by the ordinance codified in this chapter. Application contents and development standards and conditions for the approval of permits are contained in the appropriate chapter of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.75.020 - Ministerial permits issued by the planning department. 
The ministerial permits specified in this title for review pursuant to this chapter shall be issued by the planning department upon submission of an application containing the information specified in applicable chapters of this title and a determination by the planning department that the proposed use or development meets the development standards and conditions specified in the applicable chapter or chapters of this title. These permits include all uses listed in Tables 17-1 and 17-3 as permitted uses or temporary uses requiring a site plan review, not requiring a discretionary action or a change in use of existing structures. 
A.  Application and approval shall include the following: 
1.  An applicant for a ministerial permit pursuant to this chapter shall submit an application to the planning department in the format described in Section 17.54.130, unless the planning department waives any of the information requirements. The application shall be accompanied with any of the fee established by the city council pursuant to Section 17.77.030. 
2.  The planning department shall inform the applicant in writing within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt that the application is complete or that additional information is needed to complete the application. 
3.  Within fourteen (14) calendar days of determining the application is complete, and that the project or approach meets the development standards and conditions specified in the applicable chapter or chapters of this title, or other applicable ordinances, the planning department shall issue the permit; or deny the permit if he or she determines that the proposed use or development does not meet the standards and conditions specified in the applicable chapter or chapters of this title. 
B.  Appeal. If the planning department denies a permit pursuant to this chapter, the applicant may appeal such action to the planning commission. 
1.  The applicant may file with the planning department a notice of appeal to the action of the planning department indicating the basis of appeal within seven calendar days of such action. The appeal shall be accompanied with the fee established by the city council pursuant to Section 17.77.030. 
2.  The planning commission shall consider the appeal within thirty (30) days of the filing of such appeal. No public hearing or notice shall be required. 
3.  The planning commission may reverse or affirm the action of the planning department. The action of the commission shall constitute a ministerial action and shall be based solely on whether or not the proposed use or development meets the development standards and conditions specified in or established pursuant to the applicable chapter or chapters of this title. 
4.  The decision of the planning commission pursuant to subsection (B)(3) of this section may be appealed to the city council pursuant to Section 17.75.030(G)(4). 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.75.030 - Discretionary permit decisions by the planning commission. 
The permits specified in this chapter may be issued by the planning commission following submission of an application containing the information specified in the applicable chapter of this title and a properly noticed public hearing. The decision of the planning commission shall be final unless appealed to the city council: 
A.  Variances (Chapter 17.71); 
B.  Zone modifications when filed in conjunction with an application for a permit to be heard by the planning commission (Chapter 17.72); 
C.  Extensions of time; 
D.  Cluster combining overlay district development appropriate and plan review (Chapter 17.52); 
E.  Appeals of ministerial decisions by the planning department; 
F.  Conditional Use Permit (Chapter 17.70); 
G.  Precise Development Plan (Chapter 17.54). 
1.  Application and Approval. 
a.  An applicant for a discretionary permit pursuant to this chapter shall submit an application in the format described in Section 17.54.130 to the planning department. The application shall contain all the information specified for the application by the applicable chapter of this title, unless the planning department waives any of the information requirements. The application shall be accompanied with the fee established by the city council pursuant to Section 17.77.030. 
b.  The planning department shall inform the applicant in writing within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt that the application is complete or that additional information is needed to complete the application. 
c.  Upon acceptance of the application as complete and completion of an environmental document, if required, a public hearing shall be set in accordance with this chapter. 
2.  Notice of Hearing. 
a.  When an application has been submitted in accordance with this chapter, the planning department shall set the application for a public hearing. 
b.  At least ten days before the date of any public hearing, the date, time, place of the hearing, identity of the hearing body, and the nature and location of the application shall be given by the following methods: 
i.  Publishing such notice once in a newspaper of general circulation. 
ii.  Mailing or delivering notice, postage prepaid, to the property owner, the applicant, to each member of the city council, to each member of the planning commission, to the owners of all property within three hundred (300) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property which is subject of the application, and to any person who has filed a written request for such notice. For the purposes of this notice, property owners shall be the last known name and address of the property owner names, on the last assessment roll of the county. If the number of owners to whom notice would be mailed or delivered pursuant to this subsection is greater than one thousand (1,000), a display advertisement of at least one-eighth page in at least one newspaper of general circulation may be published at least ten days prior to the hearing in lieu of mailed or delivered notice. 
iii.  In lieu of the requirements set forth in subsection (G)(2)(b)(ii) of this section, a notice may also be given by posting notices not more than three hundred (300) feet apart along each street upon which the subject property abuts for a distance of not less than three hundred (300) feet in each direction from the exterior limits of the subject property. 
c.  Public Hearing. A public hearing shall be held before the planning commission at a time and place in accordance with the public notice. The planning commission may establish its own rules for the conduct of such hearings. Evidence shall be offered or presented, and the name and address of each witness shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent files. Any hearing may be continued provided that prior to adjournment or recess the presiding officer shall announce the time and place to which the hearing will be continued. 
3.  Decision. 
a.  The planning commission may approve, conditionally approve, or deny any application following the close of the public hearing on the matter or within thirty-five (35) days thereafter by resolution, or later as may be practicable. Such resolution shall include findings in accordance with the provisions of this title. The decision shall be final, subject to appeal in accordance with this chapter. 
b.  Written notice of such decision shall be given by mail within seven calendar days after the date of the decision to the applicant and any person filing a written request for notice of the decision. 
c.  The decision of the planning commission shall be final on expiration of fourteen (14) calendar days from and including the date of the decision, as required by subsection (G)(3)(a) of this section, unless a notice of appeal is filed with the planning department within such time. 
d.  All conditions of approval shall be final, and a request to delete or to modify a condition to make it less restrictive shall only be considered at a properly noticed public hearing, unless said conditions are appealed pursuant to subsection (G)(4) of this section. 
4.  Appeal. 
a.  Any decision of the planning commission pursuant to this section shall be subject to appeal to the city council. 
b.  The applicant or any other person aggrieved may appeal from such decision by filing a written notice of appeal with the planning department prior to the time the decision becomes final. The planning department shall furnish forms of notice of appeal. The appeal shall be accompanied with the fee established by the city council pursuant to Section 17.77.030. 
c.  Notice of the hearing on appeal shall be given in the manner and time provided in subsection (G)(2) of this section. Notice of the hearing on appeal shall also be given not less than ten days before such hearing to each person entitled to notice of the preceding decision. 
d.  The city council may reserve, affirm wholly or partly, modify, or attach other or additional condition to the decision appealed form. 
e.  A decision of the city council on any such appeal shall be final on adoption of an order or resolution containing its determination, and no notice thereof need be given. 
5.  Permit Issued. No permit shall be issued prior to the expiration of any appeal period. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.75.040 - Discretionary permit decisions by the city council. 
The discretionary permits specified in this title for review pursuant to this chapter may be issued by the city council following submission of an application containing the information specified in the applicable chapter of this title, review and recommendation by the planning commission and a properly noticed public hearing. These permits include: 
A.  Amendments to this Title (Chapter 17.76); 
B.  Application for change of zone classification (Chapter 17.76); 
C.  Specific Plans (Chapter 17.43); 
D.  C-L site development plan review (Chapter 17.52) when filed in conjunction with an application for change of zone classification or with a tentative subdivision map; 
E.  Final tract and parcel maps; 
F.  Conditional use permits, variances, and zone modifications when filed in conjunction with an application for a change in zone classification or for a tentative subdivision map (Chapters 17.70 through 17.72); 
G.  Appeal of planning commission decisions (Section 17.75.030(G)(4)). 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.75.050 - Permit revocation and modification. 
Any permit, conditional use permit, variance, or zone modification issued pursuant to this chapter may be modified or revoked by the official or decision making body that originally approved the permit by the same procedure under which the permit was issued for any of the following causes: 
A.  That any term or condition of the permit, conditional use permit, variance, or zone modification has not been complied with; 
B.  That the property or portion thereof subject to the permit, conditional use permit, variance, or zone modification is used or maintained in violation of any statute, ordinance, law, or regulation; 
C.  That the use for which the permit, conditional use permit, variance, or zone modification was granted has been so exercised as to be detrimental to the public health or safety or as to constitute a nuisance; 
D.  That changes in technology or in the type of amount of development in the vicinity of the use or other good cause warrants modification of the conditions of operation or imposition of additional conditions of operation to assure that the use remains compatible with existing and potential uses of other property within the general area in which the use is located. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.75.060 - Time limitations on challenges. 
Any action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void, or annul any decision made pursuant to this chapter, or concerning any of the proceedings, acts, or determinations taken, done, or made prior to such decision, or to determine the reasonableness, legality, or validity of any condition attached thereto, shall not be maintained by any person unless the action or proceeding is commenced within thirty (30) days after the date of the decision and the legislative body is served within sixty (60) days after the date of the decision. Thereafter, all persons are barred from any such action or proceeding or any defense of invalidity or unreasonableness of that decision or of these proceedings, acts, or determinations. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.75.070 - Building permits. 
A.  Issuance—Certificate Required. Before a building permit shall be issued for any such building or structure, the city administrator shall secure a certificate that: 
1.  The proposed building is in conformity with the site plan and conditions approved by the city administrator; 
2.  All required on-site (outside the City right-of-way) improvements shall have been completed. If the off-site improvements have not been completed, the permittee shall have entered into an agreement with the City to complete such work within six months from the date of the issuance of the permit. The city administrator may extend the completion date for such off-site improvements one additional six-month period upon the written request of the permittee upon a showing of good cause therefor. Such an agreement shall be secured either by cash deposited with the City, a cash deposit in an irrevocable escrow approved by the city administrator, or other financial security approved by the city administrator as the equivalent thereof. Such security shall be in the amount of one hundred (100) percent of the estimated costs of completion, such costs to be determined by the city administrator. In the event such work is not completed within the period provided, or any extension thereof, the City shall be authorized to take all necessary action to enforce the agreement, including the use of security, to cause the completion of all required improvements. Moneys deposited with the City or in escrow may be partially released to the depositor by the city administrator during the progress of the work so long as the same ratio of security is maintained on deposit to secure all uncompleted work; and 
3.  All of the required dedications have been given. 
B.  Filing Fees. Filing fees shall be paid by the applicant to the City to defray the expenses of postage, posting, advertising and processing applications according to the several procedures provided in this chapter in such amounts as the council may fix by resolution. 
C.  Form of Applications. The commission shall prescribe the form of all applications provided for in this chapter, which forms shall, among other things, indicate the accompanying data to be furnished by the applicant so as to assure the fullest practicable presentation of the facts for the proper consideration of the matter involved in each case and for a permanent record thereof. Each application provided for in this chapter shall be signed by one or more owners or lessees of the property in respect to which the application is filed. In all cases, such applications shall be provided at the City Hall. 
D.  Public Hearings. The commission may establish its own rules for the conduct of public hearings, and the member of the commission presiding at such hearings shall have the power to administer oaths to any person testifying. The commission may for any reason, when it deems such action necessary or desirable, continue any hearing to a certain date, time and place, and the public announcement of such date, time and place of the hearing to be continued shall, for all purposes, be sufficient notice thereof to all persons. 
E.  Legal Procedure. Any building or structure set up, erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter, and any use of land, buildings or premises established, conducted, operated or maintained contrary to the provision of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful; and the city attorney, at the request of the planning commission, shall immediately commence action or proceedings for the abatement and removal and the enjoining thereof in the manner prescribed by law. The remedies provided herein shall be cumulative. 
F.  Violation Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation, whether principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment, unless otherwise provided. Such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this chapter is committed or continued by such person, fine or corporation and shall be punishable as herein provided. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.76 - AMENDMENTS TO THIS TITLE 
Sections: 
 
17.76.010 - Purpose and application. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for the amendment of this zoning ordinance and zoning maps. Amendments to this title may be initiated by the city council on its own motion or by the application of any interested person. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.76.020 - Initiation of amendments by the city. 
The planning commission, city council, or property owner directly affected may at any time and in any form deemed appropriate by the commission/council initiate an amendment to any portion of this title. An amendment may be any of the following types: 
A.  An amendment to the text of this title not changing regulations or standards affecting the use of any property; 
B.  An amendment to the text of this title changing regulations or standards affecting the use of property; 
C.  Amendment to the official zoning maps reclassifying property from one district to another, including applying a combining district to, or removing a combining (overlay) district from, property. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.76.030 - Initiation of amendments by an interested person. 
A property owner, his or her authorized representative, or any other interested person may initiate an amendment to the official zoning map to reclassify property from one district to another by submitting an application and to the planning department. 
A.  An application for a reclassification of property shall include: 
1.  The name and address of the applicant; 
2.  The name(s) and address(es) of the property owner(s); 
3.  Assessor's parcel number(s); 
4.  Legal description of the property; 
5.  A map of the property; 
6.  Identification of the zoning district reclassification being sought; 
7.  Signatures or letter of consent from all property owners of record. 
The application shall be accompanied with the fee established by the city council pursuant to Section 17.77.030. 
B.  The planning department shall inform the applicant in writing within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt that the application is complete or that additional information is needed to complete the application. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.76.040 - Notice of public hearing. 
A.  At least ten days before the date of any public hearing on a proposed amendment to the text of this title changing regulations or standards affecting the use of any property or on an amendment to the official zoning maps reclassifying property from one district to another, notice of hearing, identity of the hearing body, and the nature of the amendment, identification of affected properties, shall be given by the following methods: 
1.  Publishing such notice once in at least one newspaper of general circulation; 
2.  Mailing or delivering notice, postage prepaid, to the property owner, the applicant, to each member of the city council, to each member of the planning commission, to the owners of all property within three hundred (300) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property which is subject of the application and to any person who has filed a written request for such notice. For the purposes of this notice, property owners shall be the last known name and address of the property owner names on the last assessment role of the County. If the number of owners to whom notice would be mailed or delivered pursuant to this subsection is greater than one thousand (1,000), a display advertisement of at least one-eighth page in at least one newspaper of general circulation may be published at least ten days prior to the hearing in lieu of mailed or delivered notice; 
3.  In lieu of the requirements set forth in subsection (A)(1) of this section, notice may also be given by posting notices not more than three hundred (300) feet apart along each street upon which the subject property abuts for a distance of not less than three hundred (300) feet in each direction from the exterior limits of the subject property. 
B.  At least ten days before the date of any public hearing on a proposed amendment to the text of this title not changing regulations or standards affecting the use of any property, notice of the hearing, including the date, time, place of the hearing, identity of the hearing body, and the nature of the amendment, shall be given by publishing such notice once in at least one newspaper of general circulation. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.76.050 - Public hearing. 
A public hearing shall be held before the city council at a time and place in accordance with the public notice. The city council may establish rules for the conduct of such hearings. The name and address of each witness shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent files. Any hearing may be continued provided that prior to adjournment or recess, the city council shall announce the time and place to which the hearing will be continued. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.76.060 - Decision. 
A.  The city council may approve by ordinance or deny by order the proposed amendment following the close of the public hearing within thirty-five (35) days thereafter by ordinance. The decision shall be final. 
B.  Where the amendment was initiated by an interested person pursuant to Section 17.76.030, written notice of the decision shall be given by mail within seven days after the date of the decision to the applicant and any person filing a written request for notice of the decision. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.76.070 - Time limitations challenges. 
Any action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void, or annul any decisions made pursuant to this chapter, or concerning any of the proceedings, acts, or determinations taken, done, or made prior to such decision, or to determine the reasonableness, legality, or validity or any condition attached thereto, shall not be maintained by any person unless the action or proceeding is commenced within thirty (30) days after the date of decision, and the legislative body is served within sixty (60) days after the date of the decision. Thereafter, all persons are barred from any such action or proceeding or any defense of invalidity or unreasonableness of that decision or of these proceedings, acts, or determinations. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.77 - ADMINISTRATION 
Sections: 
 
17.77.010 - Purpose and application. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish general rules for the administration of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.77.020 - Planning department delegation. 
The planning department may delegate any responsibility or authority charged to the department by any chapter of this title to any employee of the City of Huron planning department, any employee of any department of the City of Huron, a committee of employees of the City of Huron, or the planning commission. Any employee or employees so designated may act on behalf of the planning department in a matter or proceeding specified in this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.77.030 - Fees. 
The city council by resolution may establish a reasonable fee for processing any application specified in this title, provided the fee does not exceed the estimated actual cost of processing such application. The city council shall adopt and may periodically revise a schedule of fees for processing such applications. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.78 - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 
Sections: 
 
17.78.010 - Purpose and application. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish provisions for enforcement of this title. The steps in the process are outlined as well as the penalties involved. This chapter puts all persons on notice as to the proceedings and penalties involved if any provision of this title is violated. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.78.020 - Complaints regarding violation. 
Whenever a violation of this title occurs or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint with the planning department stating fully the causes and basis thereof. In a timely manner the complaint shall be recorded, investigated, and such action thereon as provided by this title taken as deemed appropriate. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.78.030 - Apparent violations. 
If any city official believes there is a violation of this title, the official shall report such violation to the code enforcement officer or responsible official. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.78.040 - Requirements to investigate. 
If a complaint has been filed, a violation reported or observed, the building official or planning department may initiate an inspection. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.78.050 - Inspection. 
The building official, code enforcement officer or responsible official may upon the presentation of proper credentials to the occupant or owner enter any premises, building, or structure at any reasonable time for the purpose of investigating and inspection said premises, building, or structure to determine if the same are being used in compliance with the provisions of this title. If admission or entry is refused, the code enforcement officer, building official or responsible officer may apply to obtain an inspection warrant. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.78.060 - Notice of violation. 
If, as a result of an inspection, the code enforcement officer, building official, planning department or responsible official determine there is a violation of this title, the responsible official shall give a ten-day written notice to the party violating this title. The notice of violation may be served by certified mail, registered mail, or by any method approved for service process, as set forth and described by the code of civil procedure for the service of process. The notice shall specify that the violation set forth shall be corrected within said period. The responsible official may for good cause extend the time for compliance if the cited party has submitted a plan for correcting the notice deficiencies. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.78.070 - Misdemeanor. 
Any person, firm, or corporation that fails to comply with the notice of violation described in Section 17.78.060 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than six months in the County jail, or both. Each day the violation of this chapter continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.78.080 - Injunctive relief. 
The City may seek injunctive relief in Superior Court to abate any violation of this title. Injunctive relief may be sought at any time, including prior to the issuance of compliance with the notice of violation if, in the opinion of the responsible official, an alleged violation of this title may be injurious to the public health or safety. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.78.090 - Abatement proceeding. 
Any building or structure, set up, erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title or any use of land, building, or premises conducted, operated, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title or contrary to a permit or variance or the terms and conditions imposed therein shall be, and the same is hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance, and the district attorney shall commence action or proceedings for the abatement and removal and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant relief as will abate and remove such buildings, structure or use and restrain and enjoin any person, firm, or corporation from setting up, erecting, building, maintaining, or using any such building, structure, or vehicle or using any property contrary to the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.78.100 - Noncompliance with permit conditions. 
Whenever a complaint has been received or any city official believes that the conditions of a permit, variance, or other entitlement granted under the provisions of this title have been violated, the responsible official shall investigate such allegations. If such a violation, in the opinion of the planning department, has occurred, a notice of violation shall be given in accordance with Section 17.78.060 of this chapter. If correction of the violation does not occur within the specified ten-day period, the responsible official shall notify the planning department. The planning department shall, upon receipt of such notice, initiate revocation proceedings in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.75.050 of this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.78.110 - Validity and issuance of permits. 
All departments, officials, and public employees of the City of Huron and where applicable the County of Fresno, vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses, shall conform to the provisions of this title and shall issue no permit or license for uses, buildings, or purposes in conflict with the provisions of this title; and any such permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this title shall be null and void. Further, no permit or license shall be issued for any use permitted by the provisions of this title, on a parcel of land, wherein it is known by the departments, officials, or employees of the City of Huron that a violation of this title exists. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 17.79 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT PROCEDURES 
Sections: 
 
17.79.010 - Purpose and application. 
The purpose of this chapter is to identify property maintenance standards, and establish procedures for the prosecution and abatement of public nuisance conditions to eliminate visual blight, protect the value of adjacent properties, and to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the community as a whole. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.79.020 - Definitions. 
The words and phrases contained in Section 17.79.020 shall, for the purposes of this chapter, be defined as follows, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
"City code enforcement officer" means the city code enforcement officer or a designee. 
"Commercial vehicle" means any motorized or nonmotorized vehicle used or maintained to transport property or goods for profit or persons for hire or compensation. 
Inoperative Vehicle. A vehicle is "inoperative" if it is: 
1.  Mechanically incapable of being driven; or 
2.  Prohibited from being operated on a public street or highway pursuant to the provisions of Vehicle Code Sections 4000, 5202, 24002, or 40001. 
"On or adjacent to real property" means and includes all areas of the real property including but not limited to the rear side, or front yard areas, parkways, sidewalks, or on abutting streets in all zones in the City except for items contained within a receptacle for collection of solid waste pursuant to the City of Huron Municipal Code. 
Owner, Vehicle. "Vehicle owner" means the last registered owner and the legal owner of record. 
"Parkway" means the area between any real property line and the edge of the pavement of a public street. 
"Public nuisance" means: 
1.  Any property that is not maintained pursuant to Section 17.79.060 of this chapter, and is in such a condition as to be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the public or the adjoining property. 
2.  The presence of vacant real property in the City that is not properly secured, fenced, boarded up, and maintained pursuant to Section 17.79.070 of this chapter, and which is in such a condition as to be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the public or the adjoining property. 
3.  The presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or part thereof, on private or public property not including streets, except as permitted in Section 17.79.050. 
4.  The presence of weeds growing upon any parkway, sidewalk or on private property within the City. 
5.  The presence of rubbish upon parkway, sidewalk, or private property. 
6.  The breeding and raising of animals whether for domestic, hobby, food, scientific or fur-bearing purposes. 
"Public property" means land, buildings, structures, or fixtures that are owned by a public agency. For the purposes of this chapter, "public property" does not include streets. 
"Recreational vehicle" means any travel trailer, camper, motor home, or trailer (as defined in State Vehicle Code Sections 242, 243, and 630, respectively), or any camper shell or boat. 
"Residential use" means any property zoned for residential use as established in Chapter 17.02 of this title. Sidewalks, parkways, and streets adjacent to residential property shall be considered a residential area for purposes of this chapter. 
"Residentially-developed property" means any property developed with a conforming dwelling unit or legal nonconforming dwelling unit. 
"Responsible official" means city chief law enforcement official, fire chief, building official, code enforcement officer or designee. 
"Responsible party" means the owner, lessee, agent, person, or entity in lawful charge or possession of the property. 
"Rubbish" means all waste which includes but is not limited to: 
1.  Animal or human offal, asphalt, inoperative bicycles and parts, boards, inoperative boats and parts, bottles, boxes, bricks, cans, cartons, cement, cinder blocks, concrete, containers, crates, dirt, doors, equipment, glass, gravel, hazardous waste, hoses, lumber, machinery, metal, paint, pallets, paper, pipe, plaster, rebar, rocks, rubber, sand, siding boards, stucco, tile, windows, wire, wood, and other similar material; 
2.  Trimmings, clippings and cuttings from lawns, shrubs and trees, and all dead or uprooted grass, sod, shrubs, trees, vegetables and dirt, and firewood piles; 
3.  Rugs, mattresses, furniture, utensils, clothing, toys, appliances, household supplies and equipment; 
4.  Vehicle bodies, motors, tires, parts and accessories; 
5.  Any other similar item and material of residential, commercial or industrial nature existing in an unusable, inoperative, discarded or abandoned condition. 
"Street" means a public street, drive, right-of-way, avenue, highway, place, close, pass, alley, lane, court, or way. 
"Temporary accessory parking structure." A parking structure approved by the city of Huron Planning Department and issued a ministerial permit. 
"Vacant real property" means any vacant parcel of land, building or structure on real property in all zones in the City where the responsible party has intentionally left such property vacant and unoccupied for a period of time exceeding thirty (30) calendar days. 
"Vehicle" means an automobile, truck, motorcycle, trailer, and any other device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power. 
"Weeds" means plant material that is noxious or dangerous, and/or dry grass, stubble, brush, or other flammable material that creates a fire hazard, and/or green weeds that are one foot in height or greater. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 362, § 3, 11-16-11)  
17.79.030 - Prohibited conduct. 
Except as provided in Section 17.79.050, it shall be unlawful for any responsible party having charge or possession of any real property in the City to: 
A.  Operate any business activity in the City without a business license registration certificate and appropriate planning and zoning approval; 
B.  Operate any business or other activity in the City not consistent with all of the terms and conditions of all applicable zoning approvals and approved plans granted by the City. This includes, but is not limited to, business license registration certificates, home occupation permits and conditional use permits; 
C.  Allow upon any premises under his or her control the placement of any temporary or permanent signs without appropriate zoning and building permit approval; 
D.  Keep, store, or maintain on or in front of any real property, or in or on any vehicle upon the real property under his or her control any litter, rubbish or weeds, when such material is open to view at street level from a parkway, street, or adjoining property, or in such a condition as to be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of such real property or any adjoining property; 
E.  Not maintain any parcel of land, building, or structure on real property in conformance with the standards contained in Section 17.79.060 of this chapter; 
F.  Permit any parcel of land, building, or structure on real property to remain a vacant real property without properly securing and maintaining the property pursuant to Section 17.79.070 vacant property maintenance standards of this chapter; 
G.  Allow upon any premises under his or her control the use of any pay telephone that is used as an instrument for or contributes substantially by its presence to any of the following conditions: 
1.  Selling or giving away controlled substances (as defined in Division 10 of the State Health and Safety Code); soliciting, agreeing to engage in, or engaging in any act of prostitution; or other criminal activity, 
2.  Consumption of alcoholic beverages on nearby outdoor public or private property except where outdoor consumption of alcoholic beverages is specifically authorized pursuant to an alcoholic beverage control license; 
H.  Allow upon any premises under his or her control any swimming pool, pond, spa, or other body of water or excavation which is abandoned, unattended, or unfiltered; 
I.  Allow the disposal or storage of oil, grease, other petroleum products, noxious chemical, pesticides, or any gaseous, liquid, or solid waste in such a manner to constitute a health or fire hazard or degrade the appearance of or detract from the aesthetic and property values of neighboring properties; 
J.  Keep, store, or maintain upon any premises under his or her control any abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or part thereof, except as permitted by Section 17.79.050; 
K.  Keep, store, or maintain upon any premises under his or her control any vehicle or recreational vehicle, except as permitted by Section 17.79.050; 
L.  Use any parked or stored vehicle or recreational vehicle, operative or not, as temporary or permanent living space unless exempted pursuant to Section 17.79.050; 
M.  Use a garage, shed or accessory structure, or any portion thereof, as a temporary or permanent living space or as a meeting room; 
N.  Keep, store, or maintain in any residential zone or on any residentially-developed property any of the following: 
1.  Construction and/or business equipment, supplies, materials, or machinery of any type or description, including cargo containers, 
2.  Buses, tow trucks, dump trucks, flatbed trucks, tractors, tractor trailers, truck trailers, catering trucks (mobile food services), 
3.  Any other commercial vehicle over twenty-five (25) feet long or eight feet in height or ninety (90) inches wide, or 
4.  Portable restroom facilities; 
O.  Allow accessory structures including but not limited to walls, fences, drainages, sidewalks, sheds, garages, temporary accessory parking structures, playhouses, lean-tos, and wall hedges to fall into a state of disrepair or deterioration. 
P.  Abandon or discard any personal property including rubbish as described in Section 17.79.020 on any public property including a street. Except when deposited in an approved City of Huron refuse container in the manner prescribed by Chapter 8.12 of the City of Huron Municipal Code; 
Q.  Breed and/or raise animals for domestic, hobby, food, scientific or fur-bearing purposes; 
R.  Keep or store any nonoperable vehicle in any, street or residential driveway. 
S.  Erect or use a temporary accessory parking structure without obtaining a ministerial permit from the City of Huron Planning Department. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 362, § 4, 11-16-11)  
17.79.040 - Violations. 
A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor pursuant to the City of Huron Municipal Code and such violation may be established by evidence obtained by the chief law enforcement official, fire chief, building official, code enforcement officer, or their designees (responsible official). 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.79.050 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
A.  Any material currently in use in the course of lawful permitted construction, demolition or landscaping on the site; 
B.  Any material contained within a fully enclosed structure or lawfully constructed solid, opaque wall, or fence, and such material is not in a condition as to be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the inhabitants of such real property, the public, or any adjoining property; 
C.  A mobilehome or recreational vehicle permitted as a temporary dwelling unit pursuant to Table 17-3 and in compliance with the provisions as set forth in Section 17.79.060(K); 
D.  Nothing in this section shall be construed as authorizing the maintenance of a public or private nuisance. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.79.060 - Property maintenance standards for developed properties. 
All developed real property in the City shall be maintained at a level not less than the following standards. 
A.  Address Numerals. Street address numerals shall be maintained pursuant to following: 
1.  For single-family dwelling units, street addresses shall be visible from the public street and may be displayed either on the front door, on the fascia adjacent to the main entrance, or on another prominent location. When the property has alley access, address numerals shall be displayed in a prominent location visible from the alley. 
2.  For multifamily dwelling units, street address shall be visible from the public street and shall be displayed on the complex identification sign. If there is no complex identification sign, the street address may be displayed on the fascia adjacent to the main entrance or on another prominent location. When the property has alley access, address numerals shall be displayed in a prominent location visible from the alley. Identification of individual units shall be provided adjacent to the unit entrances. 
3.  For nonresidential properties, street address shall be visible from the public street and shall be displayed on the freestanding sign as allowed in Chapter 17.61 of this title. If there is no freestanding sign, the street address may be displayed on the fascia adjacent to the main entrance or on another prominent location. When the property has alley access, address numerals shall be displayed in a prominent location visible from the alley. Identification of individual units shall be provided adjacent to the unit entrances. 
B.  Building Exteriors and Roofs. Exterior building surfaces and roofs for all buildings including accessory buildings and structures shall be maintained free of significant surface cracks, missing materials, warping and dry rot which either threaten the structural integrity, or result in a dilapidated, decaying, disfigured, or partially ruined appearance. 
C.  Condition of Structures. Structures shall not be partially destroyed, abandoned, unsecured, or permitted to remain in a state of, except properties with valid current building permits on file with the City of Huron building department, partial construction for more than thirty (30) days. Buildings or structures shall not be boarded up for a period in excess of ten days without a valid demolition or building permit on file, except in compliance with Section 17.79.070. 
D.  Drainage. On-site drainage improvements shall be maintained in order to prevent deterioration, disrepair, and ineffectiveness. 
E.  Excavations. Excavations, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, and other holes shall be properly secured to prevent access by unauthorized persons. 
F.  Graffiti. All structures, equipment, walls, and fencing on the property shall be maintained free of graffiti. 
G.  Landscaping. All landscaping on the property shall be maintained pursuant to Chapter 17.51 of this title and all landscaping visible from a public street shall be maintained in a healthy condition free of dying, dead, diseased, decayed, discarded and/or overgrown vegetation. 
H.  Lighting. All exterior light fixtures shall be maintained in good working order free of broken lamps, lens, and light bulbs. Furthermore, the structural integrity of all supporting poles and mounting fixtures shall be maintained. All insulation and connections shall be intact and free of exposed wire. 
I.  Outdoor Drying. In all residential zones or residential developments, the outdoor airing and/or drying of laundry, clothes, other household linens, or food is permitted only in rear or side yards, provided that the items are not visible from a public street excluding alleys. 
J.  Paint. Painted surfaces on buildings, trash enclosures, walls, retaining walls, fences, and structures shall be maintained in order to prevent decay, excessive cracking, peeling, chalking, dry rot, warping, or termite infestation. 
K.  Parking Areas, Sidewalks. Parking areas, private alleys, driveways, sidewalks, and walkways shall be maintained free of potholes, cracks, breaks, lifting, and other deteriorated conditions. The parking and storage of vehicles are subject to the provision in Table 17-7. 
Table 17-7 
Vehicle Storage and Parking Regulations 
	Residential Zones and Residentially-Developed Property 	Nonresidential Zones (Excluding Residentially-Developed Property) 
Parking and Storage Options 	Vehicles and recreational vehicles 	Abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof 	Vehicles and recreational vehicles 	Abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles, or part thereof 
Enclosed completely within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property. 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Stored or parked in an otherwise lawful manner in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or a junkyard. 	! 	! 	P 	P 
Stored or parked on a lot pursuant to an approval granted by the City of Huron for that purpose, in connection with the operation of a lawfully-conducted business. 	! 	! 	P 	P 
Stored or parked in an area screened from each abutting public street and property by a 6-foot high permanent, solid, opaque fence or wall, or building and consistent with Chapter 17.60 of this title. The fence or wall shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with applicable development standards for fences and walls. 	P 1 	! 	P 	! 
Temporarily (10 days or less) stored or parked on a paved driveway connecting a garage or carport with a public or private street for the purposes of loading/unloading. 	P 1 	! 	! 	! 
Temporary accessory parking structures 	MP 	! 	! 	! 
Stored or parked on any unpaved surface, except as permitted above. 	! 	! 	! 	! 
 
P = Permitted 
! = Prohibited 
1. Excludes buses, tow trucks, dump trucks, flatbed trucks, tractors, tractor trailers, catering trucks, or any other commercial vehicle over twenty-five (25) feet long or eight feet in height or ninety (90) inches wide, except as allowed in Section 17.79.050(A). 
L.  Pools. Barrier fencing and gates for swimming pools and spas shall be maintained as required by the California Building Code. Swimming pools and spas shall not contain unfiltered or stagnant water. 
M.  Rodent and Vermin Control. All property, including landscaped areas, buildings, and structures, shall be maintained free of rodents and other vermin in accordance with the requirements of the District Fresno County Mosquito and Vector Control. 
N.  Signs. All signs and sign structures shall be maintained in order to prevent deterioration, disrepair, and unsightliness. The structural integrity of all supporting poles, and mounting fixtures shall be maintained. All sign faces shall be maintained free of missing lettering or lighting. 
O.  Trash Bins. Trash bins or dumpsters shall be kept within an enclosed building, trash enclosure, or screened from public view to the maximum extent feasible. Overflowing trash bins or dumpsters due to inadequate number of bins and/or request for service from the trash hauler are prohibited. Use of commercial trash bins for residential uses other than during construction with a valid building permit is prohibited. 
P.  Use of Portable Canopies. The use of portable canopies in nonresidential zones is prohibited in any outdoor area. The use of portable canopies in residential zones is prohibited in any outdoor area visible from any public street. 
Q.  Use of Tarps. Excluding emergency repairs, the use of tarps for roof and building repairs is prohibited. Additionally, the use of tarps for vehicle covers, carports, or temporary (portable) canopies, enclosures, and/or awnings is prohibited in any outdoor area visible from any public street. 
R.  Temporary Accessory Parking Structures. Temporary accessory parking structure shall mean a non-porous covering fastened to vertical and/or horizontal poles fastened to vertical poles integral to the covering material. Vertical poles shall be firmly fastened to the paved surface of the driveway by fixtures easily removed and are not permanently affixed in or to the ground by footings or other means. The occupant of the property shall only use the temporary accessory parking structure for providing shade to only one private operational vehicle per parcel in an R-1-A or R-1 Zone District. Temporary accessory parking structures are not allowed in any other residential, or commercial or industrial zone district. The temporary accessory parking structure shall not substitute for the covered parking required in a residential district. A temporary accessory parking structure may be located in the front yard provided that a ministerial permit is obtained from the planning department according to Section 17.60.06(A)(1). 
S.  Walls, Fences, and Trash Enclosures. 
T.  Window Screens. 
U.  Windows. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007) 
(Ord. No. 362, § 5, 11-16-11)  
17.79.070 - Property maintenance standards for undeveloped or vacant properties. 
A.  Mandatory Standards. All vacant real property in the City shall be secured and maintained at a level not less than the following standards during the time period that such property remains vacant real property: 
1.  Graffiti. All structures, equipment, walls, and fencing on the property shall be maintained free of graffiti. 
2.  Rubbish, Litter and Weeds. All landscaped, concrete, dirt or paved open areas on the real property and adjoining public parkway shall be kept clear of rubbish, litter, and weeds. All rubbish, litter and weeds shall be removed according to the following standards: 
a.  Small Lots One Acre or Less. Lot is to be scraped of all weeds, trash, and debris, to include all areas outside of property fence (if present) to the edge of pavement or street curbing at front and side streets; and at the rear of alley or center of nondedicated easement if applicable. Grass or weeds unable to be scraped such as in corners of lot or along fences shall be cut to within one inch of ground. All weeds, trash, and debris are to be removed from property and properly disposed of at an approved City/County disposal site. 
b.  Large Lots Greater Than One Acre. Parcels exceeding one acre whether residential or nonresidential may be cleaned by scraping, plowing or tilling soil until soil is rolled, creating a path twenty (20) feet in width completely around the perimeter off parcel unless otherwise specked by case officer. All trash and debris in area are to be cleaned are to be removed from property and disposed of at an approved City/County disposal site. 
c.  Lots Containing Structures and/or Trees. Lots unable to be scraped shall be cleaned by mowing or cutting grass or weeds to within one inch of the ground. All shrubbery adjacent to structures covering window areas shall be cut or trimmed to windowsill height. Tree branches shall be cut to provide six feet of clear area above ground. All weeds, trash, and debris are to be cleaned and removed from the property and disposed of at an approved City/County disposal site. 
Note: Tumbleweeds and similar vegetation must be removed prior to tilling the soil. 
B.  Additional Standards. When deemed necessary by the responsible official in order to maintain the safety of persons or property, the following standards may also be imposed: 
1.  Access Points. All windows, doors, and other open access features to the structures on the real property shall be boarded up and secured according to the following standards (alternate materials may be used if approved by responsible official): 
a.  Any missing or broken windows or doors shall be covered as specified. Complete boarding of all unbroken windows shall only be required when specified by the case officer. 
b.  Exterior door openings may be secured against entry by locking or using #10 minimum flathead wood screws penetrating a minimum of three-fourths inch into framing members, only if doors do not contain glazing panes. 
c.  All wood used to cover openings shall be new or comparable (to be approved by case officer), exterior grade one-half inch nominal thickness plywood or O.S.B. board. Only one piece of plywood or O.S.B. board shall be used per opening unless the opening requires more than one four-foot by eight-foot sheet in which case, splices shall have two-inch by four-inch backing the complete length of the splice. Plywood or O.S.B. board shall extend two inches minimum beyond opening on all sides and shall be seared by #10 minimum flathead wood screws. Screws shall be spaced twelve (12) inches can center around complete opening and shall penetrate framing members a minimum of three-fourths inch. 
d.  Where applicable, plywood or O.S.B. board shall extend flush to top of door threshold and protruding windowsills. 
e.  All variations from above requirements shall be approved by case officer. 
f.  Contactor shall first confer with officer prior to submitting bid for special board-up conditions such as apartment buildings, motels, or commercial buildings. 
g.  All boards visible from the building's exterior shall be painted to match the buildings' exterior. 
h.  Refill holes, which are more than one foot in depth. 
2.  A building shall be permitted to be boarded up for no longer than six months. If a demo permit or building permit are not issued, within six months, the City shall initiate abatement proceedings. 
3.  Fencing. The property shall be temporarily fenced on all sides along the property line with a chain link fence or other type of secure fencing at a minimum height of six feet from grade, or greater, as determined by the fire chief or building official. The fence shall be properly posted with no trespassing signs, and kept clear of all other signs, except lawfully installed real estate signs for the lease or sale of the property and signs identifying ownership of the property or fencing. 
4.  Security Lighting. All structures which could be used for human habitation shall have a minimum of one light each in the front and rear yards. Such lighting shall be capable of illuminating the structure's exterior so as to be visible from the street or alley from dusk to dawn. However, the lights shall be shielded to avoid lighting adjacent properties. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.79.080 - Compliance responsibility. 
Compliance with the standards contained in this chapter shall be at the sole cost of the responsible party for the vacant real property and shall not limit the remedies or recovery of costs for the abatement of any vacant real property found to be in violation by city council or its designee pursuant to this title. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007)  
17.79.090 - Abatement procedures. 
A.  Abatement Administrative Costs. 
1.  City Council Authority. Upon discovering that a property is in violation of this chapter, the city council or its designee shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal of the violation in accordance with the procedures prescribed in this chapter. 
2.  Administrative Costs. The city council shall determine and fix the amount to be assessed as administrative costs in addition to the actual costs for removal of the public nuisance conditions on the real property pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  Abatement Authorized. 
1.  Responsible Officials. The building official, code enforcement officer, fire chief or their designees are authorized to abate any dangerous building or conditions found to exist on real property subject to this chapter. Such abatement action may include but is not limited to the implementation of standards in Sections 17.79.060 and 17.79.070 of this chapter. 
2.  Weed and Rubbish Abatement. The fire chief, code enforcement officer or any responsible official is authorized to abate any rubbish or weeds found to exist on any real property subject to this chapter. 
3.  Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled, or Inoperative Vehicles. Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or part thereof, on private property or, public property within the City, the responsible officer shall have the authority to cause its abatement and removal in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this chapter. 
C.  Abatement Procedures, Excepting Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled, or Inoperative Vehicles. 
1.  Resolution. Where the responsible official or their designees find conditions to exist on any real property in the City that violates this chapter, the city council by resolution may declare such conditions a public nuisance. A resolution shall refer to the real property by the name under which it is commonly known, or by the street upon which the private property fronts or abuts or nearest to which the private property is located. The resolution shall describe the property upon which the public nuisance appears, in the manner set forth in subsection (C)(2) of this section. 
2.  Property Description. The resolution shall describe the property upon which or in front of which the public nuisance exists by describing the property in accordance with the map used in describing property for taxation purposes. No other description shall be necessary. If the private property fronts or abuts upon more than one street, it shall be necessary to refer to only one of the streets. Any number of streets or parcels of private property may be included in one resolution. 
3.  Notice. Notice of the hearing at which the city council will consider a resolution declaring a public nuisance shall be provided at least ten days in advance of the hearing to the owner of the affected premises, as shown on the latest real property tax assessment roll, any known responsible party, and shall, if practical, be posted on the affected premises. The responsible official is hereby designated as the person to give notice to the responsible party to abate the public nuisance conditions on the real property. The responsible official shall have the power to develop such regulations, forms, and procedures as are necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter. After city council has passed a resolution pursuant to this section, the notice to the responsible party to abate the public nuisance conditions shall comply with the following: 
a.  The notice shall be substantially in the following form: 
NOTICE TO ABATE PUBLIC NUISANCE 
Notice is hereby given that on the _____ day of _______, 20___, the City Council of the City of Huron passed a Resolution declaring that conditions detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare exist upon the real property on or nearest to Street/road/avenue in the City, and that the conditions constitute a Public Nuisance which must be abated by the City, and the cost of removal assessed upon the land from which such Public Nuisance conditions were removed and will constitute a lien upon such land until paid. Reference is hereby made to Resolution No. _____ for more particulars. A copy of the Resolution is on file in the Office of the City Clerk, 746 - 8th Street, Huron, CA 93280. 
All property owners and other Responsible Parties having any objections to the proposed removal of such Public Nuisance conditions are hereby notified to attend the meeting of the City Council to be held on _______ when their objections will be heard and given due consideration. 
Dated this _____ day of _______, 20___. 
Responsible Official 
b.  After the adoption of a resolution by city council, the notice shall be mailed by certified first class mail to the property owner(s) as shown by the most recently received real property tax assessment roll, and to any other responsible party, to the extent that his or her address is known. 
C.  Proof of notice shall be provided to city council at the hearing on protests as set forth in this section. 
4.  Public Hearing (Hearing). At the time stated in the notice set forth in subsection (C)(3) of this section, the city council shall hear and consider all objections or protests, if any, to the proposed removal of the public nuisance conditions and may continue the hearing. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall allow or overrule by resolution or motion any or all objections, whereupon the city council shall acquire jurisdiction to proceed to perform the work of removal and the decision of the council on the matter shall be final and subject to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. If objections have not been made, or if the city council has overruled those made, it shall order the responsible official or their designee to abate the public nuisance by having the public nuisance conditions removed. Such order shall be made by resolution or motion of city council. 
5.  Decision. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
6.  Contact with Responsible Party. The responsible official or their designee shall not undertake to abate any public nuisance by order of city council pursuant to this section until he or she has made a reasonable effort to personally contact any responsible party protesting the council order to abate, in order to explain the purpose of the program, handle any special problem, and grant the responsible party additional time if warranted to provide his or her own abatement. 
7.  Right of Entry. The responsible official or their designee may enter upon private property to inspect or abate any public nuisance prohibited by this chapter upon: 
a.  Receipt of consent from the owner or occupant of the affected premises; or 
b.  Obtaining a warrant authorizing such an inspection and/or abatement. Such responsible official may enter the private property immediately, if the public nuisance presents a significant and immediate threat to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
8.  Removal Before City Representative. Any responsible party may have the public nuisance conditions removed and abated at his or her own expense if it is done before the arrival of the City representative to remove such conditions pursuant to this chapter. 
9.  Abatement Work—Costs and Records—Manner of Collection. 
a.  Abatement Work. The abatement work may be done by City work forces or by independent contractors. 
b.  Records and Costs. The responsible official or their designees who are responsible for carrying out the order of abatement by city council shall keep an account of the cost of abatement of the public nuisance on each separate lot or parcel of land and shall render a written itemized report (Report) to city council for confirmation showing the costs of removing the public nuisance conditions on each separate lot or parcel of land. 
i.  Posting of Report Required. Before the report is submitted to the city council, it shall be posted at least three days on the bulletin board at the City Hall with a notice of the time when the report will be submitted to the city council for confirmation. 
ii.  Mailing of Notice of Submission. At least seven days prior to the date of submission for confirmation, a postcard notice of the time and place of the submission of the report for confirmation, stating generally the nature of the report, shall be mailed to the owners of the parcels who have filed with the council a written request for a postcard notice within one year prior to the date of mailing the notice. 
iii.  Hearing on Report. At the time fixed for receiving and considering the report, the city council shall hear it with any objections of any of the property owners liable to be assessed for the work of abatement. The city council may make such modifications in the report as it deems necessary, after which, by motion or resolution, the report shall be confirmed. 
iv.  Costs Lien on Property Affected. The amount of the costs for abating the public nuisance on the lot or parcel of land mentioned in the report, as confirmed, shall constitute special assessments against the respective parcels or lots, and shall be a lien on the property for the amount of the respective assessments. The decision by city council to confirm the costs for abating the public nuisance shall be final and subject to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
c.  Manner of Collection. A certified copy of the report set forth in subsection (C)(9)(b) of this section shall be filed with the County of Fresno assessor on or before August 10th. The description of the parcels reported shall be those used for the same parcels on the Fresno County assessor's map books for the current year. The amount of the assessments shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as City taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary City taxes. 
i.  Application of Tax Statutes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of City taxes shall be applicable to such special assessment taxes. 
ii.  Issuance of Separate Tax Bills, Receipts. The Fresno County tax assessor, in his or her discretion, may issue separate bills for such special assessment taxes and separate receipts for collection on account of such assessments. 
iii.  Cancellation or Refund Required—Grounds. All or any portion of any such special assessment, penalty or costs heretofore or hereafter entered shall, on order of the city council, be canceled by the Fresno County assessor if uncollected, or, except as provided in subsection (C)(9)(c) hereof, be refunded by the director of finance if collected, if it was entered, charged or paid: 
(A)  More than once; 
(B)  Through clerical error; 
(C)  Through the error or mistake of the city council or of the responsible official in respect to any material fact, including the case where the cost report rendered and confirmed as hereinbefore provided shows that the City abated the nuisance but such was not the actual fact; 
(D)  Illegally; 
(E)  On property acquired after the lien date by the State or by any county, city, school district or other political subdivision, and because of this public ownership is not subject to sale for delinquent taxes. 
iv.  Claim or Refund. The provisions of this section shall not apply to cancellations. No order for a refund under this section shall be made except on a claim: 
(A)  Verified by the person who paid the special assessment, his guardian, executor or administrator; 
(B)  Filed with the city clerk on or before March 1st after the tax became due and payable. 
10.  Demolition. Where the responsible official or their designee find that a real property contains a structure that violates this chapter and presents a threat to the safety or health of the public, city council by resolution may declare the structure a public nuisance and order the demolition of the structure where it finds the property violates this chapter, presents an immediate threat to the safety or health of the public and finds that persons have continued to enter, occupy or inhabit such structures despite the application of the standards in Sections 17.79.060 and 17.79.070. The demolition of a structure pursuant to this section shall not occur until the abatement procedures are complied with as set forth in this chapter. 
11.  Emergency Abatement. In the event the public nuisance constitutes a significant and immediate threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, the responsible official or their designee, may enter the property upon which the public nuisance exists, abate the public nuisance, and restore any property affected by the public nuisance. To the extent reasonably practicable, informal notice shall be provided to the owner or occupant before abatement. If necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare, abatement may proceed without prior notice to or consent from the owner/occupant thereof and without judicial warrant. 
a.  Imminent danger shall include, but is not limited to, circumstances that present a significant and immediate threat to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
b.  Notwithstanding the authority of the City to conduct an emergency abatement action, an administrative hearing before the city council shall follow the abatement action. The hearing on the emergency abatement action shall be held within five business days following the action of abatement, unless the hearing (or the time required for the hearing) is waived in writing by the parties subject to the abatement action. A request for a hearing shall not be required of the person whose property is the subject of the abatement action. The city council at the hearing will determine the reasons for the abatement. 
D.  Abatement Procedures for Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled, or Inoperative Vehicles. 
1.  Notice Required. A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or part thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered mail to the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms: 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PART THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE. 
(Name and address of owner of the property on which the vehicle is located) 
As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Title 17, (Huron Municipal Code) has determined that there exists upon said land an (or part of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or Inoperative Vehicle registered to ___________, license number _______, which constitutes a Public Nuisance. You are hereby notified to abate said Public Nuisance by the removal of said Vehicle (or said part of a Vehicle) within 10-days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the City of Huron, and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as Responsible Party on which said Vehicle (or said part of a Vehicle) is located. 
As Responsible Party on which said Vehicle (or said part of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the City Council within the 10-day period, the City of Huron shall have the authority to abate and remove said Vehicle (or said part of a Vehicle) as a Public Nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such 10-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said Vehicle (or said part of a Vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the Vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing. 
Notice Mailed ________ 
(Date) CITY OF HURON By ___________Responsible Official 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PART THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE, 
(Name and address of last registered and legal owner(s) of record of Vehicle-notice should be given to both if different) 
As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of Vehicle-make, model, license, etc.) you are hereby notified that the undersigned, pursuant to Title 17, Huron Municipal Code, has determined that said Vehicle (or part of a Vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or Inoperative Vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a Public Nuisance pursuant to the provisions of said Municipal Code. 
You are hereby notified to abate said Public Nuisance by the removal of said Vehicle (or said part of a Vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice. 
As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said Vehicle (or said part of a Vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within ten 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the City Council within such 10-day period, the City Council shall have the authority to abate and remove said Vehicle (or said part of a Vehicle) without a hearing, 
Notice Mailed ________ 
(Date) CITY OF HURON By ___________Responsible Official 
2.  Public Hearing upon Written Request. Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located received by the City within ten days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the city council on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle, or part thereof, as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the costs of removal of the vehicle, or part thereof, against the property on which it is located. 
3.  Public Hearing upon Constructive Request—Notice of Hearing—Authority to Abate and Remove without Hearing. If the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land within such ten-day period, said statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his or her presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten days before the hearing to the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within said ten days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the City shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle, or part thereof, as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. 
4.  City Council to Hear Facts and Testimony. All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the city council, which shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. Said facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle, or part thereof, and the circumstances concerning its location on the said private property or public property. The city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the property on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land with his or her reasons for such denial. 
5.  General Powers of City Council—Notice of Council's Decision. 
a.  The city council may impose such conditions and take such other action, as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purposes of this chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle, or part thereof, if, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council may find that a vehicle, or part thereof, has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is an inoperative vehicle on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the responsible party. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle, or part thereof, and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
b.  If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle, or part thereof, was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located and that he or she has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the city council shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle, or part thereof, against the property upon which the vehicle, or part thereof, is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the property on which the vehicle is located. 
C.  If the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the city council but does not appear, he or she shall be notified in writing of the decision. 
6.  Appeal. Any rehearing or judicial review of the city council decision shall be according to the procedures set forth in Chapter 17.75. 
7.  Disposal. Seven days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle, or part thereof, to be a public nuisance, or seven days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision if such notice is required by this section, the vehicle, or part thereof, may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or automobile dismantled yard. After a vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable, unless it is a vehicle that qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates, pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 5004, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable. 
8.  Notice of Removal to Department of Motor Vehicles. Within five days after the removal of the vehicle, or part thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying, the vehicle, or part thereof, removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including, but not limited to the registration card, certificates of ownership, and license plates. 
9.  Costs of Removal Assessed. If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located or any other known responsible party pursuant to this chapter are not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel (and pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code), and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. The assessment shall have the same priority as other City taxes. 
10.  Nonexclusive Remedy. This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles with the City of Huron. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the City of Huron, the State, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 2007) 
Table 17-1 
City of Huron 
Permitted and Conditional Uses 
Nonresidential Zones 
	Admin. And 
Professional Office 	Central Businesses 
and Shopping 	Service 
Commercial 	Light 
Manufacturing 	Heavy 
Manufacturing 	Off-Street Parking 	Urban Reserve 	Public Facilities 	Commercial 
Highway 	Open Space and 
Recreational 	Community 
Commercial 	Exclusive 
Agriculture 
MASTER LIST ZONE DISTRICT 	C-P 	CBD 	C-S 	M-L 	M-H 	P 	UR 	P-F 	C-H 	O 	C-C 	A-E 
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES 
Accessory structure located on the same lot as a conditional use 								C 				
Accessory structure located on the same lot as a permitted use 		P 										
Advertising structures 				P 	P 							
Parking lot, surface 		C 1 	C 			P 					C 	
Parking structure 						C 						
Off-street parking 				P 	P 	P 				P 		
Incidental commercial uses within a parking structure with a height greater than 2 stories 						C 						
Incidental parking lot buildings 						P 2 						
Sign 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				P 	
AGRICULTURE AND GARDENING 
Agricultural uses 				P 	P 					P 		P 
Baled cotton storage 				C 	P 							P 
Christmas tree sales 		P 										T 
Farm equipment sales and service 				P 	P 							
Cotton compress 				C 	P 						C 	
Cotton compress, ready concrete 					P 							
Cotton ginning or oil milling 					P 							
Florist 		P 										
Fruit and vegetable processing 					P 							
Garden supply store 		P 									P 	
Grain milling and sacking 					P 							
Nursery 		C 3 					P 				P 	C 
Oils and fats (vegetable) refining 					P 							C 
Olive processing plants, preparation only, for shipment to cannery 				C 	P 							
Olive oil plant or olive processing plant 					P 							
Organic fertilizer manufacturing 					P 							
Plants 			P 									
Stock feed lots and stockyards 					P 							
Wool pulling or scouring 					P 							
Yeast manufacturing 					P 							
COMMERCIAL GOODS 
Appliance sale 		P 	P 	C 	P 						P 	
Art and antique store 		P 	P 	C 	P 						P 	
Automobile sales with incidental service and repair 			C 	C 	P 						C 	
Automobile parts sales 		C 	P 	C 	P 						P 	
Bakery (retail) 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Bakery (wholesale) 		C 		C 	P 						P 	
Clothing stores 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Commercial uses that are incidental or directly related to, and serve, the permitted industrial uses 				P 	P 							
Concrete and cement products 				C 	P 							
Delicatessens 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Department stores 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Dressmaking and tailor shops 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Dry goods 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Electrical appliance repair and retail sales 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Electrical supply 			C 	P 	P 						P 	
Equipment rental or sale 				P 	P 							
Fireworks stands 		P 		C 	P 						C 	
Frozen food lockers 				P 	P 							
Furniture store 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Grocery store 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Hardware 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Hobby Shop 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Ice and food dispensing machine 			C 	P 	P 							
Ice cream store 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Jewelry store 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Liquor store 		C 	C 	C 	P 						C 	
Meat markets 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Music stores 		P 	P 	C 	P 						P 	
Notions 			P 	C 	P 							
Novelty shop 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Office supplies and machines 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Paint sales, retail 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Pet shop 		P 	P 	C 	P 						P 	
Photographics 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Plumbing arts, retail sale and repair 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Post office supplies 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Printing shop 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Radio and television retail sales 		P 	P 	C 	P 						P 	
Sale of secondhand goods within enclosed structure 			C 	C 	P 						C 	
Shoe sales 			P 	C 	P 						P 	
Sporting goods 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Stationery store 			P 	C 	P 						P 	
Supermarket 		P 	P 	C 	P 						P 	
Superdrugstore 			P 	C 	P 						P 	
Swap shop 			C 	C 	P 							
Television and radio sales 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Tire sale 			P 	C 	P 							
Tobacco and cigar shop 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Tortilla sales and factory (handmade) 			C 	C 	P 							
Toy store 		P 	P 	C 	P 						P 	
Used car lot 			C 	C 	P 							
Variety store 			P 	C 	P 							
COMMERCIAL SERVICES 
Automobile repair within an enclosed building 			C 	P 	P 						C 	
Automobile reupholstery 				P 	P 						C 	
Automobile service station 		C 		C 	P 				P 			
Bar 		C 	C 	P 	P 						C 	
Barber and beauty shop 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Cafe-bars 			C 	C 	P 						P 	
Car wash, automatic self-serve 		C 		C 	P 							
Cemetery 								C 				
Drive-in cafe or restaurant 			C 	C 	P 						C 	
Dry cleaner 		C 	C 	C 	P 						C 	
Employment agency 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Gunsmith 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Janitorial services 		C 		C 	P 						C 	
Kennels 				P 	P 							
Laundry shop 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Laundry, self-service 			P 	C 	P 						P 	
Linen supply services 		C 		C 	P 							
Mini storage facilities 			P 	P 	P 							
Mortuary 		C 	C 	C 	P 			C 				
Print shop—copying, blueprinting, lithographing, publishing 			P 	P 	P 							
Printing, lithographing, publishing 				P 	P 							
Radiator shop 			C 	C 	P 							
Radio and television repair 		C 	P 	C 	P 						C 	
Restaurant 		P 4 	P 	P 	P 						P 	
Service station, with or without incidental repairs 			P 	C 	P 				P 			
Service station with garage 			C 	C 	P 				C 			
Shoe repair shop 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Shoe shine parlor 			P 	C 	P 							
Soda fountains 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Souvenir shop 		P 		C 	P 						P 	
Taxi stand 			P 	C 	P 							
Tire recapping 			C 	C 	P 							
Truck service station 				P 	P 				C 			
Upholstery shop 			P 	C 	P 							
COMMUNICATIONS 
Communications equipment building 				P 	P 			C 				
Communications substation 		C 										
Microwave relay structure 				C 	P 							
Telephone booth, temporary or permanent 	C 			P 	P 	P 					C 	
Telegraph office 		P 										
Newspaper office 		P 		P 	P 						P 	
Newspaper printing 			P 									
DESIGN 
Buildings over two stories in height 	C 	C 									C 	
FINANCIAL 
Accounting office 	P 		C 								P 	
Banks and savings and loan institutions 	P 	P 		P 	P 						P 	
Employee credit unions 	P 	P 									P 	
Security brokers, dealers, and flotation companies 	P 	P 									P 	
HOTELS AND MOTELS 
Apartment hotels 	P 	P 	P 									
Hotels 		P 							P 			
Motels 		P 	P 						P 			
INSTITUTIONAL AND EDUCATIONAL 
Art galleries 	P 	P 						P 				
Church 	P 	C 						C 				
Club or lodge, private 		C 										
Institution of a philanthropic nature (except correctional and mental) 	P 	P 										
Lodge, club, or fraternal organization 	P 	P 						P 				
Museum 	P 	P 						P 				
School, private and parochial 	P 	P 										
School, public 								P 				
Trade and professional school 		C 										
MANUFACTURING, HEAVY 
Acetylene gas manufacture or storage 					P 							
Acid manufacture 					P 							
Aircraft factory 					P 							
Alcohol distillation, including wineries and breweries, when not connected with adequate public sewers 					P 							
Alcohol fertilizer, bulk sales and storage 					P 							
Aluminum foundry 					P 							
Ammonia bleaching powder or chlorine manufacture 					P 							
Animal and poultry slaughtering or packing 					P 							
Asphaltic and asphaltic concrete, mixing or batching plants 					P 							
Automobile wrecking, junk, rag, or scrap iron storage or baling 					P 							
Blast furnace or coke oven 					P 							
Bone, coal, or wood distillation 					P 							
Brick or tile products manufacture 					P 							
Building materials, concrete, and cement products 					P 							
Cement, lime, gypsum, potash, or plaster of paris manufacture 					P 							
Cinder and cinder block manufacturing 					P 							
Clay and clay products manufacturing 					P 							
Drop forge industries manufacturing forgings with power hammers 					P 							
Dumping, refuse 					P 							
Explosives manufacturing or storage 					P 							
Fat rendering, tallow, grease, or lard manufacture or refining 					P 							
Fertilizer (inorganic), compounding or dried inorganic materials 					P 							
Fish smoking, curing or canning 					P 							
Fungicides manufacturing or processing 					P 							
Garbage, offal, dead animal, or refuse incineration, reduction, or dumping 					P 							
Glass blowing (industrial), and glass bottle production 					P 							
Glass manufacturing 					P 							
Glue manufacturing 					P 							
Insecticides manufacturing (flammable type) 					P 							
Iron, steel, brass or copper foundry or fabrication plant, including roller mill or boiler works 					P 							
Lamp black manufacture, including stove or shoe polish information 					P 							
Manufacturing 					P 							
Automotive 					P 							
Machinery shop 					P 							
Manufacturing compounding assembly from, or treatment of, certain previously prepared articles or materials 5 					P 							
Oilcloth or linoleum manufacturing 					P 							
Ore reduction, including refining and smelting of metals 					P 							
Paint, pigments, enamels, lacquers, putty, thinner, varnishes, whiting, wood fillers, stains manufacturing 					P 							
Petroleum refining or petroleum product manufacture or storage, including gas and asphalt 					P 							
Plastic manufacture 					P 							
Railroad repair shops 					P 							
Rubber or gutta-percha manufacture 					P 							
Salt works 					P 							
Sand blasting 					P 							
Sawmills 					P 							
Soap manufacturing 					P 							
Soda and compound manufacturing 					P 							
Syrup and grape sugar manufacture 					P 							
Tanning, curing, or storing of rawhides or skins 					P 							
Used materials yard, organic fertilizer, bulk sales and storage 					P 							
MANUFACTURING, .LIGHT 
Any manufacturing use or industrial development that utilizes, processes, or produces offensive, obnoxious, or hazardous materials 				C 	P 							
Fabrication 				P 	P 							
Ice and cold storage plants 				P 	P 							
Manufacturing 				P 	P 							
Meat packing and processing 				C 	P 							
Poultry processing 				C 	P 							
Punch presses and punch presses over 20 tons 												
Processing 				P 	P 							
Used materials yard 				C 	P 							
Wholesale lumber yard 				C 	P 							
MEDICAL FACILITIES AND SERVICES 
Animal hospitals and shelters 				P 	P 							
Clinic 		C 										
Hospital 	P 	C 										
Laboratory (biological, dental, medical, optometrical) 	P 	C 										
Municipal health and medical facilities 								C 				
Nursing and convalescent homes or hospitals 		C 										
Optometrical clinic 	P 	P 										
Prescription pharmacy 	C 											
Veterinary Hospital 	C 6 	P 										
OFFICES 
Administrative 	P 	P 		P 	P 						P 	
Business 	P 7 	P 7 		P 8 	P 8 						P 	
General 	P 7 	P 7 		P 	P 						P 	
Medical 	P 7 	P 7 		P 	P 						P 	
Professional 	P 7 	P 7 	P 	P 	P 						P 	
Research 				P 8 	P 8 							
Real estate office 			P 								P 	
MEDIA FACILITIES AND SERVICES 
Artist studios 	P 	P 									P 	
Photographic studios 	P 	P 									P 	
Radio and television broadcasting studios 	P 	C 		P 	P 						C 	
Music, dance, art, and vocal studios 		P 									P 	
PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES 
City, County, or State and federal offices 								P 				
Civic centers 								P 				
Municipal equipment or storage yard 								P 				
Public child day care centers 								C 				
Jail 								C 				
Library 	P 	P 						P 			C 	
Police or fire station 								P 				
Post Office substation 	C 										C 	
Post Office 			P 								C 	
Public grounds and buildings 		C 						P 				
PARCEL DELIVERY SERVICES/PARCEL DISTRIBUTION (UPS, Federal Express, etc.) 			P 	P 								
PHOTOCOPY SERVICES/DESKTOP PUBLISHING 												
-With printing press 		P 	P 	P 								
-Without printing press 		P 	P 	P 								
-Commercial Photographers studio 		P 	P 	P 							P 	
-Photography Labs (developing printing — no retail on site) 		P 	P 	P 								
-Photography Labs (developing printing with retail on site) 		P 	P 	P 							P 	
-Retail drop off and pick up 		P 	P 	P 							P 	
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT, AND TOURISM FACILITIES 
Auditorium 		C 										
Bowling alley 		C 	P 									
Carnival 		T 	T 	T 	T 			T 	T 	T 		
Community recreation building and uses 								P 			C 	
Drive-in theaters 				C 	P 							
Exhibit hall 	C 	P 									C 	
Fair, rodeo, or festival ground 								C 				
Movie theater 			P 									
Park or playground 								P 				
Pool hall 			C 									
Skating rink 			P 									
Swimming pool, public 								P 				
Tennis court 								P 				
Theater 		P 	C 	P 								
RESIDENTIAL 
Caretaker's residence 				C 	P 							
Home occupation 	P 	P 					P 					
Homeless shelters and transitional housing 			C 	C 								
Mobilehome or recreational vehicle park 				C 	P 							
Multiple-family dwelling 		C 	P 									
Nonresidential use located in an existing residential structure, when there is a change in exterior appearance of said structure 	C 											
Planned unit development 				C 	P 							
Residential alcohol/substance abuse treatment faculty (6 or fewer) 		C 	C 									
Subdivision sign, off-site 	C 											
RECYCLING FACILITIES 
-Heavy Processing 			C 	P 	P 							
-Light Processing 			P 	P 	P 							
-Large Collection 			C 	P 	P 						C 	
-Small Collection 			P 	P 	P 						P 	
-Reverse Vending Machines (indoor only) 		P 	P 	P 							C 	
-Temporary facilities (i.e.: recycling of Christmas trees, tree trimmings, etc.) 			P 	P 				T 			C 	
-Household hazardous waste collection center 				P 	P 			P 				
-Storage, sorting, collection or bailing of iron, junk, paper, rags or scrap (not including auto dismantling) 					P 							
TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES 
Bus station 		C 										
Public airport 								P 				
UTILITIES AND RESOURCE EXTRACTION 
Electrical distribution substation 	C 			P 	P 			C 				
Electrical transmission substation 				P 	P 							
Gas regulator station 		C 						C 				
Ponding basin 								P 				
Pressure tank, public service 								C 				
Public utility service yard with incidental buildings 				P 	P 							
Sewer and water treatment plants 								C 				
Utility pumping station 		C 						C 9 				
Water pump station 	C 			P 	P 		C 	P 				
OTHER 
Other uses similar in nature and intensity as determined by the Planning Director 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Other uses similar in nature and intensity as determined by the Planning Director subject to the granting of a conditional use permit 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		
 
1  In conjunction with permitted use. 
2  Not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area, to be used for purposes of maintaining the lot, and to contain no provisions for residential or commercial use. 
3  Within or behind the main building. 
4  Conditional if bar is included. 
5  Bone, feathers, hair, horns, paints (not employing a boiling process), rubber. 
6  Small animals only. 
7  Excluding retail sales, storage of stock in trade, and storage of equipment not used exclusively in said offices. 
8  When related to the administration and operation of permitted industrial uses. 
9  Public service only. 
P Permitted. 
C Conditional. 
(Ord. No. 369 , § 1, 4-6-2016) 
Table 17-2 
City of Huron 
Development Standards 
Nonresidential Zones 
	Administrative and 
Professional Office 	Central Business 
and Shopping 	Service Commercial 	Light 
Manufacturing 	Heavy 
Manufacturing 	Off-Street Parking 	Open Space and 
Recreation 	Community 
Commercial 	Exclusive 
Agriculture 
PARCEL STANDARDS;sup \sup; 	C-P 	CBD 	C-S 	M-L 	M-H 	P 	O 	C-C 	A-E 
Minimum Lot Size 	10,000 s.f. 			24,000 s.f. 	24,000 s.f. 		None 	6,000 s.f. 	160 acres 
Minimum Lot Dimensions 									
-Width 	65' 			75' 	75' 	60' 	None 		
-Depth 				120' 	120' 	100' 	None 		
Population Density (DU = Dwelling Unit) 				No DUs Permitted ii 	No DUs Permitted ii 	No DUs Permitted 	None 		
Yards and Setbacks (minimum) 									
- Front Yard 	10' 					10' 	35' 	25' 	50' 
- Front Yard abutting residential 	Variable iii 		10' 	15' 	15' 	10' 	35' 	25' 	50' 
- Side Yard 									
- Side Yard abutting residential 	10' 	10' 	10' 	15' 	15' 	10' 	20' 	10' 	20' 
- Street Side Yard 	10' 	10' 				10' 	35' 	10' 	35' 
- Street Side Yard abutting residential 	Variable iv 	Variable iv 	10' 	10' 	10' 	10' 	35' 	10' 	35'. 
- Rear Yard 	Variable iv 	Variable iv 	10' 	15' 	15' 	10' 	20' 	20' 	35' 
- Rear Yard abutting residential 	Variable iv 	Variable iv 	10' 	15' 	15' 	10' 	20' 	25' 	25' 
Height Limit/Stories 	35'/2 	40'/3 	75'/6 	50'/NR 		45'/3 	25'/1 	35'/1 	35'/2 
Fences, Hedges, and Walls 									
- Front 									
- Side 	5'-6' ;sup \sup; 	5'-6' ;sup \sup; 						5'-6' ;sup \sup; 	
- Rear 	5'-6' ;sup \sup; 	5'-6' ;sup \sup; 						5'-6' ;sup \sup; 	
Off-Street Parking, Commercial Uses (ratio of s.f. of parking to s.f. of floor area) 	1 to 1 iv 	1 to 3 	1 to 1 	1 to 3 	1 to 3 		None 	1 to 3 	
Off-Street Parking, All Uses Other Than Commercial (ratio of parking spaces to employees) 				1 to 2 	1 to 2 		None 		
Vehicular and Pedestrian Access To The Lot, Minimum Width 
- Via an Alley 	5' 	adequate access 	adequate access 	adequate access 	adequate access 	10' for each travel lane 		adequate access 	adequate access 
- Via Driveway Parallel to Side Lot Line 	10' 	adequate access 	adequate access 	adequate access 	adequate access 	10' for each travel lane 		adequate access 	adequate access 
 
DU - Dwelling Unit 
NR- No Requirement 
;sup \sup; See code for exceptions and further details. 
ii  Except a maximum of one caretaker's residence per industrial use. 
iii  The yard shall be equal to the largest adjacent residential yard required for the adjacent district, however, in no event need such a yard be greater than twenty (20) feet. 
iv  Nonresidential uses only. 
Table 17-3 
City of Huron 
Permitted, Conditional and Ministerial Permitted Uses 
Residential Zones 
	Single-Family 
Residential/ 
Agricultural 	Single-Family/Low 
Density Residential 	Single-Family/ 
Medium Density 
Residential 	Medium/High 
Density Residential 	High Density 
Multiple-Family 
Residential 	High Density 
Multiple-Family 
Residential, One 
Story 1 	Mobilehome Park 	Urban Reserve 
MASTER LIST ZONE DISTRICT 	R-A 	R-1-A 	R-1 	R-2 	R-3 	R-3-A 	MHP 	UR 
AGRICULTURAL USES 
Domestic crops for use of the resident/occupant 	P 							P 
Farm out-buildings 	P 							P 
Nurseries 	P 							P 
Field crops, fruit and nut trees, all if not sold on property 	P 							P 
Vines, vegetables, greenhouses, horticultural collections, flower and vegetable gardens, all private 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 
Livestock on site area not less than 36,000 sf, with no more than 4 adult animals and their offspring per 36,000 sf 	P 							P 
Produce stand, temporary 	C 2 							
Sale of agricultural products in a separate structure 	C 3 							
Water pump station 	C 	C 		C 	C 		C 	
CHURCHES AND OTHER RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 			
								
DAYCARE, LICENSED 								
10 or fewer children 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
11 or more children 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		
								
HOME OCCUPATION 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 
								
INSTITUTIONAL 								
Cemetery, mausoleum or mortuary 	C 							
Church (See Churches and religious Organizations) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 			
Education — Public and Parochial 								
- Preschool 	C 4 	C 4 	C 4 	C 5 	P 6 	P 6 		
- Elementary 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 	P 		
- Junior High School 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 	P 		
- High School 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 	P 		
- College or University 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 	P 		
Education — Private 								
- Preschool 	C 4 	C 4 	C 4 	C 5 	C 6 	C 6 		
-Elementary 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		
- Junior high school 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		
- High school 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		
- College or university 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		
Funeral chapel 				C 	C 	C 		
Hospital 				C 	C 	C 		
Library 		C 						
								
MEDICAL FACILITIES/SERVICES 
Hospitals, acute care (general medical and surgical) 				C 	C 	C 		
Sanitariums 				C 	C 	C 		
								
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS 		C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		
								
PUBLIC COMMUNITY SERVICES 
Public libraries 		C 	C 	C 	P 	P 		
Public parks/playgrounds 	C 		C 	C 	P 	P 		
Public restrooms and shelters 								
Flood control channels, spreading grounds, settling basins, parkways, park drives, and buffers 	P 							P 
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT AND TOURISM FACILITIES 
Athletic playing fields 	C 							
Carnival 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Fairs, rodeos, and festival grounds 	C 							
Country club 		C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		
Golf courses and driving ranges 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		
Hiking or equestrian trail for nonmotor driven vehicles 	C 							
Riding or boarding stables, and pasture areas 	C 							
Storage for recreational vehicles, motorhomes, travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers, boats, or boat trailers 			P 	P 	P 	P 		
Swimming pools, private 	P 	P 					P 	P 
Swimming pools, public 	C 							
Wildlife preserves 	C 							
								
RESIDENTIAL 
Accessory structure 7 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 9 	P 
Apartment 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Boarding or rooming house 					P 	P 		
Duplex 				P 	P 	P 		
Dwellings, when accessory or incidental to a permitted use 	C 							
Farm labor housing 								
-Permanent 				P 	P 			
-Seasonal 					P 		P 	
Group Homes (6 or less) 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Group Homes (7 or more) 		C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		
Homeless/transitional housing 	C' 	C' 			P 	P 		
Household Pets 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Mobilehome 			P 7 				P 	
Mobilehome Park 			C 	C 	C 	C 	P 8 	
Quadruplex 				P 	P 	P 		
Retirement or rest home 					C 	C 		
Single-family dwelling 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 
Secondary dwelling units 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Triplex 				P 	P 	P 		
Temporary accessory parking structure 			MP 10 	MP 				
Temporary subdivision sales office in a model home 	P 	P 						P 
Construction materials storage yards within a tract in the process of development 	P 							P 
Sign 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Subdivision sign 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		
Subdivision sign, temporary 		P 						
								
TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
Microwave relay station 	C 							
Telephone booth, temporary or permanent 	C 	C 		C 	C 	C 	P 	
								
UTILITIES AND RESOURCE EXTRACTION 
Storage of petroleum products for use by occupants but not for resale or distribution 	P 							P 
Administrative offices, accessory structures and storage for natural resource extraction or processing uses 	P 							P 
Electrical distribution substations 	C 		C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Elevated pressure tanks 	C 							
Gas regulator stations 	C 							
Communications equipment buildings 	C 							
Public service pumping stations 	C 							
Removal of natural resources 	C 							
OTHER 								
Other uses similar in nature and intensity as determined by the planning director 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Other uses similar in nature and intensity as determined by the planning director subject the granting of a conditional use permit 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 
 
1  No dwelling structure may exceed one story or twenty (20) feet in height. 
2  Only for the sale of agricultural products produced on the same site. 
3  Wholesale only. 
4  Not to exceed ten children. 
5  Not to exceed ten children when lot is occupied by only one dwelling unit. 
6  Not to exceed ten children, on a single-family lot only. 
7  Single-family only, not more than one per lot. 
8  Conditional permit required if the park allows overnight or short-term transient occupancy. 
9  Does not include temporary parking structure as defined in Chapter 17.03.02, Definitions of this Zoning Ordinance. 
10  Ministerial permit issued by the planning department, see Chapter 15.75.02 for further explanation. 
(Ord. No. 362, § 6, 11-16-11) 
Table 17-4 
City of Huron 
Development Standards 
Residential Zones
PARCEL STANDARDS 	R-A 	R-1-A 	R-1 	R-2 	R-3  	R-3-A  	MHP 	UR 	P-F 
Minimum lot size (s.f.)	24,000  	12,000  	5,000 	9,000 	9,000  	9,000 	1 acre  	5 acres 	6,000  
Minimum lot size, PUDs 		2 acres 	2 acres 	2 acres 	2 acres 	2 acres 			2 acres 
Minimum lot dimensions 									
- Width, interior lots 	120' 	75' 	50' 	60' 	60' 	60' 	120' iii 	165' 	60' 
- Width, corner lots 	120' 	80' 	70' 	70' 	70' 	70' 	120' iii 	165' 	70' 
- Depth, from major streets 	120' 	110' 	110' 	120' 	120' 	120' 	120' iii 	170' 	120' 
- Depth, from local streets 	120' 	100' 	100' 	100' 	100' 	100' 	120' iii 	170' 	100' 
Population density (DU = Dwelling Unit) 	1 DU iv per lot 	1 DU iv per lot 	1 DU v per lot 	4,500 s.f. vi lot area per DU 	1,500 s.f. lot area per DU 	1,500 s.f. lot area per DU 	2,400 s.f lot area per DU 	1 DU per lot 	1 DU v per lot 
Population density, PUDs 		9,000 s.f. per DU 	4,000 s.f. per DU 	4,500 s.f. per DU 	1,500 s.f. per DU 	1,500 s.f. per DU 			4,000 s.f. per DU 
Maximum lot coverage (of site area by structures) 	40% 	50% 	50% 	50% 	60% vii 	60% vii 	50% 	30% 	40% 
Yards and setbacks (minimum) 									
-Front yard 	30' viii 	30' 	20' 	20' 	15' 	15' 	15' 	30' viii 	20' 
- Side yard 	10' 	10' 	5' 	5' 	5' 	5' 	5' 	5' 	5' 
- Street side yard 		35' 	10' 	10' 	10' 	10' 			
-Rear yard 	20' 	20' 	20' 	20' 	15' 	15' 	10' 	10' 	20' 
Height limit/stories, main structure 	30'/2 	30'/2 	30'/2 	30'/2 	30'/2 	20'/1 	30'/2 	30'/2 	30'/2 
Height limit/stories, accessory structures 	12'/1 	12'/1 	12'/1 	12'/1 	12'/1 	12'/1 		12'/1 	12'/1 
Minimum distance between separate structures 		10' ix 	10' ix 	10' 	10' 				10' ix 
- Side to side 		10' ix 	10' ix 	10' 	10' 		10' 		10' ix 
- Rear to side 		15' ix 	15' ix 	15' 	15' 				15' ix 
- Front to side 		10' ix 	10' ix 	10' 	10' 				10' ix 
- Front to rear 		20' ix 	20' ix 	20' 	20' 				20' ix 
- Front to front 		25' ix 	25' ix 	25' 	25' 				25' ix 
- Front to front with drive-thru 		30' ix 	30' ix 	30' 	30' 				30' ix 
Minimum distance between structure housing livestock or poultry and nearest structure used for human habitation 	30' x 	Not allowed 	Not allowed 	Not allowed 	Not allowed 	Not allowed 	Not allowed 	30' x 	Not allowed 
Minimum distance between accessory structures and any other building 		6' 	6' 	6' 			10' 		6' 
Minimum distance between mobilehomes 									
- Side to side, end to end, end to side 							10' 		
- Separated by access roads 							36' 		
Fence, wall or hedge height 							xi 		
- Corner cut-off area, streets or highway 	30' 	30' 	30' 	30' 	30' 	30' 	30' 	30' 	30' 
- Corner cut-off area, private driveway 	10' 	10' 	10' 	10' 	10' 	10' 	10' 	10' 	10' 
- On or to the rear of front yard setback 	6' 	6' 	6' 	6' 	6' 	6' 	6' 	6' 	6' 
- Within front yard setback 	3' 	3' 	3' 	3' 	3' 	3' 	3' 	3' 	3' 
- Within side yard setback 	6' 	6' 	6' 	6' 	6' 	6' 	6' 	6' 	6' 
- Within rear yard setback 	6' 	6' 	6' 	6' 	6' 	6' 	6' 	6' 	6' 
Off-street parking 	See Table 17-7 	See Table 17-7 	See Table 17-7 	See Table 17-7 	See Table 17-7 	See Table 17-7 	1 space per trailer, plus 1 additional space per 	See Table 17-7 	See Table 17-7 
							every 5 trailers 		
Driveway width, side of lot 	10' 	10' 	10' 	10' 	10' 	10' 	10' 	Adequate Access 	10' 
 
;sup \sup; See code for exceptions and special cases not listed in this table. 
ii  Before any building or structure, with the exception of a single-family dwelling, is constructed within this district, a site plan shall be submitted to the city administrator. 
iii  These dimensions apply to the park as a whole. Each mobilehome space must be thirty (30) feet in width, and have a minimum area of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square foot. 
iv  Single-family only. 
v  Single-family only, except in PUDs. 
vi  Not to exceed four dwelling units per lot. 
vii  The remaining forty (40) percent shall be devoted to landscaping, lawn, and outdoor recreation facilities incidental to residential developments (see code for details). 
viii  Twenty-five (25) feet for cul-de-sac lots. 
ix  PUDs only. 
x  And not within eighty (80) feet of the front property line of the subject property. 
xi  A mobilehome park shall be entirely enclosed within a six-foot, solid block wall, with the exception of required yards, said wall shall be reduced to three feet. 
Table 17-5 
City of Huron 
Parking Requirements 
PERMITTED USE 	PARKING REQUIREMENT 
EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS (for the sale and consumption on the premises of food and beverages) 	
- Having less than 4,000 square feet gross floor area 	1 space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area 
- Having more than 4,000 square feet gross floor area 	40 spaces plus 1 for each 50 square feet in excess of 4,000 square feet 

INSTITUTIONAL 	
Mortuaries, funeral homes, and similar establishments 	1 space for each 20 square feet of floor area of assembly rooms, plus 1 space for each employee, plus 1 space for each car owned by such establishment. 
Convalescent homes, homes for the aged, nursing homes and children's homes 	1 space for each 2.5 beds or fraction thereof 
Education, public and private (advisory only for public) 	
- Day nurseries, nursery schools, and child care nurseries 	1 space for each member of the faculty, each employee, and the owner 
- Elementary 	1 space for each member of the faculty and each employee 
- Junior high school 	1 space for each member of the faculty and each employee 
- High school 	1 parking space for each member of the faculty and each employee, plus 1 space for each 8 students regularly enrolled 
- Junior college, college, or university 	1 space for each 2 members of the faculty and employees, plus 1 space for each 2 full-time or equivalent regularly enrolled students 
- Schools having auditoriums or places of assembly 	1 parking space for every 40 square feet of area within the main auditorium or meeting hall, whichever provides the greatest number of spaces, if such application will provide a greater number of spaces than the provisions otherwise pertaining to the school under this code. 
Hospital, sanitarium, or asylum 	1 parking space for every two beds or 1 space for every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, whichever provides the greater number of spaces, plus 1 space for every 3 employees 
Housing for the elderly 	1 space for every 3 dwelling units, or portion thereof, when such use is authorized by conditional use permit. 
RECREATION, ENTERTAINMENT AND TOURISM 
FACILITIES 
Bowling alleys 	5 spaces for each bowling alley and 2 spaces for each billiard table contained therein 
Dance hall, skating rink, auditorium, similar establishments 	1 space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area 
Park and recreational uses 	1 space for each 5,000 square feet of active recreational area within a park or playground 
Recreational slide 	4 parking spaces for each slide lane of the slide 
Theaters, places of public assembly including, but not limited to: charitable or public service organization, clubs, lodges, churches, libraries, community centers, theaters, museums, stadiums 	1 parking space for every 40 square feet of area within the main auditorium or meeting hall, whichever provides the greater number of spaces. In cases of a use without a building, there shall be 1 space for each 5 persons normally attending or using the facilities, plus 1 space for every 2 permanent employees. 
Vending machine, coin operated, > 100 cubic feet, outdoors 	2 spaces for each machine 
	
RESIDENTIAL 
Duplex 	1 parking space in a garage or carport for each dwelling unit. When there are 2 dwelling units on a single lot there shall be 1.5 parking spaces for each dwelling unit, 1 of which shall be in a carport or garage. If a requirement for 0.5 parking spaces results under this ratio, round up to the next highest whole number. 
Hotels, tourist courts, motels, apartment hotels, multiple-family dwellings 	1 parking space for every individual sleeping room or unit. In cases where large units may be subdivided into smaller units for individual use, there shall be 1 space for each of the smaller units. 
Mobilehome park 	1 space on a lot for each trailer space 
Quadruplex 	No provisions 
Secondary residential unit 	No provisions 
Single-family dwelling (including mobilehomes) 	1 parking space in a garage or carport for each dwelling, or as determined by the planning commission 
Triplex 	No provisions 
RETAIL, General 	
Furniture stores in a CBD district 	2 square feet of off-street parking area for each square foot of floor area 
Machinery sales and wholesale stores 	1 space for each 800 square feet of gross floor area 

SERVICE COMMERCIAL 
Motor vehicle sales and automotive repair shops 	1 space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area 

THEATERS/AUDITORIUMS 
Rooming houses, lodging houses, clubs, and fraternity and sorority houses 	1 space for each person which the building was or is designed or intended to house as a sleeping guest or member or employee 

TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES 
Airports, railroad passenger stations, bus depots, or other passenger terminal facilities 	Number and location of such spaces as the planning commission shall deem to be adequate for employees, for the loading and unloading of passengers, and for spectators, visitors and others 
17.84.010I.5 Parking or Loading of motor vehicles or motor vehicle sales 	Where 

UTILITIES AND RESOURCE EXTRACTION 	
Facilities open to the public 	3 square feet of parking for every 1 square foot of gross floor area or fraction thereof, said parking area to be within 300 feet of the property served 
Facilities not open to the public 	1 space for each 2 employees. This shall apply to the maximum number of employees on duty at any one time. 

VETERINARY HOSPITALS AND CLINICS, FOR SMALL ANIMALS 	4 spaces for each doctor in any building or structure, plus 1 space per each employee 
Facilities wherein there are areas open and not open to the public 	Total spaces required for areas open to the public times the percentage of site occupied by such areas, plus total spaces required for areas not open to the public times the percentage of site occupied by such areas 
 
Table 17-6 
City of Huron 
Signs Permitted 
SIGN TYPE 	ZONES PERMITTED 	FORM 	MAXIMUM SIGNS PER LOT 	MAXIMUM SIGN AREA (in sq. ft.) 	MAXIMUM SIGN HEIGHT 	LOCATION 	ILLUMINATION ALLOWED 	REMARKS 
Billboards 	M-L, M-H 			No requirements 	No requirements 	Shall not be located within 50' of, and facing, a boundary line with a residential district 	Illumination shall be concentrated on sign. No red, green, or amber lights or illuminated signs may be placed in such a position to interfere with or be confused with traffic signals. 	
Commercial, occupancy signs 	C-P, CBD 	On or parallel with an exterior wall or facade in which there is located a customer entrance or which faces a public street other than a local residential street 		40 	Not more than 100 square feet of any occupancy sign area may extend or be located above the top of the exterior wall or facade, and no occupancy sign may exceed the permitted building height of the district 	Mounted on, or parallel to, an exterior wall, facade, or roof of the building 	All signs in or adjacent to R districts shall be non-flashing and non-animated 	
	C-S 	Flush to building when mounted on building. Signs on marquees shall be in proportion with the length and depth of marquee but not protrude below or above it. 		100 per each building frontage. May not exceed 1 square foot for each front foot of the structure or portion of the structure wherein the pertaining use is conducted, or ½ square foot of sign for each front foot of the lot upon which the structure is located. 		Signs shall not extend over a public sidewalk or right-of-way. When parking lots are adjacent or to the rear of buildings, signs may be located on those sides. No roof signs except on service stations. 	Illumination shall be concentrated on sign. No blinking, flashing, rotating, or animated signs on the exterior of any building. 	Building frontage used to calculate permitted sign area shall include frontage whereon a public entrance to the occupancy is located. 
	C-S 	Directional (Freestanding) 		6 		No roof signs except on service stations 		
	M-L, M-H 			No requirements 	No requirements 	Shall not be located within 50' of, and facing, a boundary line with a residential district 	Illumination shall be concentrated on sign. No red, green, or amber lights or illuminated signs may be placed in such a position to interfere with or be confused with traffic signals. 	
Commercial, name of business 	C-P, CBD 	Freestanding 		100 	20' 		Illumination shall be concentrated on sign. Sign shall not be blinking, flashing, rotating, or animated. 	Shall contain only the name of the buildings, occupants, or groups thereof 
	M-L, M-H 			No requirements 	No requirements 	Shall not be located within 50' of, and facing, a boundary line with a residential district 	Illumination shall be concentrated on sign. No red, green, or amber lights or illuminated signs may be placed in such a position to interfere with or be confused with traffic signals. 	
Directional signs 	C-P, CBD 			6 				
	M-L, M-H 			No requirements 	No requirements 	Shall not be located within 50' of, and facing, a boundary line with a residential district 	Illumination shall be concentrated on sign. No red, green, or amber lights or illuminated signs may be placed in such a position to interfere with or be confused with traffic signals. 	
	C-P, CBD 		2 	6 				
	M-L, M-H 			No requirements 	No requirements 	Shall not be located within 50' of, and facing, a boundary line with a residential district 	Illumination shall be concentrated on sign. No red, green, or amber lights or illuminated signs may be placed in such a position to interfere with or be confused with traffic signals. 	
"For Rent" and "For Sale" signs 	O, R-A, R-1-A, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-3-A, UR, PF 							
Gasoline pump signs 	C-P, CBD 			1 		On top of a gasoline service station pump 		Indicating the price of gasoline dispensed through the pump 
	M-L, M-H 			No requirements 	No requirements 	Shall not be located within 50' of, and facing, a boundary line with a residential district 	Illumination shall be concentrated on sign. No red, green, or amber lights or illuminated signs may be placed in such a position to interfere with or be confused with traffic signals. 	
Institutional signs 	O, R-A, R-1-A, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-3-A, UR, PF 	Freestanding 	1 	32 	8' 	15' setback from front property line (10' with conditional use permit) 	May be flood-lighted, may not be internally illuminated 	
	O, R-A, R-1-A, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-3-A, UR, PF 	Flush to building 	1 	10 			May be flood- lighted, may not be internally illuminated 	Letter or numeral heights shall not exceed 1 foot 
	O, R-A, R-1-A, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-3-A, UR, PF 	Reader board 		10 			May be flood-lighted, may not be internally illuminated 	Shall only contain information incidental to services rendered on premises 
	M-L, M-H 			No requirements 	No requirements 	Shall not be located within 50' of, and facing, a boundary line with a residential district 	Illumination shall be concentrated on sign. No red, green, or amber lights or illuminated signs may be placed in such a position to interfere with or be confused with traffic signals. 	
Mobilehome park advertising 	MHP 			50 				Shall be located on premises 
	M-L, M-H 			No requirements 	No requirements 	Shall not be located within 50' of, and facing, a boundary line with a residential district 	Illumination shall be concentrated on sign. No red, green, or amber lights or illuminated signs may be placed in such a position to interfere with or be confused with traffic signals. 	
Name/address plates, residential 	O, R-A, R-1-A, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-3-A, UR, PF 	Flush to building 		2 				
	M-L, M-H 			No requirements 	No requirements 	Shall not be located within 50' of, and facing, a boundary line with a residential district 	Illumination shall be concentrated on sign. No red, green, or amber lights or illuminated signs may be placed in such a position to interfere with or be confused with traffic signals. 	
Parking activities 	C-S, P 		1 for each entrance, 1 for each exit 	Entrance: 1 square foot of area for each 1 lineal foot of street footage upon the subject lot. No single sign shall exceed 100 square feet in one area. Exit: 6 square feet 			Illumination shall be concentrated on sign. No red, green, or amber lights or illuminated signs may be placed in such a position to interfere with or be confused with traffic signals. 	No signs, billboards or advertising structures, other than those referring to sponsorship, availability, and charges for parking space shall be permitted. 
	M-L, M-H 			No requirements 	No requirements 	Shall not be located within 50' of, and facing, a boundary line with a residential district 	Illumination shall be concentrated on sign. No red, green, or amber lights or illuminated signs may be placed in such a position to interfere with or be confused with traffic signals. 	
Pole signs 	C-S 	Freestanding 			Subject to Planning Commission review and approval 	Adjacent to Parking Lots. No roof signs except on service stations. 		
	M-L, M-H 			No requirements 	No requirements 	Shall not be located within 50' of, and facing, a boundary line with a residential district 	Illumination shall be concentrated on sign. No red, green, or amber lights or illuminated signs may be placed in such a position to interfere with or be confused with traffic signals. 	
Public posting 	C-S 							In specifically approved areas as designated by the planning commission. 
	M-L, M-H 			No requirements 	No requirements 	Shall not be located within 50' of, and facing, a boundary line with a residential district 	Illumination shall be concentrated on sign. No red, green, or amber lights or illuminated signs may be placed in such a position to interfere with or be confused with traffic signals. 	
Signs indicating authorized testing, credit cards accepted, or trading stamps offered 	C-P, CBD 	Located together in one assemblage, flush to building, may not extend above or beyond wall or facade 	1 assemblage per street frontage 	20 per assemblage 			All signs in or adjacent to residential districts shall be non-flashing and non-animated 	Signs shall be of durable construction and affixed to the building. No portable signs permitted. 
	M-L, M-H 			No requirements 	No requirements 	Shall not be located within 50' of, and facing, a boundary line with a residential district 	Illumination shall be concentrated on sign. No red, green, or amber lights or illuminated signs may be placed in such a position to interfere with or be confused with traffic signals. 	
Subdivision signs, temporary on site 	O, R-A, R-1-A, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-3-A, UR, PF 							Advertising real property which has been subdivided for purposes of sale or lease 
 
Table 17-7 
City of Huron 
Off-Street Parking Standards 
	Residential Zones and Residentially-Developed Property 	Nonresidential Zones (Excluding Residentially-Developed Property) 
Parking and Storage Options 	Vehicles 	Recreational Vehicles 	All Vehicles Incapable of Movement Under Their Own Power 	Vehicles 	Recreational Vehicles 	All Vehicles Incapable of Movement Under Their Own Power 
Stored or parked in an entirely enclosed space or carport 	P 	P 	P 1 	P 	P 	P 
Stored or parked in an otherwise lawful manner in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or a junkyard. 	! 	! 	! 	P 	P 	P 
Stored or parked on a lot pursuant to an approval granted by the City of Huron for that purpose, in connection with the operation of a lawfully-conducted business. 	! 	! 	! 	P 	P 	P 
Stored or parked in a rear yard enclosed by a solid wall 2 or fence not less than 5 nor more than 6 feet high, or in an entirely enclosed area. The fence or wall shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with applicable development standards for fences and walls. 	P 	P 3 	P 	P 	P 	P 
Temporarily (10 days or less) stored or parked on a paved driveway connecting a garage or carport with a public or private street for the purposes of loading/ unloading. 	P 	P 	! 	P 	P 	! 
Stored or parked on any unpaved surface, except as permitted above. 	! 	! 	! 	! 	! 	! 
 
R = Required 
P = Permitted 
! = Prohibited 
1  Not required, but permitted, in the R-A zone. 
2  Where no wall is required along a boundary of an area covered by this section, there shall be a concrete curb or timber barrier not less than six inches high. 
3  Applies to all R zones except R-A. 
Appendix A 
  
NOTICE OF FAIR HOUSING ACCOMMODATION 
PROCEDURES FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES 
  
THIS IS NOT A COMPREHENSIVE EXPLANATION OF YOUR RIGHTS UNDER THE FEDERAL FAIR HOUSING AMENDMENTS ACT. 
  
You may request a reasonable accommodation to rules, policies, practices and procedures for the siting, development and use of housing, including housing related services or facilities, if you meet all of the following: 
• you have a disability* or the housing is for people with disabilities; 
• you may need a reasonable accommodation to existing rules and regulations to have equal opportunity to housing AND; 
• your request for accommodation would not be an undue burden on the city or county. 
  
If you believe that you satisfy the above criteria and are entitled to a reasonable accommodation under the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, you may obtain a Fair Housing Accommodation Request form from the front desk. If you need assistance in applying for a reasonable accommodation, the Department will assist you. 
* The Fair Housing Act defines "disability" as any of the following: a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities; a record of having such an impairment or; being regarding has having such an impairment. The Fair Housing Act does not protect individuals currently using illegal substances, unless they have a separate disability. 
Appendix B 
  
FAIR HOUSING ACCOMMODATION REQUEST 
EXPLANATION OF RIGHTS UNDER THE FAIR HOUSING AMENDMENTS ACT 
  
Before completing the request for a reasonable accommodation, below, please read the following information about who is protected by the Fair Housing Amendments Act and what accommodation may be available under the law. This is not a comprehensive explanation of your rights under the Fair Housing Amendments Act. 
  
Do the protections of the Fair Housing Amendments Act apply to me? 
You are protected by the Fair Housing Amendments Act if you have a disability or the housing is for people with disabilities. "Disability" means any one of the following: a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities or a record of having such an impairment or being regarded by others as having such an impairment. The Fair Housing Amendments Act does not protect an individual currently using illegal substances, unless that person has a separate disability. 
  
What kind of accommodation may I request under the Fair Housing Amendments Act? 
If you have a disability or the housing is for people with disabilities, the Fair Housing Amendments Act requires that the city or county provide you with reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices and procedures that may be necessary for people with disabilities to have equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. More specifically, the city or county must provide you with reasonable accommodation in decisions and procedures regulating the siting, funding, development or use of housing, including housing related services or facilities. 
  
How do I request reasonable accommodation from the City or County? 
To make a request for reasonable accommodation, answer the questions on the attached one page request form, sign and date the form and return it to the Department. If you need help in answering the questions on the request form, you may ask for assistance from the Department. Your accommodation request will be reviewed by the designee who will issue a written decision on your request within thirty (30) days of the date of the request. If the designee does not issue a written decision within 30 days, your request will automatically be granted. If the designee needs additional information consistent with the Fair Housing Amendments Act to consider your request, the 30 day time period will stop running until you respond to the request. 
  
What if my request for reasonable accommodation is denied? 
If your request for accommodation is denied, you may appeal the adverse decision by filing a Notice of Appeal with the appeals designee within thirty (30) days of the decision. You may request reasonable accommodation in the procedure by which an appeal may be conducted. You may also contact your local fair housing or disability rights organization or legal services office for further assistance. Nothing in this accommodation request procedure limits your right to any other available state or federal remedy. 
APPLICATION FOR REQUEST FOR 
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION 
  
NOTE: If you need help in completing this request form, the Department will assist you. Please contact the person at the counter where you received this request form for assistance. 
1. Name of Applicant 	Telephone Number 
_____
	
2. Address 
_____
	
3. Address of Housing At Which Accommodation Is Requested 
	
_____
4. Describe the accommodation you are requesting and the specific regulation(s) and/or procedure(s) from which accommodation is sought. 
	
_____
_____
5. Give the reason that the reasonable accommodation may be necessary for you or, the individuals with disabilities seeking the specific housing, to use and enjoy the housing. You do not need to tell us the name or extent of your disability or that of the individuals seeking the housing. 
	
_____
_____	
6. If we have questions about your request for reasonable accommodation and you would like us to contact someone assisting you with this request, instead of you, please give us that person's name, address and telephone number. 
	
_____
7. Signature of Applicant _____ 	Date _____ 
 
PLEASE ATTACH ANY DOCUMENTS THAT YOU THINK SUPPORT YOUR REQUEST FOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION AND WOULD ASSIST US IN CONSIDERING YOUR REQUEST. 
Appendix C 
  
NOTICE OF DECISION ON FAIR HOUSING ACCOMMODATION REQUEST 
  
1. Date of Application: ________ 
2. Date of Decision: ________ 
3. The request for a Fair Housing Accommodation is: 
_____ Granted _____ Denied (See Notice below re right to appeal decision.) 
4. The reasons for this decision are as follows: 
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
5. The facts relied on in making this decision: 
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
Signature of Designee ___________ Date ________ 
  
NOTICE: If your request for accommodation was denied, you may appeal the Designee's decision to the Appeals Designee within thirty (30) days of the date of this decision. To file an appeal, complete and file an Appeal of Denial of Fair Housing Accommodation Request form with the Department. You may request reasonable accommodation in the procedure by which an appeal may be conducted. 
Appendix D 
  
APPEAL OF DENIAL OF FAIR HOUSING ACCOMMODATION 
REQUEST 
  
NOTICE: PLEASE ATTACH TO THIS APPEAL FORM (1) A COPY OF YOUR FAIR HOUSING ACCOMMODATION REQUEST ALONG WITH ANY ATTACHMENTS SUBMITTED WITH THE REQUEST AND (2) THE NOTICE OFTHE DECISION DENYING YOUR ACCOMMODATION REQUEST. 
  
1. Date of Adverse Decision: ________ 
  
2. Date Appeal Filed: ________ 
  
3. State why you think the denial of your request for accommodation was wrongly decided: 
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
4. Provide any new information, facts or documents that support your request for accommodation: 
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
5. Signature ___________ Date ________ 
