LINCOLN, CALIFORNIA - MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of
Lincoln, California 
____________ 
Published in 1982 at the Direction of City Council 
Republished in 2015 at the Direction of City Council 
____________ 
  
> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF LINCOLN, CALIFORNIA 
2019 
____________ 
Paul Joiner 
Mayor 
____________ 
Dan Karleskint 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Peter Gilbert 
Alyssa Silhi 
Holly Andreatta 
City Council 
____________ 
Kristine Mollenkopf 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Gwen Scanlon 
City Clerk 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF LINCOLN, CALIFORNIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
Paul Joiner 
Mayor 
____________ 
Spencer Short 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Gabriel Hydrick 
Peter Gilbert 
Stanley Nader 
City Council 
____________ 
Jonathan Hobbs 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Patricia Avila 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
The Lincoln, California Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1982, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of the city attorney. Beginning with the republication in 2015, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the 2015 Code were the 1982 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1982 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
This 2015 republication was under the direct supervision of Dennis Sinnett, Vice-President of Supplement Department, and Connie Hamilton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. The publisher is most grateful to Dia Gix, Deputy City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this republication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city. 
This republication brings the Code up to date through Ordinance 991B , passed May 28, 2019. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title, division, chapter and article. In addition, each title has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the beginning. These history notes can be cross-referenced to the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
As of 2015, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Beginning in 2015, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Beginning in 2015, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement No. 5, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
CHAPTER 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
 
1.01.010 - Approval of code. 
The city council finds and determines, as a result of study and investigation by the city and its city attorney, that the Municipal Code of the city of Lincoln is an approved code for adoption by reference within the meaning of Section 50022.1 of the Government Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 457B §1, 1984)  
1.01.020 - Adoption. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 and 50022.2, inclusive, of the Government Code of the state of California, the city council adopts by reference the Municipal Code of the city of Lincoln, together with those ordinances passed subsequent to the compilation of the Lincoln Municipal Code and prior to its adoption, and together with those secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the Lincoln Municipal Code. 
(b)  At least one copy of the Lincoln Municipal Code, together with the ordinances and secondary codes mentioned in subsection A of this section, certified to be true copies by the city clerk, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk at least 15 days preceding the hearing provided for in Section 1.01.030 of this chapter; and a reasonable supply of copies shall be kept there for public inspection while the code is in force. 
(Ord. 457B §2, 1984)  
1.01.030 - Public hearing and notice. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 50022.3 of the Government Code of the state, after the first reading of the title of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and the title of the code to be adopted, a public hearing shall be held thereon on the 24th day of April, 1984, and notice thereof shall be given in accordance with Section 6066 of the Government Code of the state, by publication of a notice in the News Messenger, a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and shall state that a copy of the Lincoln Municipal Code, and the secondary codes, pertaining thereto being considered for adoption are on file with the city clerk of the city and are open to public inspection. The notice shall contain a description sufficient to give notice to interested persons of the purpose of the code to be adopted by reference and the subject matter thereof. The city council finds and determines that the following is a sufficient description to be incorporated in the notice to give notice to interested persons of the purpose of the code and the subject matter thereof: 
A municipal code entitled "Lincoln Municipal Code" comprising all general ordinances of the City of Lincoln up to and including Ordinance No. 420B, passed and adopted May 25, 1982, and further including Ordinance Nos. 421B through 456B, inclusive, passed subsequent to Ordinance No. 420B but prior to the adoption of the Lincoln Municipal Code and those secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the Lincoln Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 457B §3, 1984)  
1.01.040 - Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code. 
The last ordinance included in the Lincoln Municipal Code was Ordinance No. 420B, passed May 25, 1982. Ordinance Nos. 421B through 456B, inclusive, passed subsequent to Ordinance No. 420B, but prior to adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, are adopted and made a part of the Lincoln Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 457B §4, 1984)  
1.01.050 - Amendments. 
In accordance with Section 50022.7 of the Government Code of the state, the city council may propose and adopt amendments to this code and, in the discretion of the city council, such amendments may be adopted by reference as provided in Section 50022.7 of the Government Code of the state, or an ordinance may be enacted in the regular manner, setting forth the entire text of such amendment. 
(Ord. 457B §5, 1984)  
1.01.060 - Penalty where none provided. 
Whenever in this code or in any other ordinance of the city, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful, or any offense, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of said code or any other ordinance of the city shall be punished according to the punishment prescribed for a misdemeanor in the general laws of the state. 
(Ord. 457B §6, 1984)  
1.01.070 - Separate offenses. 
Every day any violation of this code or any other ordinance of the city shall continue shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. 457B §7, 1984)  
1.01.080 - Severability. 
It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and the code hereby adopted are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or subsection of the ordinance codified in this chapter and the code hereby adopted shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, sections and subsections of this chapter or the code adopted by the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 457B §8, 1984)  
1.01.090 - Repeal. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this code, as adopted by the ordinance codified in this chapter and including those ordinances incorporated in said code by Section 1.01.040 of this chapter, and those secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of this code, are repealed. 
(Ord. 457B §9, 1984)  
1.01.100 - Effect of code on past actions and obligations. 
Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee or penalty, or the penal validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 457B §10, 1984)  
1.01.110 - Effective date. 
The provisions of this code shall be in full force and effect on and after 30 days after the adoption thereof. 
(Ord. 457 §11, 1984)  
CHAPTER 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
1.04.010 - Definitions. 
In the construction of this code and of all of the ordinances of the city, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the language or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
(1)  "Building official," "building inspector," "administrative authority" or "authority" mean, as referred to in this code or in any of the codes hereinafter set forth, the city administrator or his duly authorized representative. Such codes include, but are not limited to: Uniform Building Code, Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, Uniform Plumbing Code, National Electrical and Uniform Mechanical Code. 
(2)  "The city" or "this city" means the city of Lincoln, California, a municipal corporation, all the territory within the boundaries thereof, and all territory outside the boundaries thereof over which it has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
(3)  "The code" or "this code" means the code of the city. 
(4)  Computation of Time. The time in which any act provided by law is to be done is to be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is a holiday or a Sunday, and then such day shall also be excluded. 
(5)  "Council" means the city council of the city. 
(6)  "County" means the county of Placer, state of California. 
(7)  "Health officer" means the health officer of the county or any of his duly authorized representatives. 
(8)  "Oath" includes "affirmation." 
(9)  "Owner" includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or part. 
(10)  "Person" means a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
(11)  "Personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
(12)  "Property" includes real and personal property. 
(13)  "Real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
(14)  "Shall" is mandatory; "must" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
(15)  "State" means the state of California. 
(16)  "Tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
(Ord. 411B §1, 1980)  
1.04.020 - Interpretation of language. 
All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to common approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and others as may have acquired a particular and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(Ord. 411B §2, 1980)  
1.04.030 - Grammatical interpretation—Prohibited acts. 
(a)  Grammatical Interpretations. 
(1)  Designation of the form of any gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders. 
(2)  The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
(3)  Words used in the present tense include the past and future, and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
(4)  Words and phrases not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and the approved usage of the language. 
(b)  Prohibited Acts. Whenever any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Ord. 411B §3, 1980)  
1.04.040 - Official time. 
Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they mean Pacific standard time or daylight saving time, as may be in current use in the state. 
(Ord. 411B §4, 1980)  
1.04.050 - Fees. 
Except as otherwise provided, all fees imposed under the code or the ordinances or resolutions of the city shall be established annually for the next succeeding year by resolution of the council at its regular meeting immediately prior to July 1 of each year. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the council from amending or revising the fee schedule during the year or from providing a fee pursuant to a newly enacted ordinance or resolution during the year. 
(Ord. 411B §6, 1980)  
CHAPTER 1.06 - PUBLICATION OF LEGAL NOTICES 
 
1.06.010 - Notice of ordinances. 
A summary of the text of all ordinances and amendments to ordinances shall be published in the official newspaper of the City of Lincoln at least five days before the city council meeting in which the ordinance is to be adopted, and at least one within 15 days after its final passage. The summary published after adoption of the ordinance shall include the name of each city councilmember voting for or against the ordinance. The city attorney or his or her designee shall prepare a fair and accurate summary of the substance and contents of the enacted or amended ordinance, which summary the city clerk shall be responsible to publish in the official newspaper of the City of Lincoln. The notice shall inform the public that the certified copy of the full text of the ordinance is on file in the office of the city clerk, and may be examined or copies thereof obtained during regular business hours. Except for the enactment of urgency ordinances, an ordinance shall not take effect or be valid unless it is published in substantially the manner and at the time. 
(Ord. No. 884-B, § 1, 6-25-2013)  
CHAPTER 1.08 - CITY SEAL 
 
1.08.010 - Designated. 
The following seal is adopted to be the official seal of the city: 
  
(Ord. No. 871B, § 2, 12-11-2012; Ord. 18B § 1, 1928)  
CHAPTER 1.12 - CLASSIFICATION OF CITY 
 
1.12.010 - "City" substituted for "town." 
The word "town" is eliminated from the corporate name of this city, and the word "city" is substituted in place of it. 
(Ord. 17B §1, 1928)  
CHAPTER 1.16 - GENERAL PENALTY 
 
1.16.010 - General penalty designated. 
Whenever in this code or in any ordinance or resolution of the city, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  Those acts or omissions designated as misdemeanors shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment; 
(2)  Any act or omission which is determined to be an infraction shall be punishable by (1) a fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; or (3) a fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year; 
(3)  Any act or omission which is not designated as a misdemeanor or infraction shall be punished as a misdemeanor pursuant to the provisions of subsection (1) of this section. 
(Ord. 753B §1, 2004: Ord. 411B §5(A), 1980)  
1.16.020 - Each day is separate offense. 
Each day a violation continues constitutes a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. 411B §5(B), 1980)  
1.16.030 - Violations are nuisances. 
In addition to the violations and penalties set forth in Sections 1.16.010 and 1.16.020 of this chapter, a violation of this code or any ordinance or resolution of the city is a nuisance. 
(Ord. 411B §5(C), 1980)  
CHAPTER 1.18 - ARREST AND CITATION 
 
1.18.010 - Authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Sections 836.5 and l9d of the Penal Code of the State of California. 
(Ord. 479B §1(part), 1986)  
1.18.020 - Intent. 
It is the intent of the council in adopting this chapter to: 
(1)  Provide a uniform method for the enforcement of this code and city ordinances; 
(2)  Provide that persons violating city ordinances be given an opportunity to agree to appear in court in lieu of being taken before a magistrate; and 
(3)  To provide that designated officers and employees of the city may issue notices to appear ("citations") for violation of this code and city ordinances, but to permit only sworn peace officers to physically take persons violating city ordinances into custody, when necessary. 
(Ord. 479B §1(part), 1986)  
1.18.030 - Power to arrest. 
(a)  Whenever this code or any city ordinance, including amendments to the code and ordinances as they may hereafter be enacted or amended, designates or authorizes an officer or employee of the city to administer or enforce the provisions of this code or ordinance, the violation of which is punishable as a misdemeanor or infraction, such officer or employee or his or her duly authorized representative shall be deemed authorized to arrest any person without warrant whenever such officer or employee has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a violation of such provision of this code or city ordinance in the presence of the officer or employee. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "ordinance" includes any law of the state of California which is specifically enforceable by city officials and employees, excluding matters set forth in the Penal Code and the Vehicle Code, which matters shall only be enforced by sworn peace officers. 
(Ord. 479B §1(part), 1986)  
1.18.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. 911B , § 5, adopted April 26, 2016, repealed § 1.18.040 in its entirety. Former § 1.18.040 pertained to warning notice before arrest and derived from Ord. 479B, §1(part), adopted in 1986.  
1.18.050 - Custody authority. 
If it becomes necessary to physically take and arrest a person into custody, either because he demands to be taken before a magistrate or because he refuses to sign the citation specified in Section 1.18.050 or otherwise, the arrested person shall be taken into custody by a sworn peace officer, and no other officer or employee of the city shall attempt to take such person into physical custody. 
(Ord. 479B §1(part), 1986)  
1.18.060 - Citation—Prepared when. 
Unless the person arrested pursuant to Section 1.18.030 demands to be taken before a magistrate, as more fully set forth in the Penal Code, the arresting officer or employee shall prepare in duplicate a written notice to appear in court (a citation), containing the name and address of such person, the offense charged, and the time and place such person shall appear in court. 
(Ord. 479B §1(part), 1986)  
1.18.070 - Time of appearance. 
Unless waived by the person to whom the citation is given, the time specified in the citation to appear shall be at least ten days after such arrest. 
(Ord. 479B §1(part), 1986)  
1.18.080 - Citation—Place of appearance. 
The place specified in the citation to appear in court shall be either: 
(1)  Before a judge in the judicial district in which the offense is alleged to have been committed; or 
(2)  Before an officer authorized by the court to receive a deposit of bail. 
(Ord. 479B §1(part), 1986)  
1.18.090 - Citation—Issuance. 
The officer or employee making the arrest shall deliver one copy of the citation to the arrested person, and the arrested person, in order to secure release, must give his written promise to appear in court by signing the duplicate citation which shall be retained by the officer or employee. Thereupon, the arresting officer shall forthwith release the person from arrest. The officer shall, as soon as practicable, file the duplicate citation with the magistrate specified in the citation. 
(Ord. 479B §1(part), 1986)  
1.18.100 - Citation—Complaint status—Plea. 
Whenever a citation has been prepared, delivered and filed with the court, an exact and legible duplicate copy of the citation, when filed with the magistrate in lieu of a verified complaint, shall be filed in conformity with the requirements of the Penal Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 479B §1(part), 1986)  
1.18.110 - Failure to appear—Penalty. 
Any person willfully violating his written promise to appear in court is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished according to the punishment prescribed for a misdemeanor in the general laws of the state, regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested. 
(Ord. 479B §1(part), 1986)  
1.18.120 - Failure to appear—Arrest warrant. 
When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place specified in the citation, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his arrest within 20 days after his failure to appear as promised. If such person promises to appear before an officer authorized to accept bail other than the magistrate and fails to do so on or before the date on which he promised to appear, then, within 20 days after the delivery of such written promise to appear by the officer to the magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his arrest. 
(Ord. 479B §1(part), 1986)  
CHAPTER 1.20 - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS 
 
1.20.005 - Legislative findings and statement of purpose. 
(a)  The city council finds that there is a need for an alternative method of enforcement for minor violations of this code and applicable Uniform Codes. The city council further finds that an appropriate method of enforcement for minor violations is an administrative citation program as authorized by Government Code Section 53069.4. 
(b)  The procedures established in this chapter shall be in addition to criminal, civil or any other legal remedy established by law which may be pursued to address violations of this code or applicable Uniform Codes. 
(c)  The city council finds and determines that enforcement of this code, other ordinances adopted by the city, conditions on entitlements and terms and conditions of city agreements are matters of local concern and serve important public purposes. Consistent with its powers as a general law city, the city of Lincoln adopts this administrative citation program in order to achieve the following goals: 
(1)  To protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city of Lincoln; 
(2)  To gain compliance with this code and Uniform Codes, ordinances and regulations in a timely and efficient manner; 
(3)  To provide for an administrative process to appeal the imposition of administrative citations and fines; 
(4)  To provide a method to hold parties responsible when they fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of this code, ordinances, agreements or terms and conditions on entitlements in the city of Lincoln; 
(5)  To minimize the expense and delay where the sole remedy is to pursue responsible parties in the civil or criminal justice system. 
(d)  Use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city. 
(Ord. 758B (part), 2004)  
1.20.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Enforcement officer" means any officer or employee of the city authorized to enforce the provisions of this code. 
"Responsible person" means any individual, the owner or occupant of real property, owner or authorized agent of any business, company, or entity, or the parent or the legal guardian of any person under the age of 18 years, who causes or maintains a violation of this code, ordinances, agreements or terms and conditions on entitlements in the city of Lincoln. 
(Ord. 758B (part), 2004)  
1.20.020 - Authority and fines. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this code may be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement officer as provided in this chapter. A violation of this code includes, but is not limited to, all violations of this code, the Uniform Codes adopted by the city council, the failure to comply with any condition imposed by any entitlement, permit, agreement or environmental document issued or approved pursuant to this code. 
(b)  Each and every day a violation of this code exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense. 
(c)  A civil fine shall be assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by the enforcement officer and shall be payable directly to the Lincoln finance and administrative services department. 
(d)  Fines shall be assessed in the amounts specified by resolution of the city council, or where no amount is specified: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation; 
(2)  A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation of the same ordinance or permit within one year from the date of the first violation; 
(3)  A fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation of the same ordinance or permit within one year from the date of the first violation. 
(Ord. 758B (part), 2004)  
1.20.030 - Service procedures. 
An administrative citation on a form approved by the city manager may be issued to the responsible person by an enforcement officer for violations of this code or applicable Uniform Codes in the following manner: 
(1)  Personal Service. In any case where an administrative citation is issued: 
a.  The enforcement officer shall attempt to locate and personally serve the responsible person and obtain the signature of the responsible person on the administrative citation; 
b.  If the responsible person served refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the administrative citation or of subsequent proceedings. 
(2)  Service of Citation by Mail. If the enforcement officer is unable to locate the responsible person, the administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible person by certified mail, postage prepaid with a requested return receipt. Simultaneously, the citation may be sent by first class mail. If the citation is sent by certified mail and returned unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective pursuant to first class mail, provided the citation sent by first class mail is not returned. 
(3)  Service of Citation by Posting Notice. If the enforcement officer does not succeed in personally serving the responsible person, or by certified mail or regular mail, the enforcement officer shall post the administrative citation on any real property within the city, in which the city has knowledge that the responsible person has a legal interest, and such posting shall be deemed effective service. 
(Ord. 758B (part), 2004)  
1.20.040 - Contents of administrative citation. 
Each administrative citation shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Date, approximate time, and address or definite description of the location where the violation(s) was observed; 
(2)  The code sections or conditions violated and a description of the violation(s); 
(3)  The amount of the fine for the violation(s); 
(4)  An explanation of how the fine shall be paid and the time period by which it shall be paid; 
(5)  Identification of rights of appeal, including the time within which the citation may be contested and the place to obtain a request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation; and 
(6)  The name and signature of the enforcement officer and, if possible, the signature of the responsible person. 
(Ord. 758B (part), 2004; Ord. No. 911B , § 3, 4-26-2016)  
1.20.050 - Satisfaction of administrative citation. 
Upon receipt of a citation, the responsible person must do the following: 
(1)  Pay the fine to the city within 15 days from the correction date of the administrative citation. All fines assessed shall be payable to the Lincoln finance and administrative services department. Payment of a fine shall not excuse or discharge the failure to correct the violation(s) nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city. 
(2)  Remedy the violation(s), if the violation(s) is of such a nature that it can be remedied. If the violation(s) is corrected before the date provided on the citation, no fine shall be imposed. If the responsible person fails to correct the violation(s), subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same violation(s). The amount of the fine for failure to correct the violation shall increase at a rate specified in this chapter or by ordinance. 
(Ord. 758B (part), 2004)  
1.20.060 - Appeal of administrative citation. 
Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation of this code or that he or she is the responsible person by completing a request for hearing form and returning it to the city within ten days from the date of the administrative citation, together with an advanced deposit of the fine. Any administrative citation fine which has been deposited shall be refunded if it is determined, after a hearing that the person charged in the administrative citation was not responsible for the violation(s) or that there was no violation(s) as charged in the administrative citation. 
(Ord. 758B (part), 2004; Ord. No. 911B , § 4, 4-26-2016)  
1.20.070 - Hearing officer(s). 
The Lincoln city manager shall designate the hearing officer(s) for the administrative citation hearings under this chapter. The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of the hearing officer(s), if any, shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the amount of administrative citation fines upheld by the hearing officer(s). 
(Ord. 758B (part), 2004)  
1.20.080 - Hearing procedure. 
(a)  No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a hearing officer(s) shall be held unless and until a request for hearing form has been completed and submitted, and, the fine has been deposited in advance. 
(b)  A hearing before the hearing officer(s) shall be set for a date that is not less than 15 and not more than 60 days from the date that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)  The hearing officer(s) shall only consider evidence that is relevant to whether the violation(s) occurred and whether the responsible person has caused or maintained the violation(s) of this code on the date(s) specified in the administrative citation. 
(d)  The responsible person contesting the administrative citation shall be given the opportunity to testify and present witnesses and evidence concerning the administrative citation. 
(e)  The failure of any recipient of an administrative citation to appear at the administrative citation hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine and a failure to exhaust their administrative remedies. 
(f)  The administrative citation and any additional documents submitted by the enforcement officer shall constitute prima facia evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. 
(g)  If the enforcement officer submits an additional written report concerning the administrative citation to the hearing officer(s) for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of this report also shall be served by mail on the person requesting the hearing at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(h)  At least ten days prior to the hearing, the recipient of an administrative citation shall be provided with copies of the citations, reports and other documents submitted or relied upon by the enforcement officer. No other discovery is permitted. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply. 
(i)  The hearing officer(s) may continue the hearing and request additional information from the enforcement officer or the recipient of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision. 
(Ord. 758B (part), 2004)  
1.20.090 - Hearing officer's decision. 
(a)  After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer(s) shall issue a written decision within ten days of the hearing to uphold or deny the administrative citation and shall list in the decision the reasons for that decision. The decision of the hearing officer(s) shall be final. 
(b)  If the hearing officer(s) determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, then the fine amount on deposit with the city shall be retained by the city. 
(c)  If the hearing officer(s) determines that the administrative citation should be canceled and the fine was deposited with the city, then the city shall promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine. 
(d)  The recipient of the administrative citation shall be served with a copy of the hearing officer(s)'s written decision in the manner prescribed by Section 1.20.030 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 758B (part), 2004)  
1.20.100 - Failure to pay fines. 
The failure of any person to pay the civil fines assessed by an administrative citation within the time specified on the citation may result in the matter being referred to the Lincoln City Attorney to file a claim with the Small Claims Court. Alternatively, the city may pursue any other legal remedy to collect the civil fines. The city may also recover its collections costs according to proof. 
(Ord. 758B (part), 2004; Ord. No. 985B , § 6, 5-14-2019)  
1.20.110 - Right to judicial review. 
Any person aggrieved by an administrative decision of a hearing officer(s) on an administrative citation may obtain review of the administrative decision by filing a petition for review with the Placer County Superior Court in accordance with the timelines and provisions as set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4. 
(Ord. 758B (part), 2004)  
1.20.120 - Notices. 
(a)  The administrative citation and all notices to be given by this chapter shall be served on the responsible person in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Failure to receive any notice specified in this chapter does not affect the validity of proceedings conducted hereunder. 
(Ord. 758B (part), 2004)  
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL  
CHAPTER 2.04 - COUNCIL MEETINGS—PROCEDURAL RULES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 898B , § 1, adopted April 28, 2015, repealed Ch. 2.04 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 2.04 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 2.04 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 308B, adopted in 1976; Ord. 321, adopted in 1977; Ord. 392B, adopted in 1981; Ord. 419B, adopted in 1982; Ord. 425B, adopted in 1982; Ord. 487B, adopted in 1987; Ord. 492B, adopted in 1987; Ord. 521B, adopted in 1989; Ord. 529B, adopted in 1989; Ord. 657B, adopted in 1998; Ord. 665B, adopted in 1998; Ord. No. 830B, adopted Jan. 22, 2008. 
 
2.04.010 - Authority. 
The rules of procedure of the city council set out in this chapter are adopted pursuant to Gov. Code Section 36813 and the city's police powers as set forth at Article 11, Section 7 of the California Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 898B , § 1(Exh. A), 4-28-2015)  
2.04.020 - Regular meetings. 
The city council shall, by resolution, establish the day, time, and place of regular meetings of the city council. City council agendas shall be posted and mailed pursuant to the requirements of the Ralph M. Brown Act (Gov. Code § 54950 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 898B , § 1(Exh. A), 4-28-2015)  
2.04.030 - Special meetings. 
Special meetings of the city council may be called as permitted by the Ralph M. Brown Act (Gov. Code § 54950 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 898B , § 1(Exh. A), 4-28-2015)  
2.04.040 - Quorum. 
(a)  Except where otherwise provided by law, three city councilmembers, present and qualified to act, shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business at city council meetings. 
(b)  In the absence of a city council quorum, a lesser number of councilmembers may adjourn the meeting or postpone any business to a later time, provided that not less than thirty minutes have elapsed after the hour set for such meeting. 
(c)  In the absence of all city councilmembers at a noticed city council meeting, the city clerk shall adjourn the meeting to a stated day and hour. The city clerk shall thereafter personally serve each member with a notice of the time of such adjourned meeting. 
(Ord. No. 898B , § 1(Exh. A), 4-28-2015)  
2.04.050 - Disorderly conduct and decorum. 
If a meeting is willfully interrupted by any person or persons in such a way that renders the continuation of the meeting infeasible, the mayor or other presiding officer may order the offending person or persons removed or may order the city council chambers cleared and continue the meeting. Members of the press, other news media, and city staff may remain unless they participated in the willful interruption. 
(Ord. No. 898B , § 1(Exh. A), 4-28-2015)  
2.04.060 - Mayor; presiding officer. 
(a)  The mayor shall preside over and preserve order at all meetings of the city council. In the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro-tempore shall preside. In the absence of both the mayor and mayor pro-tempore, the city councilmember with the longest continuous tenure on the city council shall preside. 
(b)  The mayor or other presiding officer shall decide all questions of order without debate, subject, however, to advice from the city council and city staff. 
(c)  The mayor or other presiding officer may move or second from the chair, and shall have the right to debate subject only to such limitations of debate as are imposed on all members, and shall be deprived of none of the rights or privileges of a councilmember by reason of his/her occupying the chair. 
(Ord. No. 898B , § 1(Exh. A), 4-28-2015)  
2.04.070 - Agenda. 
The city manager, in consultation with the mayor, shall prepare an agenda for each meeting of the city council, setting forth the business to be conducted and a brief description of each item of business. Agendas of all city council meetings shall be prepared and posted consistent with the Ralph M. Brown Act (Gov. Code § 54950 et seq.). The order of business of the city council shall be as specified in the agenda and may include, without limitation, any public presentations, an opportunity for citizens to address the city council, a consent agenda, public hearings, general business, and potential action items, informational items, consideration of city council resolutions and ordinances, city councilmember committee and other reports, and an opportunity for city councilmembers to request items to be placed on future agendas (city council-initiated business). The order of business of any agenda may be changed at any time by a majority vote of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 898B , § 1(Exh. A), 4-28-2015)  
2.04.080 - Minutes; preparation. 
(a)  The minutes of the city council shall be kept by the city clerk and shall be neatly typewritten in a book kept for that purpose, with a record of each particular type of business transacted set off in paragraphs; provided, that the city clerk shall be required to make a record only of such business as was actually passed upon by a vote of the city council, and shall not be required to record any remarks of city councilmembers or of any other person except at the special request of a member of the city council; provided further, that a record shall be made of the names and addresses of persons addressing the city council, if provided, the title of the subject matter to which their remarks related and whether the person spoke in support of or in opposition to such matter. 
(b)  The city clerk shall present a draft of the minutes to the city council for review and approval at a city council meeting following the preparation of the draft minutes by the clerk. 
(Ord. No. 898B , § 1(Exh. A), 4-28-2015)  
2.04.090 - Public addressing the city council. 
(a)  Members of the public may address the city council consistent with the Ralph M. Brown Act (Gov. Code § 54950 et seq.). The presiding officer may limit comments, testimony or debate on any matter before the city council in order to provide reasonable time for all interested parties to be heard. However, members of the public addressing the city council on any item shall generally have at least three minutes to address the city council, unless modified by the presiding officer. 
(b)  Whenever any group of persons wishes to address the city council on the same subject matter, it shall be proper for the presiding officer to request that a spokesperson be chosen by the group to address the city council and, in case additional matters are to be presented at the time by any member of such group, to limit the number of persons so addressing the city council so as to avoid unnecessary repetitions. 
(Ord. No. 898B , § 1(Exh. A), 4-28-2015)  
2.04.100 - Motion procedure. 
The making and handling of motions shall be governed by the presiding officer, subject to the provisions of the Chart of Procedure, attached to this chapter as Appendix A. The Chart of Procedure, attached to this chapter as Appendix A, shall govern the order and precedence of motions unless otherwise required by law. 
(Ord. No. 898B , § 1(Exh. A), 4-28-2015)  
2.04.110 - Majority vote. 
Except where otherwise required or authorized by law, passage of resolutions, orders for the payment of money, and all ordinances require a recorded majority vote of the total membership of the city council in favor of the item. 
(Ord. No. 898B , § 1(Exh. A), 4-28-2015)  
2.04.120 - Abstention. 
An abstention of a city councilmember shall be recorded where a city councilmember, either due to a conflict of interest, choice, or otherwise, does not register a vote and instead casts no vote whatsoever. An abstention shall not be considered for purposes of determining a majority vote; i.e., a motion would fail to receive a majority vote when the vote is 2-2 with one abstention. 
(Ord. No. 898B , § 1(Exh. A), 4-28-2015)  
2.04.130 - Nature of procedural rules. 
The procedural rules set forth in this chapter are adopted as guidelines to assist in the operation of the business of the city council. Nothing herein is intended to impose a mandatory duty upon the city council beyond that imposed by state law. Except as otherwise provided by state law, any lack of compliance with these rules shall not confer upon any person a cause of action against the city council, the city, its agents or employees, or any other person or entity. Except as otherwise provided by state law, any of the rules set forth in this chapter may be waived by majority vote of the membership of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 898B , § 1(Exh. A), 4-28-2015)  
2.04.140 - Filling city council vacancy. 
Pursuant to Government Code Section 36512(c)(3), if a city council vacancy occurs and a person is appointed to fill said vacancy, that person shall hold office only until the date of a special election which shall immediately be called to fill the remainder of the term. The special election may be held on the date of the next regularly established election or regularly scheduled municipal election to be held throughout the city not less than one hundred fourteen days from the call of the special election. 
(Ord. No. 898B , § 1(Exh. A), 4-28-2015) 
APPENDIX A—CHART OF PROCEDURE 
Type of Motion 	Second 
Required 	Debatable 	Amenable 	Priority Over 
Pending Motion 	Reconsidered 	Interrupt 
Speaker 
Adjourn (sine die) 	Y 			Y 		
Amend or substitute 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	
Appeal 	Y 	Y 			Y 	Y 
Limit Debate 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 	
Main Motion 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Except "table" 	Y 	
Nominations 		Y 				
Personal Privilege or Point of Order 				Y 	Y 	Y 
Postpone to Time Certain 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	
Previous Question 	Y 			Y 	Y 	
Recess or Adjourn to Time Certain 	Y 	Y 	Y 			
Reconsider 	Y 1 	Y 2 				3 
Table or Take From Table 	Y 			Y 4 		
Take Up Out of Order 	Y 					
Withdraw a Motion 5 				Y 	Y 	Y 
 
"Y" indicates that this action can be taken, is necessary, is required, is permitted or is applicable. 
No mark indicates that this action cannot be taken, is unnecessary, or inapplicable. 
1 May only be made by a person who voted on prevailing side; not applicable to "table" motions. 
2 If prior motion was. 
3 Except for request for later action. 
4 Highest subsidiary motion—takes precedence over all motions except adjourn and privilege. 
5 Must be voted unless no objection. 
(Ord. No. 898B , § 1(Exh. A), 4-28-2015)  
CHAPTER 2.06 - ROTATION FOR MAYOR AND VICE-MAYOR POSITIONS 
 
2.06.010 - Purpose and intent. 
Section 36801 Government Code of the state of California requires that the city council meet after a general municipal election to choose one of its members as mayor and one of its members as mayor pro tempore or vice-mayor. The purpose of this chapter is to set out a method to establish a rotation determining which councilmembers shall be chosen to serve as mayor and vice-mayor each year in order to avoid any misunderstanding or disagreements. 
(Ord. 674B §1(part), 1999)  
2.06.020 - Establishment of rotation. 
Effective on the first Tuesday following the general municipal election in November, 2000, the rotation for councilmembers determining who shall be chosen to serve as mayor and vice-mayor shall be based, to the extent possible, on the following rules and policies: 
(1)  The position of mayor shall be filled by an incumbent with at least two years of service—on the city council; 
(2)  Upon the election or appointment of a new councilmember, the new individual shall be placed at the bottom of the rotation list. In the event of an election of more than one new individual to the city council, the ranking of order of the new councilmembers shall be in relation to the number of votes received at the election. The individual with the greatest number of votes shall be placed immediately below the incumbents including incumbents who are reelected. The individual with the second greatest number of votes shall be placed below the first and so on. Following an election, the previous incumbent mayor shall be placed in the rotation above the newly elected councilmembers and below other incumbents, including incumbents who are reelected. Incumbents shall stay in their position in the rotation relative to other incumbents, even after reelection. 
(3)  In instances where there are four or five new individuals elected to the city council, those individuals filling positions with shorter terms remaining shall be placed at the top of the rotation list, in order of votes received at the election. Councilmembers with longer terms shall be placed below the shorter term councilmembers on the rotation list, in order of votes received at the election. 
(4)  If multiple appointments are made simultaneously, the rank in the rotation between or amongst the appointments shall be determined by a coin toss. 
(Ord. 674B §1(part), 1999)  
CHAPTER 2.08 - COUNCILMEMBER REIMBURSEMENTS 
 
2.08.010 - Finding of necessity. 
Each member of the city council regularly incurs actual and necessary expenses in the performance of city business as a member of the city council. Each member of the city council is a member of one or more standing committees of the city council which require his or her attendance in addition to attendance at meetings of the council and other boards and commissions of the city. Each member of the city council is authorized and required by the council to participate in local, county, regional and state functions on behalf of, and for the benefit of, the city. The city council further finds that attendance by members of the council from time to time at meetings, conferences, seminars and other functions of and for local officials is in the best interest of the city and actually and necessarily required for the performance of official duties as a member of the city council. 
(Ord. 320B §1, 1977)  
2.08.020 - Reimbursement authorized—Questions. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Government Code section 36514.5, a member of the city council is authorized to be reimbursed for expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of official duties. Any question of the validity, actuality or necessity of any such expenses or reimbursement shall be determined by the city council. 
(Ord. 320B §2, 1977)  
2.08.030 - Claims. 
Any member of the city council requesting reimbursement for expenses shall submit to the city on a form provided by the city the following information: the date, time and place the expense was incurred, and the amount and purpose of such expense. Such demands shall be processed in the manner prescribed by Government Code sections 37201 through 37205. Any such expenses not authorized in the annual budget shall be reimbursed only after approval of the council. 
(Ord. 320B §3, 1977; Ord. No. 985B , § 7, 5-14-2019)  
2.08.040 - Advances. 
Members of the city council may apply for and receive an advance of funds against contemplated expenses for any activity expressly authorized or required by the council or authorized in the annual budget. The information required by Section 2.08.030 shall be furnished by the councilmember upon completion of the business for which the expenses were incurred. 
(Ord. 320B §4, 1977)  
2.08.050 - Mileage. 
Officers and employees of the city shall be reimbursed for use of their private automobiles on authorized city business at the rate of sixteen cents per mile. Mileage claims shall be submitted in the manner prescribed by Section 2.08.030. 
(Ord. 320B §5, 1977)  
2.08.060 - Per diem expenses. 
The city council may determine a reasonable amount for ordinary expenses to be incurred in connection with a specific meeting, conference or other city business, and may authorize payment of a per diem amount for such expenses excluding public transportation, fixed registration fees or mileage. If a per diem rate is fixed, a member of the city council shall not be entitled to reimbursement in excess of the per diem rate, except for public transportation, registration fees or mileage, and it shall not be necessary for the councilmembers to submit an itemized statement of expenses. 
(Ord. 320B §6, 1977)  
CHAPTER 2.12 - COUNCILMEMBER SALARIES 
 
2.12.010 - Authority. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted under Government Code section 36516(c) which authorizes a city council to provide by ordinance that each member of the council shall receive a salary not to exceed an amount equal to five percent for each calendar year from the operative date of the last adjustment of the salary. The last adjustment of the city council salary became effective in 1986 at which time the salary was set at three hundred dollars per month. As a result, pursuant to Government Code section 36516(c), the maximum city council salary that could become effective after November, 2002 election would be six hundred and fifty-five dollars per month. 
(Ord. 706B §2 (part), 2001)  
2.12.020 - Salary. 
Following the November, 2002 election, each member of the city council shall receive a salary in the amount of six hundred and fifty-five dollars per month. The salary is payable at the same time and in the same manner as salary is paid to each of the officers and employees of the city. 
(Ord. 706B §2 (part), 2001)  
2.12.030 - Expenses and addition. 
The salaries prescribed by this chapter are exclusive of any other amount payable to a member of the council as reimbursement for actual necessary expenses incurred by the member in the performance of official duties and is exclusive of any other benefits provided a member of the council. 
(Ord. 706B §2 (part), 2001)  
CHAPTER 2.16 - CITY MANAGER 
 
2.16.010 - Office established—Appointment—Eligibility. 
The office of city manager is established. The city manager shall be appointed by the affirmative vote of at least a majority of the city council on the basis of administrative qualifications and ability to perform the functions and duties set forth herein. No person shall be eligible for appointment as city manager while serving as a member of the city council, nor within one year after ceasing to be a member of the city council. 
(Ord. 567B §1, 1992: Ord. 293B §2(a), 1975)  
2.16.015 - References to city administrator. 
Whenever the words "administrator" or "city administrator" appear in existing sections of this code, they shall be deemed to mean and refer to the city manager, and all sections not expressly repealed by the ordinance codified in this section and not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, referring to or respecting the rights, duties, powers and obligations of the administrator, are continued in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 567B §2, 1992)  
2.16.020 - Removal. 
The city manager shall hold office at the pleasure of the city council. The city manager may be removed only at a regular meeting of the city council and upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the city council. In removing the city manager, the city council shall exercise its discretion, and its action shall be final. 
(Ord. 293B §2(b), 1975)  
2.16.030 - Absence or disability. 
During the absence or disability of the city manager, the city council may designate another person to perform the duties of the office. 
(Ord. 293B §2(c), 1975)  
2.16.040 - Bond. 
Before entering upon the duties of the office, the city manager shall execute a bond to the city in an amount fixed by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 293B §2(d), 1975)  
2.16.050 - Powers and duties. 
The city manager shall be the sole administrator of the policies and directions of the city council and subject to its direction and control. The city manager shall be responsible to the city council and its committees for efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under the city manager's control. The city manager shall have the power and duty: 
(1)  To see that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced; 
(2)  Perform the duties of the personnel officer and, with the consent of the city council, to consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units of the city; 
(3)  To exercise control over all departments and divisions of city government; 
(4)  To work closely with committees of the city council at all times on matters relating to the jurisdiction of the respective committees; 
(5)  To attend all meetings of the city council and its committees unless excused by the city council; 
(6)  To recommend to the city council for study or adoption such measures and ordinances as the administrator deems necessary or expedient; 
(7)  To purchase all supplies for all of the departments or divisions of the city, provided that any expenditure of more than $35,000.00 shall require approval by the city council. Items specifically budgeted in the city's annual budget are excluded from this requirement; 
(8)  To make investigations into the affairs of the city, and any department or division of the city, and to require the proper performance of any contract or obligation for the benefit of the city; 
(9)  To investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the city and in regard to the services maintained by public utilities in the city, and to see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed; 
(10)  In cooperation with the city council committee concerned, to exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, streets and other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the city council; 
(11)  To devote full time to the duties and interests of the city; 
(12)  To prepare and submit to the city council an organization chart showing the plan for all departments of the city government; 
(13)  To issue on behalf of the city council all licenses and permits not otherwise provided for by ordinance; 
(14)  To superintend the construction of all public works within the city; 
(15)  To make, compile and file with the city clerk a complete inventory of the property, real and personal, owned by the city, and file amended inventories thereof at least semiannually as to stock supplies and equipment, and at least annually as to other properties; 
(16)  To serve in any appointed office or as head of any department within the city government when appointed thereto by the city council, and to hold and perform the duties thereof at the pleasure of the council; 
(17)  With the concurrence of the city attorney, to compromise or settle claims or litigation filed against the city in the amount of $35,000.00 or less. 
(18)  To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the city council; 
(19)  To draft, adopt, and maintain administrative policies and to maintain an administrative policy manual. Said administrative policy manual may contain standard operating procedures and administrative policies designed to facilitate the effective operation of the city. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2B.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014; Ord. 537B § 1, 1989; Ord. 492B § 5, 1987; Ord. 412B § 5, 1982: Ord. 400B § 1, 1981; Ord. 397B § 5, 1981; Ord. 395B § 1, 1981; Ord. 293B § 3, 1975) 
(Ord. No. 976B , § 6, 9-25-2018)  
2.16.060 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. 911B , § 6, adopted April 26, 2016, repealed § 2.16.060 in its entirety. Former § 2.16.060 pertained to ex officio membership in boards and commissions and derived from Ord. 293B § 4, adopted in 1975.  
2.16.070 - Cooperation of other officers. 
It shall be the duty of all officers, including the city clerk, city treasurer and city attorney, to cooperate with and assist the city administrator in administering the affairs of the city most efficiently, economically and harmoniously, so far as may be consistent with the duties of those offices as prescribed by law and the ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. 293B § 5, 1975)  
2.16.080 - Compensation. 
The city administrator shall receive such compensation, and shall be entitled to such reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties, as the city council determines from time to time by resolution; provided, that no such reimbursement shall be made except upon approval by the city council of an itemized claim for such expenses. 
(Ord. 293B § 6, 1975)  
2.16.090 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 976B , § 5, adopted September 25, 2018, repealed § 3.16.090, which pertained to residency and derived from Ord. 293B § 7, 1975.  
2.16.100 - Building official capacity. 
The city manager or the manager's designee is appointed the building official for the city. 
(Ord. 802B § 1, 2006: Ord. 293B § 8, 1975)  
CHAPTER 2.17 - CITY ATTORNEY 
 
2.17.010 - Office established. 
(1)  The Office of City Attorney is established. The office of the city attorney shall consist of the city attorney and such assistance as may be authorized by the council. The city attorney shall administer the office and be responsible for the successful performance of its duties. He or she shall serve under the direct supervision and control of the city council as its legal advisor. 
(2)  The city attorney may retain or employ other attorneys, assistants or special counsel as may be needed to take charge of any litigation or legal matters, or assist the city attorney therein; provided, however, that such employment or retainer shall be reported to the city council at the soonest possible regular meeting following the employment or retainer. 
(Ord. No. 975B , § 5, 9-25-2018)  
2.17.020 - Compensation. 
The city attorney shall receive such compensation and expense allowance as the city council shall from time to time determine, and such compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the city council shall designate. 
(Ord. No. 975B , § 5, 9-25-2018)  
2.17.030 - Appointment and removal. 
The city attorney shall be appointed by the affirmative vote of at least a majority of the city council solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications. The city attorney may not be removed from office, except for cause, during the first 90 days of a term of office of a councilmember. 
(Ord. No. 975B , § 5, 9-25-2018)  
2.17.040 - Duties of the office of the city attorney. 
The duties of the office of the city attorney shall be to: 
(1)  Advise the council, all city officers and department heads in all matters of law pertaining to their offices or departments; 
(2)  Provide legal services at all meetings of the council and planning commission, except when excused or disabled, and give advice or opinions on the legality of all matters under consideration by the council, or by any of the boards, commissions or officers of the city; 
(3)  Prepare and/or approve all ordinances, resolutions, agreements, contracts and other legal instruments as shall be required for the proper conduct of the business of the city and approve the form of all contracts, agreements and bonds given to the city; 
(4)  Prosecute on behalf of the people cases for violations of city ordinances; 
(5)  Defend all civil litigation filed against the city, and prosecute civil litigation advancing the interests of the city, as authorized by city council; 
(6)  With the concurrence of the city manager, settle or compromise claims or litigation filed against the city in the amount of $35,000.00 or less. The city attorney shall report the settlement of any such claims or litigation to the city council as soon as practicable following the final resolution of the settlement; and 
(7)  Perform such other legal tasks as may be required by the council or as may be necessary to complete the performance of these duties. 
(Ord. No. 975B , § 5, 9-25-2018)  
CHAPTER 2.20 - FINANCE DIRECTOR 
 
2.20.010 - Office established. 
The office of director of finance for the city is established. 
(Ord. 397B § 1, 1981)  
2.20.020 - Appointment of city administrator. 
The city administrator or the administrator's designee is appointed the director of finance and shall fulfill the duties of the office as set forth in the applicable laws of the State of California and as stated herein. 
(Ord. 397B §2, 1981)  
2.20.030 - Duties. 
The duties of the director of finance shall be as follows: 
(1)  Those day-to-day duties set forth in sections 41001 through 41007 and 53630 through 53683 of the Government Code of the state of California; 
(2)  To keep the council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city; 
(3)  To prepare and submit to the city council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report of the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year; and 
(4)  To prepare and submit, together with the city council budget committee, the annual city budget to the city council. 
(Ord. 397B §3, 1981; Ord. No. 985B , § 10, 5-14-2019)  
2.20.040 - Bond. 
The director of finance shall execute a bond to the city in an amount fixed by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 397B §4, 1981)  
CHAPTER 2.24 - FIRE DEPARTMENT 
 
2.24.010 - Fire department. 
The fire department shall consist of a chief fire administrator and other officers and personnel necessary for the effective operation of the department as determined by the personnel officer and the city council. 
(Ord. 550B §1, 1991: Ord. 394B §1 Art. 1, 1981)  
2.24.030 - Chief fire administrator. 
The chief fire administrator shall be appointed by the personnel officer. He shall be discharged by the personnel officer only for just cause subject to the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. 550B §3, 1991: Ord. 394B §1 Art. 3, 1981)  
2.24.040 - Officers and personnel. 
The personnel officer shall, in consultation with the chief fire administrator, appoint the officers and personnel deemed necessary for the fire department. Such officers and personnel shall be accountable to the chief fire administrator and subject to discipline or removal pursuant to the city's rules and regulations. 
(Ord. 550B §4, 1991: Ord. 394B §1 Art. 4, 1981)  
2.24.080 - Duties of chief fire administrator—Generally. 
The chief fire administrator shall formulate a set of rules and regulations to govern the department and will be responsible to the city administrator for the personnel and general efficiency of the department. 
(Ord. 550B §6, 1991: Ord. 394B §2 Art. 1, 1981)  
2.24.090 - Duties of chief fire administrator—Training. 
The chief fire administrator, officers and/or personnel training shall be responsible for the duties contained in their respective job specifications. 
(Ord. 550B §7, 1991: Ord. 394B §2 Art. 2, 1981)  
2.24.100 - Duties of fire marshal—Arson investigation. 
The fire marshal is required to assist the proper authorities in suppressing the crime of arson by investigating or causing to be investigated the cause, origin and circumstances of all fires. 
(Ord. 550B §8, 1991: Ord. 394B §2 Art. 3, 1981)  
2.24.130 - Duties of chief fire administrator—Annual report. 
The chief fire administrator shall make a complete annual report to the city administrator within one month after the close of the fiscal year, the report to include the information specified in Section 2.24.120* together with comparative data for previous years and recommendations for improving the effectiveness of the department. 
(Ord. 550B §11, 1991: Ord. 394B §2 Art. 7, 1981) 
Editor's note— Section 2.24.120 was repealed by Ord. 620B. This Section 2.24.130 will be amended in later legislation.  
2.24.140 - Right of entry—Abatement of fire hazards. 
(a)  Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection or whenever the chief fire administrator or his authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition which makes such building or premises a fire hazard, the chief fire administrator or his authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the chief fire administrator by this chapter or any ordinance of the city; provided, that if such building or premises are occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and if such building or premises are unoccupied he shall first make reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the chief fire administrator or his authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(b)  When the chief fire administrator or his authorized representative has first obtained a proper inspection warrant, no owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made, to permit entry by the chief fire administrator or his authorized representative for the purpose of inspection and examination of the fire hazards. 
(c)  The chief fire administrator is empowered to serve written notice upon the owner or occupancy of any building or premises to abate, within a reasonable time, any and all fire hazards which may be found within or upon such building or premises. Any persons so served with a written notice to abate any fire hazard or hazards shall promptly comply with the notice and shall notify the chief fire administrator of the completion of that compliance. 
(Ord. 550B §12, 1991: Ord. 412B §9, 1982: Ord. 394B §2 Art. 4, 1981)  
2.24.200 - Equipment—Provision. 
The department shall be responsible for recommending apparatus and other equipment as may be required from time to time to maintain its efficiency and protect life and property from fire. 
(Ord. 550B §18, 1991: Ord. 394B §4 Art. 1, 1981)  
2.24.210 - Equipment—Need recommendations. 
Recommendations of apparatus and equipment needed shall be made by the chief fire administrator to the city administrator. 
(Ord. 550B §19, 1991: Ord. 394B §4 Art. 2, 1981)  
2.24.220 - Equipment—Housing. 
All equipment of the department shall be safely and conveniently housed in such places as may be designated by the chief fire administrator. 
(Ord. 550B §20, 1991: Ord. 394B §4 Art. 3, 1981)  
2.24.230 - Equipment—Alarm systems. 
Reserved. 
(Ord. 550B §21, 1991: Ord. 394B §4 Art. 4, 1981)  
2.24.240 - Equipment—Misuse. 
No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any unauthorized purpose, nor shall any person willfully and without proper authority take away or conceal any article used in any way by the department. 
(Ord. 550B §22, 1991: Ord. 394B §4 Art. 5, 1981)  
2.24.250 - Equipment—Interference with. 
No person shall enter any place where fire apparatus is housed or handle any apparatus or equipment belonging to the department unless accompanied by, or having special permission of, an officer or authorized personnel. 
(Ord. 550B §23, 1991: Ord. 394B §4 Art. 6, 1981)  
2.24.260 - Equipment—Use outside city. 
No apparatus shall be hired out or permitted to leave the city, except in response to a call for aid in an authorized area, or repairs, without the consent of the chief fire administrator or officer in charge. The officer in charge of the department shall have the power to assign equipment for response to calls for outside aid in accordance with Section 2.24.270, and in other cases only when the absence of such equipment will not jeopardize protection in the city. 
(Ord. 550B §24, 1991: Ord. 394B §4 Art. 8, 1981)  
2.24.270 - Mutual aid agreements. 
The city administrator is authorized to enter into agreements or contracts with nearby incorporated communities or governing bodies of other organizations with fire protection to establish a mutual aid system. 
(Ord. 550B §25, 1991: Ord. 394B §4 Art. 7, 1981)  
2.24.290 - Insignia for members' cars. 
Each member of the department driving a car shall be issued a suitable insignia to be attached to the car. 
(Ord. 550B §27, 1991: Ord. 394B §5 Art. 2, 1981)  
2.24.300 - Driving over fire hoses. 
No person shall drive any vehicle over a fire hose except upon specific orders from the chief fire administrator or other authorized personnel in charge where the hose is used. 
(Ord. 550B §28, 1991: Ord. 394B §5 Art. 3, 1981)  
2.24.310 - Obstructing station, apparatus or hydrants. 
No person shall park any vehicle or otherwise cause any obstruction to be placed within ten feet of the entrance to any fire station or other place where fire apparatus is stored, or within ten feet of any fire hydrant or cistern. 
(Ord. 550B §29, 1991: Ord. 394B §5 Art. 4, 1981)  
2.24.320 - Radio—alarm activation. 
The radio-fire alarm system shall be activated for all reported rescues and fires. 
(Ord. 550B §30, 1991: Ord. 394B §5 Art. 6, 1981)  
2.24.330 - Vehicle Code provisions. 
All sections of the most recent edition of the California Vehicle Code as pertains to those ordinances shall be in effect. 
(Ord. 550B §31, 1991: Ord. 394B §5 Art. 7, 1981)  
2.24.360 - Peace officers to assist department. 
It is the special duty of all peace officers who may be on duty and available for fire or rescue duty, to respond to all fire alarms and assist the department in the protection of life and property in regulating traffic, maintaining order and enforcing observance of all sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. 550B §33, 1991: Ord. 394B §6 Art. 2, 1981)  
CHAPTER 2.28 - PEACE OFFICER STANDARDS AND TRAINING 
 
2.28.010 - Desire to qualify to aid. 
The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state of California under the provisions of Section 13522, Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code. 
(Ord. 526B §1, 1989: Ord. 204B §1, 1964)  
2.28.020 - Adherence to standards. 
Pursuant to Section 13510(c), Chapter 1, the Lincoln police department will adhere to standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST). 
(Ord. 526B, §2, 1989: Ord. 204B §2, 1964)  
2.28.030 - Commission inquiries. 
Pursuant to Section 13512, Chapter 1, the Commission and its representatives may make such inquiries as deemed appropriate by the commission to ascertain that the Lincoln police department's public safety dispatcher personnel adhere to standards for selection and training established by the commission on peace officer standards and training. 
(Ord. 526B §3, 1989)  
CHAPTER 2.30 - PUBLIC SAFETY DISPATCHER STANDARDS AND TRAINING 
 
2.30.010 - Desire to qualify to aid. 
The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state of California under the provisions of Section 13522, Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code. 
(Ord. 526B §1, 1989)  
2.30.020 - Adherence to standards. 
Pursuant to Section 13510(c), Chapter 1, the city police department will adhere to standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST). 
(Ord. 526B §2, 1989)  
2.30.030 - Commission inquiries. 
Pursuant to Section 13512, Chapter 1, the commission and its representatives may make such inquiries as deemed appropriate by the commission to ascertain that the city police department's public safety dispatcher personnel adhere to standards for selection and training established by the commission on peace officer standards and training. 
(Ord. 526B §3, 1989)  
CHAPTER 2.32 - VOLUNTEER POLICE RESERVE 
 
2.32.010 - Established—Function. 
A police reserve as a volunteer organization composed of persons appointed by the chief of police and accepted by the city council is established. The reserve is to serve as a unit of auxiliary law enforcement of the city, pursuant to the provisions of city ordinances and the state laws relating thereto. The members of the police reserve, when ordered by the chief of police, or any authorized police officer, may assist regular officers of the police department in the performance of law enforcement functions as designated by the chief of police. 
(Ord. 252B §1, 1971: Ord. 150B §1, 1959)  
2.32.020 - Chief of police to control. 
Subject to the provisions of this chapter and rules and regulations of the city and the state of California, the control of the police reserves shall be vested in the chief of police. He shall provide for the training of personnel in the fields of law enforcement activities that he deems necessary, and for that purpose may assign such members to various police duties. 
(Ord. 252B §2, 1971: Ord. 150B §2, 1959)  
2.32.030 - Qualifications—Appointment. 
No person shall become a member of the reserve until he is able to meet all requirements prescribed by the city council. When so qualified and selected by the chief of police, in concurrence with the personnel officer, a new member shall then be sworn in by the chief of police, and/or his representative, as a member of the reserve and shall be registered as a member of the police reserve unit and take the oath of office prescribed therefor. 
(Ord. 561B §1, 1991: Ord. 275B §1, 1974: Ord. 252B §3, 1971: Ord. 150B §3, 1959)  
2.32.040 - Rules and regulations. 
The chief of police may, by order, written or otherwise, establish rules and regulations to govern the reserve and the duties thereof; provided, however, that such rules and regulations do not conflict with those provided and set by the state of California and the United States of America. 
(Ord. 252B §4, 1971: Ord. 150B §4, 1959)  
2.32.050 - Identification cards. 
Identification cards shall be issued to each police reserve member, who must carry the card at all times. Each member shall surrender all city property and the card issued to him upon termination of his membership. 
(Ord. 252B §5, 1971: Ord. 150B §5, 1959)  
2.32.060 - Termination—Resignation. 
The membership of any person in the police reserve may be terminated at any time by the chief of police or council, for causes satisfactory to them, and members may resign from the reserve at any time upon notifying the chief of police of their resignation in writing. 
(Ord. 252B §6, 1971: Ord. 150B §6, 1959)  
2.32.070 - Expansion, diminution or elimination. 
The city council may diminish and/or terminate the reserve unit by repeal of this chapter. The chief of police may, by order, expand the membership of the reserve as may be required. 
(Ord. 252B §7, 1971: Ord. 150B §7, 1959)  
2.32.080 - Impersonation. 
It is a misdemeanor for any person not a member of the police reserve: 
(1)  To wear or to display a police reserve identification card, badge, cap piece or insignia; or 
(2)  In any manner, to represent himself to be connected with the police reserve unit in the city. 
(Ord. 252B §8, 1971: Ord. 150B §8, 1959)  
2.32.090 - Uniforms and equipment. 
The necessary uniforms and equipment for reserve members shall be the same as the city regulation police uniform. 
(Ord. 252B §9, 1971: Ord. 150B §9, 1959)  
2.32.100 - Compensation. 
All police reserve members shall be entitled to medical and hospital treatment and compensation for injury and/or death as provided by the laws of the state of California and the State Compensation and Insurance Fund of California. 
(Ord. 252B §10, 1971: Ord. 150B §10, 1959)  
CHAPTER 2.36 - EMERGENCY SERVICES 
 
2.36.010 - Purposes. 
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency, the direction of the emergency organization, and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected private persons. 
(Ord. 249B §1, 1971)  
2.36.020 - Emergency defined. 
As used in this chapter, "emergency" means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the service, personnel, equipment and facilities of this city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. 
(Ord. 249B §2, 1971)  
2.36.030 - Disaster council—Established—Membership. 
The Lincoln disaster council is established and shall consist of the following: 
(1)  The mayor, who shall be chairman; 
(2)  The director of emergency services, who shall be vice-chairman: the city administrator; 
(3)  The assistant director of emergency services: the chief of police; 
(4)  Such chief of emergency services as is provided for in a current emergency plan of this city, adopted pursuant to this chapter; 
(5)  Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans', professional or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Ord. 249B §3, 1971)  
2.36.040 - Disaster council—Powers and duties. 
It shall be the duty of the disaster council, and the disaster council is empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairman or, in his absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice-chairman. 
(Ord. 249B §4, 1971)  
2.36.050 - Director of emergency services and assistant—Offices established. 
(a)  There is created the office of director of emergency services. The city administrator shall be the director of emergency services. 
(b)  There is created the office of assistant director of emergency services, who shall be appointed by the director. 
(Ord. 249B §5, 1971)  
2.36.060 - Director of emergency services and assistant—Powers and duties. 
(a)  The director is empowered to: 
(1)  Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect; 
(2)  Request the Governor to proclaim a state of emergency when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency; 
(3)  Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter; 
(4)  Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this city; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them; 
(5)  Represent this city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in Section 2.36.020; 
(6)  In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as provided in this chapter, the proclamation of a state of emergency by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a state of war emergency, the director is empowered to: 
a.  Make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council, 
b.  Obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use, 
c.  Require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a state of emergency in the county in which this city is located or the existence of a state of war emergency, to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers, 
d.  Requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency, and 
e.  Execute all of his ordinary power as city administrator, all of his special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan adopted pursuant to this chapter by the city council, all powers conferred upon him by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority. 
(b)  The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an emergency; such order of succession shall be approved by the city council. 
(c)  The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of emergency services chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this city, and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. 
(Ord. 249B §6, 1981)  
2.36.070 - Emergency organization. 
All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Section 2.36.060(A)(6)(c), be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency organization of the city. 
(Ord. 249B §7, 1971)  
2.36.080 - Emergency plan. 
The disaster council shall be responsible for the development of the city emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency or state of war emergency, and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 249B §8, 1971)  
2.36.090 - Expenditures. 
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. 
(Ord. 249B §9, 1971)  
2.36.100 - Interference—Rule or regulation—Impersonation. 
It is a misdemeanor, for any person, during an emergency, to: 
(1)  Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter; 
(2)  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof; 
(3)  Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. 
(Ord. 249B §10, 1971)  
CHAPTER 2.40 - PERSONNEL SYSTEM 
 
2.40.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a system of personnel administration in order to provide for effective personnel management practices, to promote fairness and equality in the recruitment, appointment, retention, promotion and termination of employees on the basis of merit and fitness, and in order to provide the public with the highest quality of public service. 
(Ord. 731B § 2 (part), 2003)  
2.40.020 - System established. 
There is established a personnel system for the selection, employment, classification, promotion, suspension, discharge and retirement of appointive officers and employees. 
(Ord. 731B § 2 (part), 2003)  
2.40.030 - Administration. 
The city manager is designated the personnel officer and shall administer the city personnel system and may delegate any powers and duties to a human resource manager or may delegate the appointing authority granted by the city council to any other officer or employee of the city or may recommend that such powers and duties be performed under contract as provided in this chapter. The city manager shall: 
(1)  Act as the appointing authority for the city; 
(2)  Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules not specifically reserved to the city council; 
(3)  Prepare and recommend to the city council personnel rules and revisions and amendments to such rules; 
(4)  Prepare a position classification plan, including class specifications, and revisions of the plan; 
(5)  Have the authority to discipline employees in accordance with the personnel rules of the city and any collective bargaining agreements; 
(6)  Provide for the publishing or posting of notices of tests for positions in the competitive service; the receiving of applications therefor; the conducting and grading of tests; the certification of a list of all persons eligible for appointment to the appropriate position in the competitive service; and performing any other duty that may be required to administer the personnel system. 
(Ord. 731B § 2 (part), 2003)  
2.40.040 - Competitive service. 
Except as provided below, all employees employed on a continuous basis shall be included in the competitive service, and following the probationary period defined within the personnel rules, shall be disciplined only for cause. 
The following employees shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority: 
(1)  The city manager; 
(2)  The city attorney and any assistant or deputy city attorneys; 
(3)  The chief of police, except as further described in the personnel rules; 
(4)  Department heads who are hired after the effective date of this section; 
(5)  Employees who enter into an employment agreement that provides for discipline without cause; 
(6)  Members of appointive boards, commissions and committees; 
(7)  Independent contractors engaged under contract to supply expert, professional, engineering, technical, instructional or any other service; 
(8)  All volunteer personnel; 
(9)  All council-appointed city officers; 
(10)  Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of an emergency condition, such as extraordinary fire, flood or earthquake which threatens life or property; 
(11)  Employees, other than those listed elsewhere in this section, who are not regularly employed in regular positions. "Regularly employed in permanent positions" means an employee hired for an indefinite term into a budgeted position, who is regularly scheduled to work no less than one thousand hours per year, and has successfully completed the probationary period and has been retained as provided in this chapter and the personnel rules; 
(12)  Employees not hired as provided for in this chapter and the personnel rules and for whom the appointing authority compensates hourly and anticipates employment for a definite time period; 
(13)  The city clerk, who shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(Ord. 815B § 1, 2006; Ord. 731B § 2(part), 2003)  
2.40.050 - Adoption and amendment of rules. 
Personnel rules shall be adopted and/or amended by resolution of the city council. The rules may establish regulations governing the personnel system, including but not necessarily limited to: 
(1)  Preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions in the competitive service-including employment standards and qualifications for each class; 
(2)  Appropriate announcement of the selection process and acceptance of applications for employment; 
(3)  Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use of resulting employment lists containing names of persons eligible for appointment; 
(4)  Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists, and the making of provisional appointments; 
(5)  Establishment of probationary periods; 
(6)  Evaluation of employees during the probationary period and thereafter; 
(7)  Transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, reemployment, disciplinary action and layoff of employees in the competitive service; 
(8)  Separation of employees from the city service; 
(9)  The establishment of any necessary appeal procedures; 
(10)  The establishment and maintenance of adequate personnel records for purposes of accounting and legal requirements. 
(Ord. 731B § 2 (part), 2003)  
2.40.060 - Status of present employees. 
Any person holding a position included in the competitive service who, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall have served continuously in such position, or in some other position in the competitive service, and has completed the probationary period prescribed in the existing employee rules and regulations or in an applicable collective bargaining agreement for his or her classification, shall assume regular status, as defined in the personnel rules, in the competitive service in the position held on such effective date without a qualifying test, and shall thereafter be subject to all respects to the provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules. 
Any other persons holding positions in the competitive service shall be regarded as probationers who are serving out the balance of their probationary periods as prescribed in the rules or in an applicable collective bargaining agreement before obtaining regular status. The probationary period shall be calculated from the date of appointment or employment. 
(Ord. 731B § 2 (part), 2003)  
2.40.070 - Contracts for special service. 
The city manager may consider and make recommendations to the city council regarding the extent to which the city should contract for the performance of technical services in connection with the establishment or operation of the personnel system. The city manager and/or city council may contract with any qualified person or public or private agency for the performance of all or any of the following responsibilities and duties imposed by this chapter: 
(1)  The preparation of personnel rules and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof; 
(2)  The preparation of a position classification plan, and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof; 
(3)  The preparation, conduct and grading of competitive tests; 
(4)  The conduct of employee training programs; 
(5)  Special and technical services of advisory or informational character on matters regarding personnel administration. 
(Ord. 731B § 2 (part), 2003)  
2.40.080 - Public Employees' Retirement System (PERS). 
The city has a contractual relationship with the California Public Employees' Retirement System (PERS). These contracts provide retirement benefits to qualified city employees. There are two retirement programs maintained by the city through PERS. The first is for police and fire personnel (referred to by PERS as local safety members). The second is for nonsafety employees (referred to by PERS as miscellaneous members). 
(Ord. 731B § 2 (part), 2003)  
CHAPTER 2.41 - POSITION CLASSIFICATION AND COMPENSATION PLAN 
 
2.41.010 - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to authorize and establish a position classification plan and a compensation plan, to provide a complete inventory of all classes, to provide accurate class specifications, to ensure that each position is allocated to the appropriate class and to establish a mechanism for establishing salary ranges for each classification. 
(b)  This plan shall pertain to all employees of the city who are employed as of the date of adoption of this chapter, and who shall become employed thereafter. This plan shall not prohibit the city from contracting, reorganizing or deleting existing or future departments or functions in city service. 
(Ord. 731B § 3 (part), 2003)  
2.41.020 - Classifications. 
(a)  The personnel officer shall be authorized to approve and maintain an inventory of class specifications. Classifications shall be determined by the knowledge, ability and skill necessary to perform job functions, the criticality of the tasks performed, the independence of class functions and the level of supervision received and exercised. 
(b)  The city council shall allocate to and determine the number of authorized positions for each classification. 
(c)  The personnel officer shall be authorized to allocate positions to classifications within a class series, where classifications within a series perform similar type job duties and are primarily distinguished by the level of responsibility and the complexity of the duties assigned. 
(Ord. 731B § 3 (part), 2003)  
2.41.030 - Compensation. 
(a)  The city council shall establish the compensation, salary ranges and intermediate salary steps for all classifications. Employees shall be compensated within the salary range for each classification. 
(b)  In determining the salary ranges for each classification, the city council shall give consideration to presentations of recognized employee organizations; prevailing rates of pay for comparable work in other public and private employment, including consideration of working conditions; city manager recommendations; changes in the cost of living; and the city's financial condition. 
(c)  The personnel officer shall be authorized to determine the salary step upon initial employment of every employee, and to advance the salary of employees within the salary range in accordance with the Personnel Rules adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. 731B § 3 (part), 2003)  
CHAPTER 2.42 - MUNICIPAL SOLAR AND CONSERVATION UTILITY DEPARTMENT 
 
2.42.010 - Established. 
There is established in the city the department of the "Lincoln municipal solar and conservation utility." This department shall be under the direct authority of the city administrator who shall promulgate rules and regulations to establish procedures to implement the policies of the California Legislature in its enactment of AB 3788. 
(Ord. 430B §1, 1982)  
CHAPTER 2.44 - INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
 
2.44.010 - Purposes. 
The California Industrial Development Financing Act, Title 10 (commencing with section 91500) of the Government Code (the "Act"), has established an industrial development authority of this city for the achievement of specified public purposes. The public purposes are to increase opportunities for useful employment or otherwise contribute to economic development. The need for the establishment of an industrial development authority in the achievement of such purposes is based upon findings that industry requires the new and alternative method of capital finance that such authorities can provide in order for it to undertake the acquisition, construction or rehabilitation of facilities, the use of which will serve those public purposes. 
(Ord. 401B §1, 1981)  
2.44.020 - Finding of need. 
There is a need in the city for the acquisition, construction or rehabilitation of facilities for the use of industry which will increase employment opportunities or otherwise contribute to economic development, and further, the new and alternative method of capital finance that industrial development authorities can provide will aid in satisfying that need. 
(Ord. 401B §2, 1981)  
2.44.030 - Need for authority. 
There is a need in the city for an industrial development authority to provide industry with an alternative and additional method of finance in accordance with state policy as set forth in the Act. 
(Ord. 401B §3(a), 1981)  
2.44.040 - Authority organized. 
The industrial development authority of this city established by the Act is declared organized and shall function under the name, "Lincoln Industrial Development Authority (LINDA)," and is authorized to transact business and exercise all of the powers and other authority conferred upon industrial development authorities by the Act. 
(Ord. 401B §3(b), 1981)  
CHAPTER 2.48 - REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
 
2.48.010 - Finding of need. 
It is found, determined and declared that there is a need for a redevelopment agency to function in the city in accordance with the provisions of the Community Redevelopment Law (Health and Safety Code Section 33000 et seq.). 
(Ord. 404B §1, 1981)  
2.48.020 - Redevelopment agency established. 
The redevelopment agency contemplated in Section 2.48.010 is established pursuant to Section 33101 of the Community Redevelopment Law, to be known as the "Redevelopment Agency of the City of Lincoln." The redevelopment agency is authorized to transact business and exercise its powers under provisions of the Community Redevelopment Law. 
(Ord. 404B §2, 1981)  
2.48.030 - City council declared agency. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 33200 of the Community Redevelopment Law, the city council declares itself to be the redevelopment agency of the city. 
(Ord. 404B §3, 1981)  
2.48.040 - Finding regarding council as agency. 
The city council finds and determines that the designation of the council as the redevelopment agency will serve the public interest and promote the public health, safety and welfare in an effective manner in that this public body is best able to serve the needs of the community to implement the purposes of the Community Redevelopment Law. 
(Ord. 404B §4, 1981)  
CHAPTER 2.50 - COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS, AND BOARDS 
 
2.50.010 - Established. 
The following committees, commission, and board are established without loss of continuity: airport committee, fiscal and investments oversight committee, parks and recreation advisory committee, Lincoln library advisory board, planning commission, economic development committee, accessibility advisory committee, building board of appeals (see Chapter 15.06), and design review board (see Chapter 18.66). 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
2.50.020 - Appointment. 
The city clerk will solicit applicants to serve on all committees, commissions and boards. The city council shall screen the applications and interview the potential applicants. Except as otherwise provided, the members of all city commissions and boards shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the council. Unless otherwise prohibited by other applicable law, city employees and staff members may serve on committees, commission, and boards. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
2.50.030 - Vacancies. 
Except as otherwise provided, a vacancy in membership in any committee, commission, or board shall be filled for the unexpired term according to the procedures in Section 2.50.020. A vacancy on the committee shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of the term. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
2.50.040 - Term. 
The terms of office for all committees, commissions and boards shall be four years. Appointments shall be made for fixed terms commencing January 1. Where a mid-term vacancy occurs, the appointment shall be for the remainder of the term of the person vacating the office. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016; Ord. No. 925B , § 3, 10-25-2016)  
2.50.050 - Removal. 
No appointment shall create tenure or any property right in the person appointed. Any member of any committee, commission, or board may be removed without cause at any time by a majority vote of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
2.50.060 - Record of appointments. 
The city clerk shall maintain a roster of all appointees showing their names, the office to which they have been appointed, the terms of appointment, and the dates of the beginning and of the end of the term of appointment. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
2.50.070 - Absence from meetings without cause. 
If a member of any committee, commission, or board is absent from three successive regular meetings of the committee, commission, or board without cause, the office of such member shall be deemed vacant and the secretary of the committee, commission, or board shall immediately inform the city manager of such termination. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
2.50.080 - Absence from meetings with cause. 
An absence due to illness or an unavoidable absence from the city where written notice of the absence is given to the secretary of the committee, commission, or board on or before the day or any regular meeting of the committee, commission, or board shall be deemed absence for cause. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
CHAPTER 2.51 - AGENDAS AND PROCEDURAL RULES FOR CITY COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS, AND BOARDS 
 
2.51.010 - Meetings. 
The regular meetings of the committee, commission, and board shall be established by resolution of each respective committee, commission, or board. Each committee, commission, and board shall create a document to be approved by a resolution of the city council identifying the purpose, intent, responsibilities, and functions of the committee, commission, or board. These functions may provide for the keeping of minutes. All meetings shall be open to the public and in compliance with the Brown Act, Government Code Section 54950, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
2.51.020 - Chairperson and vice-chairperson. 
The membership of the committee, commission, or board may select a chairperson and a vice-chairperson to serve a term of one year each. In no case shall the chairperson or the vice-chairperson serve more than two consecutive terms. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
2.51.030 - Agendas. 
Every city committee, commission, or board subject to the Brown Act (Gov. Code § 54950 et seq.) shall post an agenda containing a brief description of each item of business to be transacted or discussed at the meeting together with the time and location of the meeting at City Hall, 600 6th Street, Lincoln, California, in a location readily accessible to the public at least 72 hours in advance of each regular meeting and at least 24 hours in advance of each special meeting. A record of such posting shall be kept by the clerk of such board, commission or committee. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
2.51.040 - Public discussion. 
(a)  Every committee, commission, or board subject to the Brown Act (Gov. Code § 54950 et seq.) shall establish a reasonable time at the beginning of its public meetings for public input and discussion on matters within the commission's, board's or committee's subject matter jurisdiction. Except for formal public hearings, public input and comment on matters on the agenda as well as public input and comment on items not otherwise on the agenda, shall be made during the time set aside for public comment; provided, however, that the presiding officer may direct that public input and comment on matters on the agenda be made when the matter regularly comes up on the agenda. 
(b)  The presiding officer of the committee, commission, or board may limit the total amount of time allocated for public discussion on particular items and/or the time allocated for each individual speaker. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
2.51.050 - Non-agenda items. 
Matters brought before the committee, commission, or board which were not placed on the agenda of the meeting may be discussed but shall not be acted upon unless such action is permissible pursuant to the Brown Act (Gov. Code § 54958). Those non-agenda matters for which action is not so authorized shall either be placed on the agenda of a future regular meeting of the committee, commission, or board or referred to staff at the direction of the presiding officer. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
2.51.060 - Reimbursement for expenses. 
The city council may approve reimbursement of members of the committee, commission, or board for reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
2.51.070 - Studies by city personnel. 
Upon a request from a committee, commission, or board, the city manager may, from time to time, allocate city personnel to conduct special studies for the committee, commission, or board, subject to the limitation of the city manager's contracting authority and any other limitations imposed by this code or applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
CHAPTER 2.52 - AIRPORT COMMITTEE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), adopted April 26, 2016, repealed Ch. 2.52 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 2.52 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 2.52, §§ 2.52.010—2.52.040, pertained to commission and board appointments and derived from Ord. 411B § 7(part), adopted in 1980. 
 
2.52.010 - Established. 
The airport committee ("committee") is established. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
2.52.020 - Function—Objective. 
The committee shall be an advisory body to the city council on policy issues affecting the Lincoln Airport. The committee shall create a document to be approved by a resolution of the city council identifying the purpose, intent, responsibilities, and functions of the committee. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
2.52.030 - Composition. 
The committee shall consist of seven members, with five public members appointed pursuant to Chapter 2.50 and two members of the city council appointed by a majority of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
CHAPTER 2.54 - FISCAL AND INVESTMENTS OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE 
 
2.54.010 - Established. 
The fiscal and investments oversight committee ("committee") is established. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016; Ord. No. 986B , § 5, 5-14-2019)  
2.54.020 - Function—Objective. 
The committee shall be an advisory body to the city council on all financial, fiscal and investment matters. The committee shall assist the city council in fulfilling its oversight responsibilities by: 
(1)  Ensuring correct and complete financial records are maintained to accurately reflect the total financial position of the city; 
(2)  Supporting the city's efforts to provide accurate, timely and meaningful financial statements; 
(3)  Supporting the budgeting process with review, analysis and recommendations for improvement and transparency; 
(4)  Safeguarding the organization's assets by making conservative and prudent financial planning recommendations consistent with an adopted investment policy; and 
(5)  Reviewing fund balances and reserves, and offering recommendations to ensure healthy cash flow and appropriate long-term planning. 
The city council may task the committee with additional responsibilities or projects at a duly noticed general or special meeting of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016; Ord. No. 986B , § 5, 5-14-2019)  
2.54.030 - Composition. 
The committee shall consist of seven voting members, comprised of the city treasurer and six city residents appointed pursuant to Chapter 2.50. The finance director, city manager and other necessary city personnel will staff committee meetings, but will not be voting members. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016; Ord. No. 986B , § 5, 5-14-2019)  
2.54.040 - Qualifications. 
City residents serving on the committee shall have demonstrated knowledge, experience, training or education in municipal finance, general accounting practices, budgets and investments. 
(Ord. No. 986B , § 5, 5-14-2019)  
CHAPTER 2.56 - PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), adopted April 26, 2016, repealed Ch. 2.56 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 2.56 to read a set out herein. Former Ch. 2.56, §§ 2.56.010—2.56.100, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 396B §§ 1, 2, 4—10, adopted in 1981 and Ord. 661B § 1, adopted in 1998. 
 
2.56.010 - Established. 
The parks and recreation advisory committee ("committee") is established. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
2.56.020 - Function—Objective. 
The committee shall be an advisory body to the city council on policy issues affecting the city's park and recreation programs including, but not limited to: facility expansion, creation of new programs, reduction or change in program capacity, and marketing of park facilities and programs. The committee's objective in advising the council shall be the provision of public recreational and leisure facilities and services by maintaining the city's existing park and recreation programs and developing new programs, based on public demand and the city's financial capacity, to serve the community's leisure and recreational needs. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
2.56.030 - Composition. 
The committee shall consist of nine public members appointed pursuant to Chapter 2.50. At least six public members of the park and recreation advisory committee shall reside within the city limits of Lincoln. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
2.56.040 - Responsibilities. 
The committee shall be responsible for the following: 
(1)  An annual analysis of the fee structure for rentals and use of public facilities, and a report to the city council as to any changes in the fee structure the committee deems advisable; 
(2)  Review and advise on new and existing programs, projects, and services sponsored by the city to determine if the programs, projects, and services are fulfilling their stated objectives; 
(3)  Review and advise on proposed park designs for park master plans; 
(4)  The development of new recreational programs, projects or services to be recommended to the city council; and 
(5)  The investigation into and search for outside funding sources for park and recreation programs, projects, and services. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A, § 2.56.070), 4-26-2016)  
CHAPTER 2.59 - LINCOLN LIBRARY BOARD 
 
2.59.010 - Established. 
There exists in the city of Lincoln a Lincoln Library Board ("board"). 
(Ord. 704B §1(part), 2001)  
2.59.020 - Composition. 
The library board consists of six public members. At least four public members of the library advisory board shall reside within the city limits of Lincoln. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
2.59.030 - Function—Objective. 
The board is an advisory body to the city council regarding the city's library and shall make recommendations to the city council concerning library policies and the operation and administration of the library. 
(Ord. 704B §1(part), 2001)  
CHAPTER 2.60 - PLANNING COMMISSION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), adopted April 26, 2016, repealed Ch. 2.60 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 2.60 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 2.60, §§ 2.60.010—2.60.060, pertained to boards/committees/commissions and derived from Ord. 792B § 8(part), adopted in 2005; Ord. No. 839B, § 1, adopted June 23, 2009; Ord. No. 844B, § 1, adopted Feb. 23, 2010; Ord. No. 858B, § 1, adopted Aug. 9, 2011; Ord. No. 870B, § 2, adopted Aug. 14, 2012. 
 
2.60.010 - Established. 
The planning commission is established. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
2.60.020 - Composition. 
The planning commission shall consist of seven public members appointed pursuant to Chapter 2.50. All planning commission members shall reside within the city limits of Lincoln. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A, § 2.60.015), 4-26-2016)  
2.60.030 - Nomination and appointment. 
The city clerk will solicit applicants to serve on the planning commission. The city council shall screen the applications and interview the remaining potential applicants. Each member of the city council shall be allowed to nominate one member of the planning commission and the city council may thereupon appoint such individual by majority vote. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A, § 2.60.020), 4-26-2016)  
2.60.040 - Vacancies. 
A vacancy in membership in the planning commission shall be filled for the unexpired term by a nomination by the city council member who initially had nominated that person and appointment by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A, § 2.60.27), 4-26-2016)  
2.60.050 - Duties. 
The planning commission duties are prescribed by Section 65101 of the Government Code. The planning commission shall serve as the "advisory agency" as the term is used in the Subdivision Map Act and shall consider such matters as may be prescribed by applicable state law and ordinances of the city. The planning commission shall form a five-person ad hoc theming and naming committee as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A, § 2.60.030), 4-26-2016)  
2.60.060 - Theme and naming function. 
The planning commission may periodically convene an advisory ad hoc theme and naming committee, which shall not be comprised of a quorum of its membership, for the limited purpose of assembling a list of proposed names for streets, public buildings and facilities, and parks and recreational facilities. The planning commission shall make a reasonable effort to consult with the Lincoln Museum Archives, local service clubs, and other individuals knowledgeable about the city's history in forming the ad hoc theme and naming committee. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A, § 2.60.035), 4-26-2016)  
CHAPTER 2.62 - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), adopted April 26, 2016, repealed Ch. 2.62 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 2.62 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 2.62, §§ 2.62.010—2.62.110, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 666B §1(part), adopted in 1998. 
 
2.62.010 - Established. 
The economic development committee ("EDC") is established. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
2.62.020 - Function—Objective. 
The EDC shall be an advisory body to the city council on matters related to the attraction and retention of businesses; development and review of plans, programs, and strategies that relate to job creation; property and sales tax generation; and to serve as a source of local input into economic development. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
2.62.030 - Composition. 
The EDC shall consist of nine public members appointed pursuant to Chapter 2.50, two councilmembers selected by the city council, the city manager, and one additional city staff person. At least three public members of the economic development committee shall reside within the city limits of Lincoln. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
2.62.040 - Duties. 
It is the duty of the EDC to recommend to the city council means of attracting and retaining business and generating property and sales tax. It is also the duty of the EDC to develop and review plans, programs, and strategies that promote job creation. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A, § 2.62.080), 4-26-2016)  
CHAPTER 2.64 - ACCESSIBILITY ADVISORY COMMITTEE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), adopted April 26, 2016, repealed Ch. 2.64 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 2.64 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 2.64, §§ 2.64.010—2.64.070, pertained to traffic safety commission and derived from Ord. 309B §§ 1—4, adopted in 1976. 
 
2.64.010 - Established. 
The accessibility advisory committee ("committee") is established. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
2.64.020 - Function—Objective. 
The committee shall be an advisory body to the city council on policy issues related to accessibility issues for persons with disabilities, including, without limitations, topics arising under the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
2.64.030 - Composition. 
The committee shall consist of three members appointed pursuant to Chapter 2.50. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 8(Exh. A), 4-26-2016)  
CHAPTER 2.65 - CITY TREASURER[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 985B, § 5, adopted May 14, 2019 added provisions as Chapter 2.65. Prior to reenactment, Ord. 911B , § 8, adopted April 26, 2016, repealed Ch. 2.65 in its entirety. Former Ch. 2.65, §§ 2.65.010, 2.65.020, 2.65.040, 2.65.050, pertained to hearing board and derived from Ord. 701B §1(part), adopted in 2001. 
 
2.65.010 - Office established. 
The office of city treasurer is established. 
(Ord. No. 985B , § 5, 5-14-2019)  
2.65.020 - Qualifications. 
The city treasurer is an elected official. Therefore, the only statutory requirements for the position are that of being a resident and registered voter of the city. The following qualifications, however, while not required, are desirable: 
(1)  Knowledge of municipal revenue sources; 
(2)  Knowledge of methods, practices and principles related to the investment of city funds; 
(3)  Knowledge of assessment district and bond financing techniques; 
(4)  Knowledge of methods, practices and principles related to evaluating municipal cash flow needs; 
(5)  Ability to invest the city's funds in a wise and prudent manner; and 
(6)  Ability to establish and maintain effective working relationships with those necessary to the performance of required duties. 
(Ord. No. 985B , § 5, 5-14-2019)  
2.65.030 - Duties. 
(1)  The city treasurer shall act as general auditor of all municipal finances, and shall chair and make a quarterly report to the fiscal and investments oversight committee regarding the adequacy of existing internal controls, including reporting whether assets are being properly used, fairly stated and accounted for, and whether all liabilities and fund balances are fairly stated. Once the report is approved by the committee, the city treasurer shall submit the report to the city council for consideration. 
(2)  With the assistance of the finance director and outside finance professionals, the city treasurer shall ensure funds deposited are compliant with Government Code sections 53630—53683. 
(3)  The city treasurer shall annually propose an investment policy to the city council for its consideration and approval. 
(4)  Nothing herein contained shall be construed to dispense with internal control procedures or the annual or special audits otherwise provided for under California or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 985B , § 5, 5-14-2019)  
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE  
CHAPTER 3.04 - TRANSFER OF CITY TAX FUNCTIONS 
 
3.04.010 - Transfer of duties. 
The assessment and tax collection duties, and the collection of assessments levied for municipal improvements, performed before the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter by the assessor and tax collector of the city, are transferred to the assessor and the tax collector of the county for the purpose of assessment and collections of and for ad valorem property taxes that become a lien after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and the collection of assessments for municipal improvements becoming due and payable on and after July 1, 1961. 
(Ord. 172B §2, 1961)  
3.04.020 - Offices of city assessor and tax collector abolished. 
The offices of city assessor and city tax collector are abolished as of the first day of July 1961, and thereafter all duties performed by the city assessor other than the assessing of property in the city, and all duties performed by the city tax collector other than the collection of ad valorem taxes on property that become a lien after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter and the collection of assessments for municipal improvements becoming due and payable on and after July 1, 1961, are transferred to and are to be performed by the city clerk. 
(Ord. 172B §3, 1961)  
CHAPTER 3.08 - GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND 
 
3.08.010 - Fund established. 
Pursuant to the Highway Users Tax Fund Law of the state of California, and more particularly section 2113 of the Streets and Highways Code, there is created within the city a fund to be known as the "Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund" for the purpose of receiving and expending moneys received pursuant to the Highway Users Tax Fund Law. 
(Ord. 306B §2, 1976)  
3.08.020 - Successor to earlier fund. 
The fund created by Section 3.08.010 shall be deemed a successor without interruption of the fund of the same name created by Ordinance No. 52B, repealed by the ordinance codified in this chapter. The purpose of this chapter is to revise the reference to the applicable statutory requirement for such fund, and nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to affect the receipt or expenditure of funds received from the Highway Users Tax Fund. 
(Ord. 306B §3, 1976)  
CHAPTER 3.12 - BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND EXPANSION TAX 
 
3.12.010 - Imposed. 
Pursuant to the authority of Government Code section 37101, there is imposed for revenue purposes a license tax within the city on the construction of any new buildings, or the expansion of any existing buildings which increases the floor area of the building by more than sixty percent. 
(Ord. 416B §1, 1982: Ord. 329B §1, 1977)  
3.12.020 - Rate. 
(a)  Residential Construction. The tax imposed by Section 3.12.010 shall be, for residential construction, the product of seventy-two dollars and fifty cents multiplied by the average density per dwelling unit as set forth in Title 17, multiplied by the number of dwelling units. 
(b)  Other Construction. For construction other than residential, said tax shall be one-quarter of one percent of the valuation used for determination of building permit fees pursuant to the Uniform Building Code, or ninety dollars times the number of employees expected to be employed by the use or uses contemplated by the construction, whichever is less. The tax shall be paid prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. 445B §1, 1983; Ord. 329B §2, 1977)  
3.12.030 - Use of revenues. 
(a)  The city council finds and declares that the construction and expansion of residential, commercial and industrial buildings within the city places an increasing burden on existing park and recreational facilities, and creates a need for such additional facilities. The city council further finds that other available sources of revenue are insufficient to provide such public facilities commensurate with the demand created by new construction. 
(b)  The revenues collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in a park and recreation fund and shall be used solely for the development of public parks and recreational facilities, the improvement of existing parks and recreational facilities, and the acquisition of land for parks and recreational facilities. Such facilities may include, but shall not be limited to, bicycle and pedestrian trails, equestrian trails and related improvements. 
(Ord. 329B §3, 1977)  
CHAPTER 3.16 - DOCUMENTARY TRANSFER TAX 
 
3.16.010 - Title—Authority—References to "Code". 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Documentary Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City of Lincoln." It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California, referred to in this chapter as the "Code." All references to the Code shall be as the same reads as of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter or as it may, after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, be amended to read from time to time. 
(Ord. 307B §2, 1976)  
3.16.020 - Tax imposed. 
There is imposed a tax on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements or other realty sold within the city is granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, upon the value and in the amounts specified by subsection b of section 11911 of the Code. 
(Ord. 307B §3, 1976)  
3.16.030 - Who shall pay. 
The tax imposed by Section 3.16.020 shall be paid by those persons specified in section 11912 of the Code. 
(Ord. 307B §4, 1976)  
3.16.040 - Exemptions. 
The tax imposed by Section 3.16.020 shall not apply to those entities or under those conditions specified in sections 11921 through 11926 of the Code. 
(Ord. 412B §6, 1982: Ord. 307B §5, 1976)  
3.16.050 - Administration by county recorder. 
The recorder of Placer County shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of section 11933 of the Code. 
(Ord. 307B §6, 1976)  
3.16.060 - Refund claims. 
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of section 11934 of the Code. 
(Ord. 307B §7, 1976)  
3.16.070 - Allocation by county auditor. 
Money received by the county through the county recorder shall be allocated by the county auditor pursuant to section 11931 of the Code. This chapter is in conformity with Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Code. 
(Ord. 307B §8, 1976)  
CHAPTER 3.20 - SALES AND USE TAX 
 
3.20.010 - Short title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance." 
(Ord. 269B §1, 1973)  
3.20.020 - Purposes. 
The city council declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions of this chapter be interpreted in order to accomplish these purposes: 
(1)  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
(2)  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
(3)  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California state sales and use taxes; 
(4)  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 269B §4, 1973)  
3.20.030 - Rate. 
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter is one percent. 
(Ord. 269B §2, 1973)  
3.20.040 - Contract with state for administration. 
Prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this chapter; provided, that if this city has not contracted with the state Board of Equalization prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 269B §5, 1973)  
3.20.050 - Sales tax imposed. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.20.030 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 269B §6, 1973)  
3.20.060 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which such delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. 269B §7, 1973)  
3.20.070 - Use tax imposed. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter at the rate stated in Section 3.20.030 of the sales price of the property. The sales price includes delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. 269B §8, 1973)  
3.20.080 - State provisions—Adoption. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. 269B §9, 1973)  
3.20.090 - State provisions—"City" substituted for "state." 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. 
The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "state" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury or the Constitution of the State of California, the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency of the city rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or provisions of that Code; the substitution shall not be made in sections 6701, 6702 (except the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "State" in the phrase, "retailer engaged in business in this State," in section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in section 6203. 
(Ord. 269B §10, 1973)  
3.20.100 - State provisions—Amendments. 
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. 269B §15, 1973)  
3.20.110 - Additional seller's permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit is not required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 269B §11, 1973)  
3.20.120 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
(a)  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer. 
(b)  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city, in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
(c)  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
(d)  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Ord. 269B §13, 1973)  
3.20.121 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
(a)  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
(b)  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
(c)  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes. 
(d)  The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax. 
(e)  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipt from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
(f)  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Ord. 455B §2, 1984)  
3.20.122 - Application of exclusions and exemptions. 
(a)  Section 3.20.120 shall be operative January 1, 1984. 
(b)  Section 3.20.121 shall be operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the state of California which amends Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code or which repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202 as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983. 
(Ord. 455B §§3, 4, 1984)  
3.20.130 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against any officer of the state or this city to prevent or enjoin the collection, under this chapter or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. 269B §16, 1973)  
3.20.140 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 269B §17, 1973)  
CHAPTER 3.21 - MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX 
 
3.21.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Motel Occupancy Tax Ordinance" of the city of Lincoln. 
(Ord. 658B §1(part), 1998)  
3.21.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
(1)  "Motel" means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any motel, hotel, inn, tourist home or house, studio motel, bachelor apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof. 
(2)  "Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any motel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
(3)  "Operator" means the person who is proprietor of the motel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgage in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purpose of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
(4)  "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
(5)  "Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a motel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
(6)  "Tax administrator" means the finance director. 
(7)  "Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a motel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in these regulations may be considered. 
(Ord. 658B §1(part), 1998)  
3.21.030 - Motel occupancy tax—Amount—Where payable. 
(a)  For privilege of occupancy in any motel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of ten percent of the rent charged by the operator. Said tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city, which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. 
(b)  The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the motel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the motel. 
(c)  If, for any reason, the tax due is not paid to the operator of the motel, the tax administrator may require that such tax be paid directly to the tax administrator. 
(Ord. 658B §1(part), 1998)  
3.21.040 - Motel occupancy tax—Persons exempt. 
No tax shall be imposed upon: 
(1)  Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided; 
(2)  Any federal or state officer or employee when on official business; 
(3)  Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty. 
No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. 
(Ord. 658B §1(part), 1998)  
3.21.050 - Motel occupancy tax—Collection. 
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by the ordinance codified in this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt when requested for payment from the operator. 
(Ord. 658B §1(part), 1998)  
3.21.060 - Motel occupancy registration certificate. 
Within thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in these regulations or within thirty days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any motel renting occupancy to transients shall register such motel with the tax administrator and obtain from him a "motel occupancy registration certificate" to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
(1)  The name of the operator; 
(2)  The address of the motel; 
(3)  The date upon which the certificate was issued. 
(4)  "This Motel Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Motel Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the tax administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the motel occupancy tax and remitting said tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in any unlawful manner, nor to operate a motel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this county. This certificate does not constitute a permit." 
(Ord. 658B §1(part), 1998)  
3.21.070 - Reports and remittances. 
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. 
(Ord. 658B §1(part), 1998)  
3.21.080 - Failure to remit tax—Penalties. 
(a)  Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required, shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of tax. 
(b)  Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed. 
(c)  Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section. 
(d)  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties for the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
(e)  Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. 
(Ord. 658B §1(part), 1998)  
3.21.090 - Operator failure to collect and report tax—Determination of tax—Notice—Hearing. 
If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect such tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of such tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last-known place of address. Such operator may within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in such notice why such amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest, and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.21.100. 
(Ord. 658B §1(part), 1998)  
3.21.100 - Appeal. 
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The city council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of address. The findings of the city council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. 
(Ord. 658B §1(part), 1998)  
3.21.110 - Records kept for three years. 
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of any payment to the city, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. 658B §1(part), 1998)  
3.21.120 - Refunds. 
(a)  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under the ordinance codified in this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section; provided, a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator. 
(b)  An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator, that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
(c)  A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
(d)  No refund shall be paid under the provision of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Ord. 658B §1(part), 1998)  
3.21.130 - Action by city to collect tax. 
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provision of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. 
(Ord. 658B §1(part), 1998)  
3.21.140 - Violation—Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefor by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of misdemeanor, and is punishable as aforesaid. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report of claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this article to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. 
(Ord. 658B §1(part), 1998)  
CHAPTER 3.24 - CONTRACTS AND PURCHASING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 890B, § 2A(Exh. A), adopted March 11, 2014, amended Ch. 3.24 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 3.24, §§ 3.24.010—3.24.140, pertained to purchasing and derived from Ord. 467B §§ 1—9 adopted in 1985; Ord. 721B, §§ 3, 4, adopted in 2001. 
 
Article I. - General 
 
3.24.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to define the types of contracts regulated by this chapter, to provide for the authority of city officers to enter into certain contracts, and to set forth the procedural requirements for the various types of contracts. All purchases and contracts for contracted services, commodities, equipment, and other personal property required by any department or other organizational unit of the city shall be made on behalf of the city in accordance with this chapter, except as otherwise provided by state law. However, a purchase or contract may be initiated only if sufficient funds have been appropriated and for which there is an unexpended and unencumbered remaining balance sufficient to pay for the purchase or contract. This purchasing system implements Sections 52401 through 52405 of the California Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
3.24.020 - Types of regulated contracts. 
The contracts regulated by this chapter are: 
(1)  Contracts for consultant or professional services; 
(2)  Contracts for the purchase of commodities and equipment; 
(3)  Contracts for the purchase of general services, including maintenance contracts, which may also include the purchase of commodities, equipment, and/or materials; and 
(4)  Contracts for public projects (public works) concerning prequalification of bidders, providing that nothing herein shall be interpreted to supersede any provision of state law concerning the bidding or awarding of contracts for public projects under the California Public Contract Code. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
3.24.025. - Exempt contracts. 
Except as set forth below, and notwithstanding any other provision of law, the following contracts shall not be subject to this chapter: 
(1)  Annual Membership Dues. Membership dues for professional and civic organizations to which the city is a member, including, without limitation, the League of California Cities, the chamber of commerce, and such similar professional and civic organizations that may charge an annual or other membership fee. Such contracts may be entered into and/or membership fees paid at the direction of the city manager, without prior city council approval, provided there is adequate funding allocated in the city budget; 
(2)  Public Works Contracts. Contracts for public projects (public works) governed by the California Public Contracts Code, except that the provisions of article VII concerning prequalification of bidders and chapter 3.26 of the Lincoln Municipal Code shall apply to such contracts; and 
(3)  Other Contracts. Such other contracts as the city council, in its discretion, finds by resolution are not susceptible to the contracting procedures set forth in this chapter, provided that nothing herein shall relieve the city from any contracting procedures required by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
3.24.030 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Amendment" or "change order" means change, modification, or addendum to a contract after it has been executed. 
"Commodities" means any tangible goods or items such as supplies, parts, and materials. Generally, they are consumable in city operations, become part or a component of city equipment or city facilities, and/or have a useful life of one year or less. 
"Consultant or professional services" means the services of an architect, attorney, landscape architect, engineer, doctor, financial consultant, planning or environmental consultant, investment advisor, banking and trustee services, or other similar professional services as defined in Section 37103 of the California Government Code, as may be amended from time to time. 
"Contract" means any agreement to do or not do a certain thing. "Contract" and "agreement" are synonymous. The term "contract" includes, among other things, a purchase order, a contract for services, and an addendum or change order. 
"Cost," means the amount charged, exclusive of sales tax, use tax, delivery charges, shipping and/or handling, and which will be incurred on a fiscal year basis. 
"Equipment" means tangible personal property. It may be mobile, portable or fixed, and is an independent functioning unit, as opposed to parts which are components. Examples include, but are not limited to, office equipment, furniture, field equipment, shop, lab, and plant equipment, vehicles, and rolling stock. 
"Emergency" means a sudden, unexpected occurrence that poses a clear and imminent danger, requiring immediate action to prevent or mitigate the loss or impairment of life, health, property, or essential public services. 
"General services" includes: 
(1)  Any work performed or services rendered by an independent contractor, not otherwise qualifying as consultant or professional services, with or without the furnishing of associated commodities, equipment or materials, and excluding any work defined as a "public project" under Section 20161 of the Public Contract Code. Examples of general services include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Maintenance or nonstructural repair of city buildings, structures or improvements which do not require engineering plans, specifications or design, including, but not limited to, unscheduled replacement of broken window panes, fire extinguisher maintenance, minor roof repairs, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, elevator maintenance, custodial services, and pest control; 
b.  Installation, repair, modification, and maintenance of city property and equipment; 
c.  Cleaning, analysis, testing, moving, removal or disposal (other than by sale) of city supplies, equipment, and waste products; 
d.  Providing other technical services to facilitate city operations such as communications, transportation, utilities, and which may also include providing related commodities, equipment, materials, and/or computer software; 
e.  Performing repair, demolition or other work required to abate nuisances under this code; and 
f.  Leasing or rental of equipment (personal property) for use by the city; 
"Public project" shall have the same definition as contained in Section 20161 of the Public Contract Code as may be amended from time to time. 
"Purchase order" shall mean a written authorization for small purchases under $5,000.00, and within the city's annual budget, requesting a vendor to furnish commodities, equipment and/or general services to the city at a specified price, quantity, and delivery date. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
3.24.040 - Insurance and indemnification—City attorney and budget approval—Execution. 
Except for a contract for a public project, as defined herein, and unless otherwise authorized by the city manager and the city attorney, before a contract is signed by any city representative, or placed on a city council agenda, the contract must: 
(1)  Include appropriate insurance and indemnification provisions reviewed by the city's purchasing officer or city attorney; 
(2)  Be approved as to form by the city attorney; 
(3)  Be approved as to budget availability and purchasing procedural compliance by the administrative services director or designee; and 
(4)  Be signed by the other party (except in the instance of a public entity, in which instance it may be signed by the city representative first). 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
3.24.050 - Encumbrance of contracts. 
Each contract entered into under this chapter and requiring the payment of city funds, after execution, will be entered into the city financial system by an encumbrance against the appropriate budgeted funds. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
3.24.060 - Filing with city clerk. 
A signed original of each contract entered into under this chapter shall be filed with the city clerk's office, except for transactions involving the purchase of commodities, equipment or general services documented with a purchase order, which is filed with the administrative services department. Contracts shall be retained in accordance with the city council adopted retention schedule. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
3.24.070 - Voidability. 
Any transaction failing to comply with this chapter in any respect is voidable at the discretion of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
3.24.075 - Splitting orders prohibited. 
It is unlawful to split into smaller orders the purchase of commodities, equipment or services for the purpose of evading the competitive bidding provisions of this article.  
Article II. - Contract Authority 
 
3.24.080 - City council authority. 
City council approval is required for each contract regulated by this chapter unless authority to sign the contract is granted to another city officer under this chapter. Such authority shall be exercised consistent with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
3.24.090 - City manager authority. 
(a)  The city manager is authorized to enter into and sign on behalf of the city, without the prior approval of the city council, a contract: 
(1)  Which contains an initial maximum compensation figure of up to $35,000.00 or less. As to a change order or amendment, the limit of authority may not exceed ten percent of the original contract amount not to exceed a cumulative total of $38,500.00. Cumulative additional change orders or contract amendments exceeding $38,500.00 must be approved by the city council; and 
(2)  Which is not required by any applicable state law to be let to the lowest bidder. 
(b)  The city manager is authorized to enter into and sign agreements for right of entry onto real property. 
(c)  In an emergency endangering the lives, property or welfare of the people of the city or the property of the city, the city manager may authorize the expenditure of any unencumbered moneys, notwithstanding the fact that such moneys may not have been appropriated for such purpose, to the extent that other moneys have not been appropriated or are otherwise unavailable. 
(d)  The city manager shall report, in writing, every exercise of the purchasing authority granted by this chapter at the next scheduled city council meeting. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014; Ord. No. 976B , § 7, 9-25-2018)  
3.24.100 - Department head authority. 
Department heads are authorized to enter into and sign on behalf of the city, without the prior approval of the city manager or city council, a contract that meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  Which is for the purchase or lease of commodities, equipment, general services, and/or professional services; 
(2)  Which contains a maximum compensation amount up to $10,000.00. As to a change order or contract amendment, the limit of authority is 25 percent of the original contract, not to exceed a cumulative amount of $12,500.00; and 
(3)  Which is not required by any state law to be let to the lowest responsible bidder. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
Article III. - Consultant and Professional Services 
 
3.24.110 - Authority—Definition. 
The city manager and the department heads are each authorized to enter into a contract for consultant or professional services in accordance with the limits on their authority in article II of this chapter. "Consultant or professional services" is defined in Lincoln Municipal Code section 3.24.030(3). 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
3.24.120 - Procurement of services with a value of $5,000.00 or less. 
For procurement of services with a value of $5,000.00 or less, the procurement procedures shall be established by an administrative regulation of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
3.24.130 - Procurement of services with a value from $5,000.01 up to $25,000.00. 
(a)  Informal Request for Proposal (RFP) Procedure. Except as set forth herein, the procurement of consultant or professional services with a value from $5,000.01 up to $25,000.00 shall be made following the procedure prescribed below: 
(1)  Solicitation of Proposals. The department may solicit proposals by written (including e-mail) or verbal request to prospective consultants. Informal requests for proposals shall, whenever feasible, be based on at least three proposals and shall be awarded to the best qualified and most responsible proposer, which may not necessarily be the lowest priced proposal. The dollar amount of the proposal shall be considered but the award need not be made to the lowest dollar proposal. 
(2)  Retention of Proposal. The department shall retain all proposals in accordance with the city council-approved retention schedule. 
(3)  Award of Contracts. The city manager is authorized to award a contract in accordance with the authorization granted in Lincoln Municipal Code section 3.24.090. 
(b)  Exceptions. The city manager (within the monetary limitations of this chapter) may dispense with the informal RFP procedure, in whole or in part, or reject any proposals received as part of any informal RFP procedure, whether the informal RFP procedure has been initiated or not, for the reasons set forth at Lincoln Municipal Code section 3.24.140(b). 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
3.24.140 - Procurement of services with a value of $25,000.01 or more. 
(a)  Formal Request for Proposal (RFP) Procedures. Except as set forth herein, the city shall procure consultant or professional services with a value of $25,000.01 or more following the procedure prescribed below: 
(1)  Request for Proposals. The request for proposals (RFP) shall include a general description of the services to be procured, a proposed professional services agreement, and the time and place for submission of proposals. To the extent feasible, a notice inviting proposals shall be distributed to at least three consultant firms. It shall also be posted on the city's website at least ten days prior to the deadline for submission of proposals. Proposers shall submit sealed proposals and shall identify them as proposals on the envelope; 
(2)  Evaluation of Proposals. All responsive proposals shall be reviewed and evaluated by the city in order to determine which proposer best meets the city's needs by demonstrating the competence and professional qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the required services, and shall not necessarily be based on the lowest price or bid. The criteria by which the city shall evaluate proposals will be set forth in the request for proposals. The city reserves the right to reject any and all proposals or waive any irregularities in any proposal or the proposal process; and 
(3)  Award of Contract. The city council shall be the awarding body for a contract for consultant or professional services with a value greater than $25,000.00. 
(b)  Exceptions. The city manager or the city council (as applicable within the monetary limitations of this chapter) may dispense with the formal RFP procedure, in whole or in part, or reject any proposals received as part of any formal RFP procedure, whether the formal RFP procedure has been initiated or not, under the following circumstances: 
(1)  In an emergency; 
(2)  When the services can be obtained from only one source which has been reviewed and approved in writing by the city manager; 
(3)  When, in the judgment of the city manager or city council (as applicable given the monetary limitations of this chapter), compliance with the procedure is not in the best interest of the city; 
(4)  When processed through a cooperative purchasing agreement with another public agency whose procurement process is substantially consistent with the provisions of this chapter; or 
(5)  Contracts for city-managed professional services in an amount up to $50,000.00 if the following criteria are met: 
a.  A third party has entered into a reimbursement agreement, approved as to form by the city attorney, requiring reimbursement of such costs to the city; 
b.  An applicant for development entitlements has deposited the full amount of the contract with the city; and 
c.  The funds are to be used for development-related studies, such as an environmental impact report. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
Article IV. - Purchasing Commodities and Equipment 
 
3.24.150 - Applicability. 
This article applies to the purchase of commodities and equipment purchased on behalf of the city except for those supplies or materials governed by the public contract code. The purpose of this article is to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of commodities and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function, and to assure the quality of purchases. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
3.24.160 - Purchases of commodities and equipment with a value of $5,000.00 or less. 
For purchases of $5,000.00 or less, the purchasing procedures shall be established by an administrative regulation of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
3.24.170 - Purchases of commodities and equipment with a value from $5,000.01 up to $25,000.00. 
(a)  Informal Bidding and Quotation Procedure. The purchase of commodities and equipment from $5,000.01 up to $25,000.00 may be made in the open market, following the informal bidding and quotation procedure prescribed below: 
(1)  Minimum Number of Quotations. Open-market purchases shall, whenever feasible, be based on at least three bids or quotations and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible quotation. 
(2)  Notice Inviting Bids or Quotations. The department making the purchase shall solicit bids or quotations by written (including e-mail) or verbal request to prospective vendors. 
(3)  Bids and Quotations. Bids or quotations shall be submitted in writing (including facsimile and e-mail) to the department, which shall keep a record of all open-market orders and quotes for a period of six months after the submission of quotes or the placing of orders. This record is open for public inspection. 
(4)  Award of Contracts. The department head is authorized to award a contract for $10,000.00 or less when the city council has budgeted funds for the item(s) and the amount of the award is not more than the budgeted amount. 
(5)  Award of Contracts. The city manager is authorized to award a contract of up to $25,000.00 when the city council has budgeted funds for the item(s) and the amount of the award is not more than the budgeted amount. 
(b)  Exceptions. The city manager (within the monetary limitations of this chapter), may dispense with the informal bidding and quotation procedure, in whole or in part, or reject any bids/quotations received as part of any process, whether the procedure has been initiated or not, for the reasons set forth at section 3.24.180(b) 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
3.24.180 - Purchases of commodities and equipment with a value of $25,000.01 or more. 
(a)  Formal Bidding Procedures. The city shall purchase commodities and equipment of a value equal to or greater than $25,000.01 following the formal bidding procedure prescribed below: 
(1)  Notice Inviting Bids. The notice inviting bids shall include a general description of the commodities or equipment to be purchased, and shall state where bid forms and specifications may be secured and the time and place for opening bids. 
(2)  Published Notice. The notice inviting bids shall be published at least ten days before the date of the opening of the bids. Notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(3)  Bidders' List. The city shall also solicit sealed bids from responsible prospective suppliers whose names are on the bidders' list. 
(4)  Bidders' Security. When deemed necessary, the city shall require bidders' security. Bidders' security shall be in accordance with the provisions of the California Public Contract Code. 
(5)  Bid Opening Procedure. Bidders shall submit sealed bids to the city clerk and shall provide the project number or other reference and identify them as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than 30 days after the bid opening. 
(6)  Rejection of Bids. At its discretion, the city council may reject any and all bids presented, and may re-advertise for bids. 
(7)  Award of Contracts. The city council shall be the awarding body for a contract for the purchase of commodities or equipment with a value of $25,000.01 or more. A contract shall be awarded to the responsible bidder with the lowest responsive bid, except as otherwise provided here. A contract may be awarded to the next lowest responsible bidder if the successful bidder refuses or fails to execute the contract. 
(8)  Tie Bids. If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price and quality, service, and delivery being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of re-advertising for bids, the city manager or city council may accept the one it chooses, or accept the lowest good faith offer by negotiation with the tie bidders. 
(9)  Performance Bonds. The city has the authority to require a performance bond before entering into a contract, in such amount as is reasonably necessary to protect the best interest of the city. If a performance bond is required, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids. 
(b)  Exceptions. The city manager or city council (as applicable given the monetary limitations of this Chapter) may dispense with the formal bidding procedure, in whole or in part, or reject any bid received as part of any procedure, whether the process has been initiated or not, under the following circumstances: 
(1)  In an emergency; 
(2)  When the purchase can be obtained from only one source which has been reviewed and approved in writing by the city manager; 
(3)  When, in the determination of the city council, compliance with the procedure is not in the best interest of the city for those commodities or equipment, the costs of which exceed $25,000.00; or 
(4)  When processed through a cooperative purchasing agreement with another public agency whose procurement process is substantially consistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
Article V. - Procurement of General Services 
 
3.24.182. - Applicability. 
This article applies to the purchase of general services on behalf of the city except for those supplies or materials governed by the public contract code. The purpose of this article is to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of general services at the lowest reasonable cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function, and to assure the quality of purchases. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
3.24.184. - Procurement of general services with a value of $5,000.00 or less. 
For purchases of $5,000.00 or less, the purchasing procedures shall be established by an administrative regulation of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
3.24.186. - Procurement of general services with a value from $5,000.01 up to $25,000.00. 
(a)  Informal Request for Proposal (RFP) Procedures. Except as set forth herein, the procurement of general services with a value from $5,000.01 up to $25,000.00 shall be made following the informal request for proposal procedure prescribed below: 
(1)  Solicitation of Proposals. The department may solicit proposals by written (including e-mail) or verbal request to prospective service providers. Informal requests for proposals shall, whenever feasible, be based on at least three proposals and shall be awarded to the best qualified and most responsible proposer, which may not necessarily be the lowest priced proposal. The dollar amount of the proposal shall be considered but the award need not be made to the lowest dollar proposal. 
(2)  Retention of Proposal. The department shall retain all proposals in accordance with the city council approved retention schedule. 
(3)  Award of Contracts. The city manager is authorized to award a contract in accordance with the authorization granted in Lincoln Municipal Code section 3.24.090. 
(b)  Exceptions. The city manager (as applicable given the monetary limitations of this Chapter) may dispense with the informal request for proposal procedure, in whole or in part, or reject any proposal received as part of any procedure, whether the informal request for proposal procedure has been initiated or not for the reasons set forth at section 3.24.188(b). 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
3.24.188. - Procurement of general services with a value of $25,000.01 or more. 
(a)  Formal Request for Proposal (RFP) Procedures. Except as set forth herein, the city shall procure general services with a value of $25,000.01 or more following the formal request for proposal procedure prescribed below: 
(1)  Request for Proposals. The request for proposals (RFP) shall include a description of the general services to be procured, a proposed services agreement, and the time and place for submission of proposals. To the extent feasible, a notice inviting proposals shall be distributed to at least three providers. It shall also be posted on the city's website at least ten days prior to the deadline for submission of proposals. Proposers shall submit sealed proposals and shall identify them as proposals on the envelope. 
(2)  Evaluation of Proposals. All responsive proposals shall be reviewed and evaluated by the city in order to determine which proposer best meets the city's needs by demonstrating the competence and qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the required services, shall not necessarily be based on the lowest priced proposal, but shall be based on a determination of which services offered serve the best interests of the city. The criteria by which the city shall evaluate proposals shall be set forth in the request for proposals, and may include a ranking system identifying factors considered important by the city. The city reserves the right to reject any and all proposals or waive any irregularities in any proposal or the proposal process. 
(3)  Award of Contract. The city council shall be the awarding body for a contract for general services with a value greater than $25,000.00. 
(b)  Exceptions. The city manager or the city council (as applicable given the monetary limitations of this chapter), may dispense with the formal request for proposal procedure, in whole or in part, or reject any proposal received as part of any procedure, whether the formal request for proposal procedure has been initiated or not, under the following circumstances: 
(1)  In an emergency; 
(2)  When the services can be obtained from only one source which has been reviewed and approved in writing by the city manager; 
(3)  When, in the judgment of the city manager or city council (as applicable given the monetary limitations of this chapter), compliance with the procedure is not in the best interest of the city; or 
(4)  When processed through a cooperative purchasing agreement with another public agency whose procurement process is substantially consistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
Article VI. - Provisions Applicable to Purchasing Commodities, Equipment, and General Services 
 
3.24.190. - Applicability. 
The provisions set forth in this article shall apply to the purchase of commodities, equipment, and general services under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
3.24.200 - Equipment leasing. 
(a)  Leasing of equipment shall be in accordance with the authority limits set forth in article II of this chapter, depending upon the annual cost of the lease. 
(b)  Each contract for the leasing or rental of equipment for the city shall contain a provision permitting the city to terminate the contract at the end of any fiscal year during the term of the contract upon not less than 30 days' written notice to the other party. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
3.24.210 - Inspection, testing, interviews, and demonstrations. 
The city may inspect and evaluate supplies, equipment, and/or services delivered or to be delivered, conduct interviews, and request demonstrations to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the request for bid or proposals, the responsiveness of the bid or proposal, and/or the responsibility of the bidder or proposer. A department head has the authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids, and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
3.24.220 - Cooperative purchasing agreements with other public agencies. 
Nothing in this article prohibits the voluntary participation by the city in any cooperative purchasing agreements or programs entered into between the city and the state, county, or other public agencies, including, but not limited to, the California Multiple Award Schedule ("CMAS") and U.S. Communities. The city manager is authorized to act under the provisions of this article to procure for the city supplies and equipment in conjunction with such voluntary cooperative purchasing agreements or programs as may be entered into by the city. All formal contract and bidding procedures to be followed in such cases shall be those specifically enumerated in the voluntary cooperative purchasing agreement or program. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
Article VII. - Public Projects Subject to the Public Contract Code 
 
3.24.250 - Prequalification of bidders. 
(a)  Purpose. This section is enacted pursuant to Section 20101 of the California Public Contract Code, which authorizes the city to establish a system for prequalification of prospective bidders on public works construction and maintenance projects. In addition, pursuant to the city's general police powers under California Constitution Article 11, Section 7, the city desires to apply this process to the award of public works maintenance contracts in order to ensure that bidders are qualified to perform city public works maintenance. 
(b)  Prequalification of Bidders. 
(1)  The city hereby establishes a system for prequalification of prospective bidders for public works construction and maintenance projects. The city may use the prequalification system identified in this section for any public works project. 
(2)  The community development director is authorized to adopt and apply a uniform system of rating bidders for each project based on: 
a.  The requirements of Section 20101 of the California Public Contract Code, and 
b.  The model guidelines and standardized questionnaire created by the state of California Department of Industrial Relations, as modified at the city engineer's discretion to address the needs of the particular project, or projects, to which they are to be applied. 
(3)  a.  Prequalification of prospective bidders shall be conducted for public works projects that involve the construction, retrofitting, remodeling, renovation or expansion of public buildings, water or wastewater treatment facilities, water works; maintenance of roadways, drainage facilities, roadway landscaping, or parks; or require significant specialized experience or expertise, unless the city engineer determines that it is in the best interests of the city to forego prequalification of prospective bidders on a particular project. In making his or her determination whether it is in the best interests of the city to forego prequalification of prospective bidders on a particular project, the city engineer's decision shall be supported by one or more of the following reasons: 
1.  Prequalification of prospective bidders is likely to unreasonably adversely affect the cost of the project; 
2.  The complexity, scale or cost of the project does not warrant use of this prequalification process; 
3.  There is an urgent need, based upon concerns for the health and safety of the public, to pursue the project on an expedited basis; 
4.  The particular project is of such a specialized nature that there is a very limited pool of qualified potential bidders, and for this reason the purposes of the prequalification process may be accomplished by use of a bid questionnaire; or 
5.  The project will not be competitively bid. 
b.  Notwithstanding subsection (b)(3)a. of this section, the city engineer is authorized to require prequalification of prospective bidders on any public works project or to engage in a program of prequalification of prospective bidders, on public works projects on a recurring basis as provided in Section 20101 of the California Public Contract Code. 
(4)  If prequalification of prospective bidders is required for a particular project, the city engineer shall determine which bidders are qualified to bid that project based upon the uniform system of rating bidders. If the city engineer determines any bidder is not qualified to bid a project, the city engineer shall provide to the bidder written notice that includes the basis for the determination and an identification of any supporting evidence therefor, and an opportunity for the bidder to appeal the determination pursuant to subsection (c) of this section. A copy of all prequalification determinations shall be filed with the city clerk at least ten days prior to the scheduled bid opening. 
(c)  Appeals. 
(1)  Any person aggrieved by a determination made by the city engineer pursuant to subsection (b)(4) of this section may appeal the determination only by complying with the requirements set forth in this subsection. Such an aggrieved person shall be referred to herein as "appellant." Without a timely appeal, the appellant waives any and all rights to challenge the decision of the city engineer, whether by administrative process, judicial process or any other legal process or proceeding. 
(2)  The appellant shall submit a written notice of appeal to the city clerk, along with a complete written description of all factual and legal bases for the appeal and accompanied by a fee in the amount established by resolution of the city council, no later than ten days after the city has mailed written notice of the determination made by the city engineer. Should the appellant prevail in its appeal, the deposit shall be returned to the appellant and the city shall bear the costs of the appeal. If the appellant does not prevail, the deposit shall be used to pay all costs associated with the appeal. If the deposit is insufficient to pay the entirety of the costs of the appeal, the appellant shall pay the remaining costs within 30 days after the decision. Any failure by the appellant to timely pay any outstanding appeal costs, as required herein, shall be considered by the city in future prequalification proceedings. 
(3)  If the appellant gives the required notice of appeal, provides the necessary deposit, and requests a hearing, the hearing shall be conducted so that it is concluded no later than five business days prior to the last date for the receipt of bids on the project or 20 days following the city's receipt of the notice of appeal, whichever is sooner. The hearing shall be an informal process conducted by an arbitrator, who shall be an attorney experienced in public works and construction matters. The arbitrator may be selected by the mutual consent of the appellant and the city. If an agreement cannot be reached regarding the selection of the arbitrator, the appellant and the city shall each exchange a list of three arbitrators they would be willing to accept. In turn, beginning with the appellant, each party shall strike one name from the other party's list until only one name remains and that remaining person shall be the arbitrator. If the arbitrator selected is unavailable, the parties shall repeat the process until they succeed in selecting an available arbitrator. 
(4)  At the hearing, the appellant and the city shall each be provided an opportunity to be represented by legal counsel and to present or rebut any evidence bearing upon the issues presented in the appeal. Each party shall bear his, her, its, or their own attorneys' fees, regardless of the outcome of the appeal. 
(5)  The arbitrator shall consider relevant evidence presented during the hearing and provide a written decision on the appeal to the city, with a copy to the city clerk, and the appellant within one business day after the close of the hearing. The time identified in this section for providing the arbitrator's decision may be extended only by consent of the city and the appellant and such an extension shall not affect or require a delay in a scheduled time for opening of bids for any public works project. Failure by the arbitrator to render a timely decision shall be deemed a denial of the appeal. 
(6)  The arbitrator's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
Article VIII. - Acquisition and Disposition of Interests in Real Property 
 
3.24.280 - Leases of real property. 
(a)  City-Owned Real Property. The city council shall be the authorizing authority for all leases and licenses of city-owned property. If consideration for a lease or license is in excess of $1,000.00 per year, the property shall be leased or licensed by means of competitive proposals unless the city council finds that an award without competitive proposals is in the best interests of the city. If competitive proposals are solicited for leases or licenses of city-owned property, the city shall have discretion to determine the proposal process and to determine the proposal which best meets the needs of the city, which may not necessarily be the highest priced proposal. 
(b)  City Lease of Private Property. 
(1)  Leases of private property by the city with a total lease amount of $25,000.00 or more shall be authorized by the council. 
(2)  Leases of private property by the city with a total lease amount less than $25,000.00 may be authorized by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
3.24.290 - Acquisition of real property. 
The acquisition of real property, whether by negotiation, dedication, or eminent domain, shall be in accordance with state law. The limits set forth in article II of this chapter shall apply to acquisitions of real property. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
3.24.300 - Disposition of real property. 
(a)  Procedures for the disposition of real property shall be in accordance with state law. In accordance with Section 65402(a) of the California Government Code, the council hereby determines that the provisions of that section shall not apply to: 
(1)  The disposition of the remainder of a larger parcel which was acquired and used in part for street purposes; 
(2)  Acquisitions, dispositions, or abandonments for street widening; or 
(3)  Alignment projects, provided such dispositions for street purposes, acquisitions, dispositions, or abandonments for street widening or alignment projects are of a minor nature. 
(b)  The report of the planning commission regarding the conformance of a capital improvement project with the general plan made pursuant to Section 65401 of the California Government Code shall also constitute the report required by Section 65402(a) of the California Government Code regarding each acquisition or disposition of real estate, street abandonment or vacation, or public building or structure included in that capital improvement project. 
(c)  The disposition of real property shall be by competitive proposals unless the city council determines that disposition without competitive proposals is in the best interests of the city. If competitive proposals are solicited for the disposition of city-owned property, the city shall have discretion to determine the proposal process and to determine the proposal which best meets the needs of the city, which may not necessarily be the highest priced proposal. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
Article IX. - Surplus Commodities and Equipment 
 
3.24.310 - Surplus commodities and equipment. 
(a)  Each department shall submit to the purchasing officer at such times and in such forms as the purchasing officer prescribes, reports showing all commodities and equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete or worn out. The purchasing officer has the authority to sell or otherwise dispose of all commodities and equipment which cannot be used by any department or which have become unsuitable for city use, or to exchange the same for or trade the same in on new commodities and equipment. The administrative services director also has the authority to make transfers between departments of any useable surplus commodities or equipment. 
(b)  Disposition may include abandonment, destruction or donation to public bodies, charitable, civic or nonprofit organizations, and may include city property which has no commercial value or for which the estimated cost of continued care, handling, maintenance or storage would exceed the estimated proceeds of sale. Sales procedures may include negotiated sales, acceptance of sealed bids or public auction. Services of a paid auctioneer may be used, as appropriate. 
(c)  The city manager shall approve the disposition of commodities and/or equipment when the estimated value of an individual item is less than $2,000.00; however, city council approval is required if the value is equal to or exceeds $2,000.00. 
(d)  Property acquired by the city as a result of a lawful seizure or forfeiture shall be disposed of as authorized by, and in accordance with, applicable state and/or federal law and shall be exempt from this section except that no officer, agent or employee of the city shall either directly or indirectly submit a bid for or purchase property acquired by seizure or forfeiture. 
(Ord. No. 890B, § 2A.(Exh. A), 3-11-2014)  
CHAPTER 3.26 - PUBLIC PROJECTS BIDDING PROCEDURES 
 
3.26.010 - Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act. 
The city elects to be subject to the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act as set forth in Section 22000 et seq. of the Public Contract Code ("Act"), and the uniform construction cost accounting procedures as set forth in said Act. 
(Ord. 711B §1 (part), 2001)  
3.26.020 - Public project defined. 
"Public project" in this chapter shall be defined as set forth in Section 22002 of the Act. 
(Ord. 711B §1 (part), 2001)  
3.26.030 - Public projects of $60,000.00 or less. 
Public projects of $60,000.00 or less, or in such sum as may be authorized by California Public Contracts Code § 22032(a), may be performed by the employees of the city by force account, by negotiated contract or by purchase order. If the funds have been budgeted and approved by the city council, the city manager may award contracts for the amounts specified by Municipal Code Section 2.16.050, and may delegate the authorization to award contracts for less than $10,000.00. 
(Ord. 711B §1 (part), 2001Ord. No. 983B , § 5, 1-22-2019)  
3.26.040 - Public projects of $200,000.00 or less. 
Public projects of $200,000.00 or less, or in such sum as may be authorized by California Public Contracts Code § 22032(b), may be let to contract by informal procedures as set forth in the Act and as follows: 
(1)  A list of qualified contractors identified according to categories of work shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the Act and criteria promulgated from time to time by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission ("Commission"); 
(2)  Notice inviting informal bids shall be mailed to all contractors on the list for the category of work being bid and to all construction trade journals as provided in Section 22036 of the Act; provided, however (i) if there is no list of qualified contractors maintained by the city for the particular category of work to be performed, the notice inviting informal bids shall be sent only to the construction trade journals specified by the commission, (ii) if the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting informal bids may be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors; 
(3)  All mailing of notices to contractors and construction trade journals shall be completed not less than ten calendar days before the bids are due; 
(4)  The notice inviting informal bids shall describe the project in general terms, how to obtain more detailed information about the project, and state the time and place for the submission of bids; 
(5)  The city council shall award informal contracts pursuant to this section. 
(6)  If all bids received are in excess of $200,000.00, the city council by passage of a resolution by a four-fifths vote, award the contract, at $212,500.00, or less, or in such sum as may be authorized by California Public Contracts Code § 22034(d), to the lowest responsible bidder, if it determines the cost estimate of the city was reasonable. 
(Ord. 711B §1 (part), 2001; Ord. No. 983B , § 5, 1-22-2019)  
3.26.050 - Public projects of more than $200,000.00. 
Public projects of more than $200,000.00, or in such sum as may be authorized by California Public Contracts Code § 22032(c), shall, except as otherwise provided in the Act, be let to contract by formal bidding procedure. 
(Ord. 711B §1 (part), 2001; Ord. No. 983B , § 5, 1-22-2019)  
CHAPTER 3.28 - PUBLIC FACILITIES REIMBURSEMENT FEE 
 
3.28.010 - Purpose. 
The city council has determined to prepare a public facilities element of the Lincoln general plan pursuant to Government Code Section 65303 and an environmental impact report and financing plan for the public facilities element (hereinafter referred to collectively as the program) to provide for the public health, safety, and welfare and the orderly physical development of the city. The city has entered into a reimbursement agreement dated as of December 13, 1988, to aid in financing preparation of the program. Under this agreement three developers have advanced to the city the full cost of preparation of the program and the city has agreed to reimburse to them that portion of the amounts advanced that exceeds their proportionate fair share of the cost. The city council determines that a reimbursement fee is needed to spread the cost of preparation of the program to all benefitted properties and to meet the city's reimbursement obligation. In establishing the fee described in the following sections the city council has found the fee to be consistent with the city's general plan and, pursuant to Government Code Section 65913.2, has considered the effects of the fee with respect to the city's housing needs as established in the housing element of the general plan. 
(Ord. 515B §1, 1988)  
3.28.020 - Public facilities element reimbursement fee. 
A public facilities element reimbursement is established on the annexation of territory into the city. The city council shall, in a council resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fee, describe the benefit area on which the fee shall be imposed, describe the program and its estimated cost, describe the reasonable relationship between the fee and the annexation to which it shall apply, and set forth the time of payment. As described in the fee resolution, the reimbursement fee shall be paid as a condition of submitting an application to the city for annexation of the territory to which it applies to the city. On an annual basis, the city council shall review this fee to determine whether the fee amounts are reasonably related to the preparation of the program and whether the fee is still needed. 
(Ord. 515B §2, 1988)  
3.28.030 - Limited use of fee. 
The funds raised by payment of the reimbursement fee shall be placed in a separate interest-bearing account for the benefit of those developers advancing to the city the cost of preparation of the program (the "reimbursement fee account") and such funding, along with all accrued interest earnings on the funds, shall be used solely to reimburse the developers as provided in the reimbursement agreement. 
(Ord. 515B §3, 1988)  
3.28.040 - Fee waiver. 
The fee established in this chapter shall be waived for any applicant for annexation who is a party to the reimbursement agreement under the terms and conditions and as provided for in the reimbursement agreement. 
(Ord. 515B §4, 1988)  
3.28.050 - Fee adjustment. 
Any applicant for annexation who is subject to the fee established in this chapter may apply for a reduction or waiver of the fee based on a lesser degree or complete absence of any reasonable relationship between the annexation and the benefits of the program to that annexation and the amount of the fee. The application shall be in writing and filed with the director of community development concurrently with the annexation application, accompanied by a fee in the amount of $250.00 to cover the cost of the hearing. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the reduction or waiver request. The city council shall consider the application at a noticed public hearing held no later than 60 days thereafter. The city council shall approve the application in whole or in part only upon finding that due to specific and specified factors particular to the proposed annexation that the information in the program is not fully beneficial or applicable to the proposed annexation. The decision of the city council shall be final. The procedure and hearing requirements of this section shall not apply to a fee waiver under Section 3.28.040. 
(Ord. 515B §5, 1988)  
CHAPTER 3.30 - DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 
 
3.30.010 - Disposition of unclaimed property. 
(a)  Any unclaimed property not governed by statute, after being held 90 days from the date the owner was notified by letter to claim the property, may be sold at public auction by the director of public safety, or his designee, provided that notice of such sale shall be given by the director at least five days prior to the date of sale in the newspaper. 
(b)  Unclaimed property that is needed for public use, need not be sold and if the unclaimed property is of the type that would not normally be sold at auction, it shall be destroyed. 
(c)  Pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Section 217, toys or bicycles which have been unclaimed for at least 60 days, instead of being sold at public auction, may be turned over to those organizations as provided for in Welfare and Institutions Code Section 217. 
(Ord. 599B §1, 1993)  
CHAPTER 3.32 - COST FOR EMERGENCY RESPONSE 
 
3.32.010 - Authority. 
The provisions of this chapter are established for the implementation and administration of Title 5, Division 2, Part 1, Chapter 1, Article 8 of the California Government Code entitled "Costs of Emergency Response" (53150 et seq.) as it may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 596B §1(part), 1993)  
3.32.020 - Liability. 
Pursuant to the authority vested in the city by state statute, each person who is under the influence of alcohol and/or any drug, whose negligent operation of a motor vehicle, boat or aircraft caused by that influence proximately causes any incident resulting in an appropriate emergency response, or whose intentional wrongful conduct proximately causes any incident resulting in an appropriate emergency response, shall pay to the city the expense of such emergency response. In no event shall a person's liability under this section exceed the maximum allowable under statute. 
(Ord. 596B §1(part), 1993)  
3.32.030 - Department record keeping. 
All city departments participating in emergency responses to any incident involving a person under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs, or a person whose conduct is intentionally wrongful, while operating a motor vehicle, boat or civil aircraft, shall log all personnel time, equipment time and use, and all incidental costs involved in such emergency response. 
(Ord. 596B §1(part), 1993)  
3.32.040 - Reporting costs. 
The costs of the city for all such personnel time, equipment use and incidental items shall be reported by each department within ten days thereafter to the city manager, including, without limitation: 
(1)  All direct wage costs for all department personnel so involved including the department head; 
(2)  All equipment costs, including reasonable depreciation or standard industry hourly rental amounts, plus the cost of all incidental materials and supplies, involved in the emergency response; 
(3)  The department head responsible for determining that the person causing the incident was driving under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs, or that said person's driving conduct was intentionally wrongful, shall be responsible for coordinating the preparation and furnishing of the departmental reports to the city manager. 
(Ord. 596B §1(part), 1993)  
3.32.050 - Collection of costs. 
The cost of an emergency response shall be charged against the person liable for the expenses provided in this chapter. This charge constitutes a debt of that person to the city, and is collectable by the city in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, express or implied. All judicial actions for judgment and collection of the debt obligation herein shall be filed in the Placer County municipal court, small claims division, Lincoln, California. 
(Ord. 596 §1(part), 1993)  
3.32.060 - Release of obligation to pay costs. 
The debt obligation herein shall only be excused or canceled upon an explicit verdict or finding by a court, that said person did not cause the incident, or that said person was not under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs and said person's conduct was not intentionally wrongful at the time of the incident. 
All moneys collected shall be placed in the city's general fund, and shall be included in city budget projects. 
(Ord. 596B §1(part), 1993)  
CHAPTER 3.36 - COSTS FOR CRIMINAL JUSTICE ADMINISTRATIVE FEES 
 
3.36.010 - Authority. 
The provisions of this chapter are enacted pursuant to the authority provided by Title 3, Division 3, Chapter 2, Article 12 of the California Government Code establishing a "criminal justice administrative fee" (29950 et seq.) and as said provisions may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 603B §1(part), 1993)  
3.36.020 - Liability. 
Pursuant to the authority vested in the city by state statute, each person who is arrested and convicted of any criminal offense shall be liable for any criminal justice administrative fee imposed by the County of Placer upon the city. 
(Ord. 603B §1(part), 1993)  
3.36.030 - Collection of fee. 
The cost of the criminal justice administrative fee shall be charged against the person liable for said fee as provided in this chapter. The charge constitutes a debt of that person to the city, and is collectable by the city in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, express or implied. The city will issue an invoice to the responsible person for the cost of the criminal justice administrative fee incurred by the city. All judicial actions for judgment and collection of the debt obligation herein shall be filed in the Placer County Municipal Court, small claims division, Lincoln, California. All moneys collected shall be placed in the city's general fund, and shall be included in city budget projects. 
(Ord. 603B §1(part), 1993)  
Title 5 - BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS  
CHAPTER 5.04 - LICENSE TAX 
 
5.04.010 - Revenue not regulation measure. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes, and is not intended for regulations. 
(Ord. 274B §2, 1974)  
5.04.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Business" means and includes professions, trades and occupations and all and every kind of calling carried on for profit. 
"Person" means and includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts business or common law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city, other than as an employee. 
(Ord. 274B §1, 1974)  
5.04.030 - Other license taxes unimpaired. 
Persons required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any business under this chapter shall not be relieved from payment of any license tax for the privilege of doing such business required under any other ordinance of the city, and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of other ordinances. 
(Ord. 274B §3, 1974)  
5.04.040 - Past ordinance requirements unimpaired. 
Neither the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter nor its superseding of any portion of any other ordinance of the city shall in any manner be construed to affect prosecution of a violation, nor be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required by any ordinance to be posted, filed or deposited, and all rights and obligations thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 274B §4, 1974)  
5.04.050 - Branch establishments. 
A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on, and each license shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license; provided, that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business license under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. 
(Ord. 274B §5, 1974)  
5.04.060 - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city clerk with respect to issuance or refusal to issue a license under this chapter may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the council. The city council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The clerk of the council shall give notice to such person of the time and place of hearing by depositing it in the United States Post Office in the city, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his last known address. The city council shall have authority to determine all questions raised on such appeal. 
(Ord. 274B §6, 1974)  
5.04.070 - Application. 
Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this chapter shall make application for the same to the city clerk, and upon the payment of the prescribed license tax the city clerk shall issue to such a person a license which shall contain: 
(1)  The name of the person to whom the license is issued; 
(2)  The business licensed; 
(3)  The place where such business is to be transacted and carried on; 
(4)  The date of the expiration of such license; and 
(5)  Such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 274B § 7, 1974)  
5.04.080 - Transfer of license. 
No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be assignable and may not be transferred to a new owner of the same business. 
(Ord. 710B §1, 2002: Ord. 274B §8, 1974)  
5.04.090 - Duplicate license. 
A duplicate license may be issued by the city clerk to replace any license previously issued under this chapter which has been lost or destroyed upon the licensee filing a statements of such fact, and at the time of filing such statement paying the city clerk a duplicate license fee of $5.00. 
(Ord. 274B §10, 1974)  
5.04.100 - Posting license. 
All licenses must be kept and posted in the following manner: Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license upon his person at all times while transacting any such business. 
(Ord. 274B §11, 1974)  
5.04.110 - License tax—Due date. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, all annual license taxes, under the provisions of this chapter, shall be due and payable in advance on January 1 of each year; provided, that license taxes covering new operations, commenced after January 1, may be prorated for the balance of the license period. 
(Ord. 274B §12, 1974)  
5.04.120 - License tax—Late payment penalty. 
For failure to pay the license tax when due, the city clerk shall add a penalty of 40 percent of the license tax on the last day of each month after the due date of the license tax; provided, that the amount of such penalty to be added shall in no event exceed 50 percent of the amount of the license tax due. 
(Ord. 274B §13, 1974)  
5.04.130 - Business license tax. 
(a)  Every person carrying on a business or profession shall pay an annual business license tax. This includes but is not limited to corporations, contractors, vendors, individuals, solicitors, vehicle-based businesses, equipment and/or container rental businesses and those not subject to payment of a franchise fee. The tax for this purpose shall be $30.00 renewed annually. 
(b)  Every person engaging in the business of renting residential real property comprised of four or more attached dwelling units per building shall pay an annual license tax of $50.00 per year for the first six units and $10.00 per year for each additional unit. Each such person shall file with the city clerk a list of the addresses and number of units at each address and shall receive one certificate for all such units and payment of the appropriate tax. 
(Ord. 710B §2, 2002: Ord. 449B §1, 1983; Ord. 274B §14, 1974)  
5.04.170 - Peddlers and solicitors. 
For the business of selling, offering for sale or taking orders for or soliciting the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property the subject of sale or trade, whether for present or future delivery, from any vacant lot, or by house-to-house canvass or by traveling from place to place in the city, including sales by sample and also including the taking or soliciting of orders for future delivery of photographs, portraits, prints, pictures, newspapers, magazines, clothing, fixtures, machines, appliances and all other articles or things to be made, produced, combined or manufactured, the license tax is $80.00 per person per year if there is no fixed place of business within the city limits. 
(Ord. 449B §2, 1983: Ord. 274B §18, 1974)  
5.04.175 - Street vendors. 
Every person engaged in a business of selling, displaying for sale or offering for sale any goods, wares, merchandise, food or other personal property of any kind or description for which a price is asked and the article delivered on or from the public sidewalks, streets or alleys of the city or from any other city-owned place shall pay an annual license tax of $100.00. 
(Ord. 449B §3, 1983)  
5.04.180 - Utilities. 
Every person engaged in the business of operating a bus company, express company, telegraph, telephone, water, gas or electric company, or other utilities within the city, and who is not subject to payment of a franchise fee, shall pay an annual license fee of $24.00. 
(Ord. 274B §19, 1974)  
5.04.220 - Enforcement. 
(a)  It is the duty of the city clerk to, and he is directed to, enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter, and the chief of police shall render such assistance in the enforcement of this chapter as may from time to time be required by the city clerk or the city council. 
(b)  The city clerk, in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him under this chapter, and acting through his deputies or duly authorized assistants, shall examine or cause to be examined all places of business in the city to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter have been complied with. 
(c)  The city clerk and each and all of his assistants and any police officers shall have the power and authority to enter, free of charge, and at any reasonable time, any place of business required to be licensed in this chapter, and demand an exhibition of its license certificate. Any person having such license certificate theretofore issued, in his possession or under his control, who willfully fails to exhibit it on demand, is guilty of a misdemeanor. It shall be the duty of the city clerk and each of his assistants to cause a complaint to be filed against any and all persons found to be violating any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 274B §23, 1974)  
5.04.230 - Violation—Misdemeanor. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of this city any material fact in procuring the license or permit provided for in this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 274B §24, 1974)  
CHAPTER 5.08 - CARD ROOMS 
 
5.08.010 - Card room defined. 
For the purpose of this chapter, a "card room" is defined to be any space, room or enclosure which: 
(1)  Is furnished or equipped with a table used or intended to be used as a card table for the playing of cards and similar games; 
(2)  Returns to the owner or operator any remuneration for card games played therein; and 
(3)  Is available to the public, or any portion of the public; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any bona fide nonprofit society, club, fraternal, labor or other organization as defined in Section 5.08.120. 
(Ord. 202B §2, 1963)  
5.08.020 - License—Required. 
It is unlawful for any person, for himself, or for any other person, firm or corporation, to carry on or engage in, or to maintain, or to conduct, or cause to be engaged in, carried on, maintained or conducted, any card room in the city without having secured a license from the city to do so, in accordance with every requirement of this chapter, or without complying with each and every regulation contained in this chapter pertaining to such card room. 
(Ord. 202B §1, 1963)  
5.08.030 - License—Application. 
An applicant for a card room license shall submit his application to the chief of police. Such application shall be under oath, and shall include, among other things, the true names and addresses of all persons financially interested in the business. The term, "persons financially interested" includes all persons who share in the profits of the business on the basis of gross or net revenue. The past criminal record, if any, of the applicant and of all persons financially interested in the business shall be shown on such application. The application shall also be accompanied by fingerprints, and a physical description of the applicant and of persons financially interested in the business. 
(Ord. 202B §3(part), 1963)  
5.08.040 - License—Fee. 
A license fee per card table, to be established by resolution of the city council, is established, which fee shall cover the period between July 1 and June 30 of each fiscal year. The fee shall not be returned in the event the license is suspended or revoked. A license fee shall not be prorated in the event application is made for a license to cover an unexpired portion of a fiscal year. 
(Ord. 412B §10(1)(part), 1982; Ord. 202B §8, 1963)  
5.08.050 - License—Denial. 
(a)  The chief of police shall deny an applicant a card room license if: 
(1)  The applicant has previously been convicted of any narcotics violation, a felony involving theft or any crime involving moral turpitude within the past ten years; or 
(2)  The applicant is not, in the opinion of the chief of police, a person of good moral character. 
(b)  The action of the chief of police in denying a card room license on the basis of the applicant not being a person of good moral character is subject to an appeal to the city council. Notice of such an appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days after the denial of the license. Upon failure to file such notice within the ten-day period, the action of the chief of police in denying such license shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 202B §3(part), 1963)  
5.08.060 - Employee work permits—Required—Application. 
(a)  Card room employees must obtain a work permit from the chief of police. 
"Card room employees," for the purpose of this chapter, are defined as dealers, overseers and others directly connected with such operation and supervision. 
(b)  Applications for such work permits shall be submitted under oath and contain the past criminal record, if any, of the applicant and such information as may be deemed by the chief of police to be necessary to determine whether the applicant is a proper person to be issued a card room work permit. The application shall also be accompanied by the fingerprints and physical description of the applicant. 
(Ord. 202B §4(part), 1963)  
5.08.070 - Employee work permits—Fee—Term—Emergency permit. 
(a)  Each application for a work permit shall be accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the city council and shall be valid for a period of one year. The fee shall not be returned in the event that the work permit is refused, revoked or suspended as provided in this chapter. Only one such work permit is required each year, even though the holder of the work permit may change his place of employment within the city. 
(b)  An emergency permit may be issued by the chief of police for a period of 24 hours. 
(Ord. 412B §10(1)(part), 1982; Ord. 202B §4(part), 1963)  
5.08.080 - Employee work permits—Denial. 
(a)  The chief of police shall deny an applicant a work permit if: 
(1)  The applicant has previously been convicted of any narcotics violation, a felony involving theft or any crime involving moral turpitude within the past ten years; or 
(2)  The applicant is not, in the opinion of the chief of police, a person of good moral character. 
(b)  The action of the chief of police in denying such a work permit on the basis of the applicant not being a person of good moral character is subject to an appeal to the city council. Notice of such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days after the denial of the work permit. Upon failure to file such notice within the ten-day period, the action of the chief of police in denying such work permit shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 202B §4(part), 1963)  
5.08.090 - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  The chief of police shall have the right, for cause, to revoke or suspend any card room work permit issued under this chapter and to take possession of such permits. Any of the grounds upon which the chief of police is required to refuse to issue an initial card room license or card room work permit also constitutes grounds for suspension or revocation. In addition, the failure of a holder of a card room license or card room work permit to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall also constitute grounds for revocation or suspension of such license or work permit. 
(b)  The action of the chief of police with respect to revocation or suspension as provided for in subsection A of this section is subject to an appeal to the city council. Notice of such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days after the revocation or suspension. Upon failure to file such notice within the ten-day period, the action of the chief of police in revoking or suspending the license or work permit shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 202B §5, 1963)  
5.08.100 - Nontransferability. 
No card room license is assignable or transferable. 
(Ord. 202B §6, 1963)  
5.08.110 - Card room regulations. 
It is unlawful to operate a card room in violation of any of the following regulations and rules: 
(1)  Not more than one card room shall be located at any one address, and not more than three card table in any one card room. 
(2)  Card rooms shall be located and so arranged that card tables and the players are plainly visible from the card room door opening. No wall, partition, screen or similar structure between the card room door opening and any card table located in the card room shall be permitted if it interferes with such visibility. 
(3)  No minor shall be allowed in card rooms during operating hours. 
(4)  Card rooms may be open seven days a week but shall be closed between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of each day. 
(5)  All card rooms shall be open to police inspection at all times. 
(6)  During hours of operation, doors must be unlocked and accessible to the general public. 
(7)  Operators and employees are required to exhibit their permits on demand of any law enforcement officer. 
(Ord. 202B §7, 1963)  
5.08.120 - Clubs exempted. 
A nonprofit society, club, fraternal, labor or other organization, having adopted bylaws and duly elected directors and members, may be granted a permit without fee by the chief of police, when it appears that the tables are for the exclusive use of members of the society, club, fraternal, labor or other organization, and no charge is made for any of the facilities. 
(Ord. 202B §9, 1963)  
5.08.130 - State laws unimpaired. 
The city council declares that it is not the intention of this chapter to permit the licensing of any card room for the playing of any game prohibited by the laws of the state, including but not limited to those games enumerated in section 330 of the Penal Code of the state of California, which section includes banking and percentage games. 
(Ord. 202B §10, 1963)  
5.08.140 - Violation—Misdemeanor. 
Any person, society, club or organization violating any of the terms, requirements, regulations or provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 202B §11, 1963)  
CHAPTER 5.12 - BINGO 
 
5.12.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter: 
(1)  "Bingo" means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols elected at random. 
(2)  "Nonprofit charitable organization" means an organization which is exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California and a contribution or gift to which would be a charitable contribution under section 170(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. 
(Ord. 317B §1(part), 1976)  
5.12.020 - License authorized. 
A nonprofit charitable organization may be granted a license by the city council or its designated representative to conduct bingo games in the city. 
(Ord. 317B §1(part), 1976)  
5.12.030 - Premises of games. 
A nonprofit charitable organization licensed to conduct bingo games pursuant to this chapter shall conduct such games only on property or premises owned or leased by it, or the use of which by such organization is duly authorized on a regular and continuing basis, which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. 
(Ord. 317B §2, 1976)  
5.12.040 - Who may participate in games. 
Any bingo game conducted under this chapter shall be open to the general public unless restricted to members of the licensed organization. No minors shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. No person shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game unless such person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. 
(Ord. 317B §3, 1976)  
5.12.050 - Prizes. 
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games shall not exceed $250.00 in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. No money or cash shall be pledged, awarded or exchanged as prizes. 
(Ord. 317B §4, 1976)  
5.12.060 - Operation personnel—Financial interest. 
A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the nonprofit charitable organization which organized it. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game. Only the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall operate such game or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity except the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game under this chapter shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. 
(Ord. 317B §5, 1976)  
5.12.070 - Profit, wage or salary prohibited. 
It is a misdemeanor for any person to receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game authorized and licensed under this chapter. 
(Ord. 317B §6, 1976)  
5.12.080 - Actions to enjoin violations. 
The city may bring an action to enjoin a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 317B §7, 1976)  
CHAPTER 5.16 - OUTDOOR MUSIC FESTIVALS 
 
5.16.010 - Findings. 
The city council finds and declares that it is necessary for the protection of the health and welfare of the general public and the inhabitants of the city that rules and regulations be established for the purpose of regulating outdoor music festivals within the city and that, to ensure the public health and safety, measures be provided to regulate outdoor music festivals. 
(Ord. 253B §1, 1972)  
5.16.020 - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person, persons, corporations, organizations, landowner, tenant or lessee to allow, permit, encourage, organize, promote, conduct or advertise any entertainment, game, show, exhibition, activity, amusement, gathering or assembly of persons within the city, where there will be presented outdoor live or recorded musical entertainment which the person, persons, corporation, organization, landowner, tenant or lessee believes or has reason to believe will attract $500.00 or more persons, unless a valid city permit is first obtained for the conducting and operating of such activities. A separate permit is required for each activity. 
(Ord. 253B §2, 1972)  
5.16.030 - Application procedure generally. 
(a)  Written application for a permit to conduct and operate an activity of the kind contemplated in Section 5.16.020 shall be made to the city council. The application shall be submitted 60 days or more prior to the date upon which the activity is to be, or may be, held. Application for the permits provided for in this chapter shall be conditionally approved or denied within 45 days after the application has been filed. Failure by the city council to act within the 45-day period shall constitute approval of the application. If the application of the permit is not approved and the permit is denied, the denial shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons for the denial. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(b)  With each application for a permit to conduct an outdoor music festival, the applicant shall pay an application fee established by resolution of the city council, which fee shall be nonrefundable. 
(Ord. 412B §10(2), 1982; Ord. 253B §3, 1972)  
5.16.040 - City or county approval. 
Whenever approval by a city or county government department, office or other agency is a condition for the issuance of a permit pursuant to application made therefor as set forth in this chapter, the request to such department, office or other agency for such approval shall be made simultaneously with the filing of the application for the permit with the city council. Conditional approval or denial by such government department, office or agency shall be made within 25 days after request for permission has been filed with the government department, office or agency. Failure to act within that period by the government department, office or agency shall constitute its approval. 
(Ord. 253B §4, 1972)  
5.16.050 - Physical facilities' compliance. 
When a physical facility is required or subject to approval under this chapter, conditional approval may be granted upon the basis of specific plans and specifications proposed and submitted by the applicant for permit. Any and all facilities required under the terms of any permit issued shall be in existence and in place at the location for which the permit is granted ten days or more before the date when the event is scheduled to take place and shall be subject to inspection and approval of the agencies, departments or offices whose approval is required. Inspection of any and all facilities referred to in this section shall be approved or disapproved at least five days preceding the event. Failure by the department or agency to act as required in this chapter constitutes an approval. If the facilities fail to meet the standards set forth in the plans and specifications therefor which have been conditionally approved, such conditional approval shall be withdrawn and any and all permits granted subject to such approval shall be cancelled and withdrawn. 
(Ord. 253B §5, 1972)  
5.16.060 - Application contents. 
An application for a permit and the required accompanying documents shall be in six copies and shall show: 
(1)  The owner, exact location, legal description and area of the premises on which it is planned the activities will be conducted; 
(2)  The owner, exact location, legal description and area of all lands to be used for parking or other uses incidental to the activity; 
(3)  The date or dates and the hours during which the event is to be conducted; 
(4)  An estimate of the minimum and maximum numbers of customers, spectators, participants and other persons expected to attend the event for each day it is conducted, together with detailed information supporting such estimate; 
(5)  A detailed explanation of the applicant's program, plans and ability to supply potable water and facilities, food supply and facilities, sanitation facilities (including but not limited to sewage, garbage and rubbish), medical and first aid facilities and services, vehicle parking space, vehicle access, on-site traffic control, evacuation plans for sick or injured persons and to comply with all conditions and regulations set forth in this chapter and in proposed permit conditions; 
(6)  A description of all loudspeakers and sound equipment to be used and the intensity of the sound, in decibels, at the boundaries of the premises; 
(6)  Provisions for cleanup of the premises and removal of rubbish after the event has concluded; 
(8)  Such other information pertinent to the event as the city council or any city officer finds is reasonably necessary and required in order to determine whether or not the permit should be granted; 
(9)  The name, age, residence, mailing address and telephone number of the applicant and applicant's legal nature, such as individual, partnership, corporation, etc. If the application is made by a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners, both general and special, shall be included. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be signed by the president and secretary of the corporation, and shall contain the names and addresses of all corporate officers, and a certified copy of the articles of incorporation shall be attached to the application. If the application is by a joint venture, the names and addresses of each member of the joint venture shall be included; 
(10)  A financial statement sufficient to give assurance of the ability of the applicants to meet the conditions of the permit; 
(11)  A detailed explanation of the applicant's plan for policing the activity with particular emphasis on the control and prevention of illegal alcoholic and illegal drug consumption; 
(12)  A detailed explanation of the applicant's plans in the event more persons attempt to attend the event than is permitted by the particular permit involved; 
(13)  A consent to the entry, at any time in the course of his duties, of any peace officer, and any employee of the sheriff, health officer and any other Placer County officer in the performance of his duties, including but not limited to inspection; 
(14)  The address of applicant within the state of California to which all notices and correspondence addressed to the applicant shall be directed by the city. Any notice or correspondence addressed and mailed postage prepaid to the address shall be deemed received by the applicant. 
(Ord. 253B §6, 1972)  
5.16.070 - Application supplements. 
At the time of filing an application for a permit for an activity or event contemplated in this chapter with the required fee and the items required by Section 5.16.060, the applicant, at the same time, shall file: 
(1)  Six copies of white-background prints of a map, drawn to scale, showing: 
a.  The location of the property on which the event is planned to occur, 
b.  The location of all highways, streets, alleys, lots and parcels of land within 1,000 feet of the exterior boundaries of the proposed use, 
c.  The location of the parking area and of all other areas to be used for other uses incidental to the event, 
d.  All interior accessways, 
e.  Access to the property, 
f.  The location and detailed plans of all buildings and structures on the premises or to be erected, including the bandstand, stage or other facility for performance, 
g.  The location of all loudspeakers, 
h.  The location of all toilet, medical, washing, drinking and other facilities required by this chapter; 
(2)  A certified list, as shown on the latest available assessment roll of the county, of the names and addresses of all persons to whom all property is assessed within 500 feet of the exterior boundaries of the proposed use; 
(3)  An agreement, in writing and signed by all property owners, permitting such use of the premises to be used for both the activity and for parking, or a document showing that the applicant is the owner of those properties; 
(4)  The agreements or contracts which show what doctors, first aid attendants and ambulances will be available at the premises; 
(5)  An agreement, approved as to form by the city attorney and signed by the applicants, that within 72 hours after the conclusion of the event, he or they will clean up the premises and remove all trash, debris, garbage and other waste from in and around the premises. Such agreement shall be secured by an undertaking in a total amount of not less than $5,000.00. The undertaking shall be in the form of a surety bond written by a corporate bonding company authorized to do business in the state of California. The undertaking shall be filed with the city clerk within seven days after the city council grants the permit. The city clerk shall not issue the permit until the undertaking is filed with him in a form approved by the city attorney; 
(6)  An agreement, in writing and approved as to form by the city attorney, and signed by the applicant or applicants and by the owner or owners of the subject premises (including both the premises where the event will be held and where the parking for the event will be located), that they will reimburse all owners and occupants of property adjoining the subject premises for all damages of any kind to such owners or occupants or to their property caused by the applicant or applicants, owner or owners of the subject premises, or by any person attending the event, which damage would not have occurred had the event not been held; and the agreement shall also state that the applicant or applicants and the owner or owners of the subject premises (including both where the event will be held and where the parking therefor will be located) agree to indemnify the city and its officers, agents and employees against any and all loss, injury, damage, claim, liability and cause of action, of any and every nature whatsoever, arising out of or in any way connected with the event and shall indemnify against loss, injury, damage, claim, liability and cause of action to both persons and property. 
(Ord. 253B §7, 1972)  
5.16.080 - Insurance coverage. 
The undertaking or insurance policy required in this chapter shall name the city as an additional insured and shall carry limits of not less than $100,000.00 for each person, $500,000.00 for each occurrence and $500,000.00 aggregate for property damage liability. The liability coverage policy shall have an insuring agreement reading as follows: 
(1)  Coverage A—Bodily and Personal Injury Liability. To pay on the behalf of the insured all sums the insured becomes obligated to pay by reason of liability imposed by law, including Chapter 1681 of the state of California Statutes of 1963, or liability assumed by contract, insofar as the named insured may legally do so, for damages: 
a.  Because of bodily injury, sickness or disease, including death at any time resulting therefrom and also including care and loss of services, sustained by any person or persons; or 
b.  Because of any other injury a person may suffer to his person, reputation, character or feelings, including but not limited to malpractice, false arrest, detention or imprisonment, malicious prosecution, libel, slander, defamation of character, invasion of privacy, wrongful eviction or wrongful entry. 
(2)  Coverage B—Property Damage and Liability—Automobile. To pay on behalf of the insured all sums which the insured becomes obligated to pay by reason of liability imposed by law, including Chapter 1681 of the state of California Statutes of 1963, or liability assumed by contract, insofar as the named insured may legally do so, for damages because of injury to or destruction of property, including the loss of use thereof, arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of any automobile. 
(3)  Coverage C—Property Damage Liability—Except Automobile. To pay on behalf of the insured all sums which the insured becomes obligated to pay by reason of liability imposed by law, including Chapter 1681 of the state of California Statutes of 1963, or liability assumed by contract, insofar as the named insured may legally do so, for damages because of injury or destruction of property, including the loss of use thereof. 
(4)  Coverage D—Errors or Omissions Liability. To pay on behalf of the insured all sums which the insured become legally obligated to pay, insofar as such coverage is not afforded under Coverage A or C, on account of any claim for breach of duty made against the insured by reason of any negligent act, error or omission of the insured if such negligent act, error or omission is committed during the policy period and discovered during the policy period or within 24 months after termination of the policy. 
(5)  Persons Insured. Each of the following is an insured to the extent set forth below: 
a.  The named insured; 
b.  While acting within the scope of his employment as such: 
1.  Any officer, servant or employee of the named insured, except that the insurance so provided any officer, servant or employee does not apply to bodily injury to or death of another officer, servant or employee of the named insured injured in the course of and arising out of his employment, 
2.  Any member of the governing body of the named insured, 
3.  Any member of boards or commissions of the named insured; 
c.  Under Coverages A and B, any person while using an owned automobile or a hired automobile and any person or organization legally responsible for the use thereof, provided the actual use of the automobile is by or with the permission of the named insured. The insurance with respect to any person or organization other than the named insured does not apply under Coverage C of the insurance agreement: 
1.  To any person or organization, or to any agent or employee thereof engaged in selling, repairing, servicing, delivering, testing, road testing, parking or storing automobiles, with respect to any occurrence arising out of any such occupation, if there is other valid and collectible insurance available to such person as named insured or as an agent or employee of a named insured under a policy with limits at least equal to the requirements of the applicable financial responsibility law; provided, that in the event there is no such other valid and collectible insurance, coverage shall be afforded such person or organization with limits of liability equal to the requirements of the financial responsibility laws, 
2.  With respect to any hired automobile, to the owner or lessee thereof other than the named insured, or to any agent or employee of such owner or lessee. 
(Ord. 253B §8, 1972)  
5.16.090 - Insurance company rating. 
The undertaking or insurance and bonding companies required by this agreement shall be written in an insurance company having a Best's Key Rating of not less than AAAA. Liability insurance shall be furnished in an amount commonly known as $100,000.00/500,000.00 and property damage in the amount of $100,000.00, under which the city shall be named as co-insured. 
(Ord. 253B §9, 1972)  
5.16.100 - Hearing on permit application. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a complete application, including accompanying documents and the application fee, the city clerk shall with due diligence transmit the same to the city council and the city clerk at that time shall request the city council to set a time and date for a public hearing. The city council shall set the application for public hearing at a regular meeting of the council not more than 30 days thereafter. The city clerk shall thereupon give not less than ten days' written notice of the hearing to the applicant by mail, postage prepaid, to the address set forth in the application. The city clerk shall also give written notice of the hearing and copies of the application to the chief of police, the county health officer, the county director of public works and the city attorney, who shall investigate the matter and report in writing to the city council not later than the time set for the hearing, with appropriate recommendations concerning the activity. 
(b)  The city clerk shall also serve notice of the time and place of the hearing contemplated in subsection A of this section by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city at least ten days before the hearing, and shall also, not less than ten days before such hearing, send written notice by mail of the time and place of the hearing to all persons whose names and addresses appear upon the latest available assessment roll of the county as owners of property within 500 feet of the exterior boundaries of the proposed use. 
(c)  At the hearing provided for in this section, the applicant shall have the right to testify and to present other evidence. 
(Ord. 253B §10, 1972)  
5.16.110 - Grant or denial of permit. 
If the city council finds that the applicant has complied with or will comply with the requirements of this chapter, it shall grant the permit; providing, however, that the permit shall be revoked at any time the applicant fails to meet the conditions of this chapter. The permit shall state the maximum number of persons allowed to attend the event. If the city council finds that the applicants has not complied with this chapter and ordinances of the city and Placer County applicable thereto, then the permit shall be denied. 
(Ord. 253B §11, 1972)  
5.16.120 - Drinking water and toilet facilities. 
The following regulations must be complied with by each permittee: 
(1)  Drinking Water. 
a.  The permittee shall provide a potable domestic water supply from a source approved by the health officer. Water shall not be dipped from a receptacle for drinking or cooking uses. All food concessions that handle other than packaged or bottled goods must be supplied with hot and cold running water under pressure and a means of disposing of wastewater. 
b.  If trucks are used to haul water into the site, they shall, prior to use, be cleaned and sterilized under the supervision of the county health department. 
c.  Water shall be provided for employees and spectators at the following rate per person per day: employees, 35 gallons; spectators, ten gallons. 
d.  The approval of the county health officer of the permittee's drinking water plans shall be a prerequisite to issuance of a permit. 
(2)  Sanitary Facilities. 
a.  Adequate toilet facilities for both sexes must be distributed throughout the grounds as follows: one water closet, chemical or sanitary privy unit must be supplied for each 250 persons. 
b.  Toilet facilities and accessories shall be maintained in a sanitary condition at all times and shall be cleaned at least twice each day. 
c.  Wastewater and sewage originating on the grounds must be disposed of by a system approved by the health officer. 
d.  The approval by the health officer of the permittee's sanitary facilities plans shall be a prerequisite for the issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. 253B §12, 1972)  
5.16.130 - Parking. 
The permittee shall have on the premises, or contiguous thereto, automobile storage spaces equal to one-fourth of the number of persons which the permit allows to attend the event. At all times between one hour before the beginning of the event and one hour after its termination, the permittee shall provide a sufficient number of parking attendants at all entrances, exits and within the parking lots. The approval of the permittee's parking plans shall be a prerequisite to the issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. 253B §13, 1972)  
5.16.140 - Solid waste disposal. 
(a)  The permittee shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the health officer that the permittee has an adequate plan for the proper storage, collection and disposal of garbage, trash and refuse. All solid waste material shall be disposed of by the sanitary landfill method, and the event area and parking shall be returned to a litter-free condition within 72 hours after the event is concluded, all to the satisfaction of the health officer. 
(b)  Every licensee shall be required to furnish at least one trash can with at least 32 gallons capacity for every 25 persons expected to be in attendance. Proof that the requisite quantity of trash and refuse receptacles will be available must be made to the health officer. 
(c)  The approval by the health officer of the permittee's solid waste disposal plans is a prerequisite to the issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. 253B §14, 1972)  
5.16.150 - Days and hours of operation. 
The permittee shall operate the event only on those days and during the hours specified on the permit. 
(Ord. 253B §15, 1972)  
5.16.160 - Admission—Tickets. 
Admission shall be by ticket only. The permittee shall not admit and shall prevent the entrance of any person who does not possess a ticket to the event, except a peace officer or other county public officer or employee or agent thereof. The permittee shall not sell, give or distribute a greater number of tickets than the number which the permit allows to attend. Permittee shall submit a proposal for prevention of entrance of unauthorized persons and means of implementing the proposal. 
(Ord. 253B §16, 1972)  
5.16.170 - Permit to precede publicity. 
A person shall not advertise or announce by any means or medium, including but not confined to pamphlets, handbills, newspaper, radio and television, the holding of such an event prior to the granting of a permit. 
(Ord. 253B §17, 1972)  
5.16.180 - Food and drink facilities. 
The permittee shall be required to provide food and drink service facilities to adequately feed the number of persons allowed by permit. In selling, preparing, delivering or serving food or beverages, or both, all persons shall comply with the California Restaurant Act, Chapter 11, beginning with section 28590 of Division 21 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California, and also with the Placer County Ordinance Code, all to the satisfaction of the health officer. The approval of the health officer of the permittee's food and beverage plans is a prerequisite to the issuance of a permit for an outdoor music festival. 
(Ord. 253B §18, 1972)  
5.16.190 - Medical care. 
(a)  The permittee shall be responsible for making adequate plans for medical coverage of performers, employees, participants, customers and spectators. 
(b)  There shall be at least one physician per 1,000 persons available on the site all the time during preparation and performance of the outdoor festival. Adequate medical supply, including personnel and material for first aid and minor emergency surgery, shall be available on the site. An adequately protected area shall be set aside for the purpose of medical care. An area suitable for recovery from reaction to drug abuse shall be available. The permittee shall furnish one ambulance per each 1,000 persons at the event. 
(c)  The permittee's plans for the medical preparedness required by this section shall be subject to approval by the county health officer and such approval is a prerequisite to the issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. 253B §19, 1972)  
5.16.200 - Illumination. 
(a)  Every permittee planning an event after dark, or planning to allow persons who attend the public to remain on the premises after dark, shall provide electrical illumination to ensure that those areas which are occupied are lighted at all times. The planning director must approve an applicant's lighting plans as a prerequisite to the issuance of a permit. 
(b)  A permittee shall be required to illuminate specific areas on the premises in accordance with the following scale of lighting intensity: 
Open areas reserved for spectators 	 10 footcandles; 
Stage areas 	100 footcandles; 
Parking areas 	   5 footcandles; 
Restroom and concession areas 	 50 footcandles. 
 
(Ord. 253B §20, 1972)  
5.16.210 - Zoning compliance. 
The permittee shall comply with all applicable zoning regulations of the city. 
(Ord. 253B §21, 1972)  
5.16.220 - Nontransferability of permit. 
No permit granted under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable to another location, another person or entity, or another set of dates. 
(Ord. 253B §22, 1972)  
5.16.230 - Building, grading and encroachment. 
Prior to doing any construction, excavation, grading or encroachment required for the event, the permittee or applicant shall obtain from the city all necessary permits therefor. 
(Ord. 253B §23, 1972)  
5.16.240 - Camping facilities. 
Every permittee of an event which will last more than one day, or at which persons will remain overnight on the premises, shall provide camping facilities and overnight areas. Plans for these areas must be approved by the health officer and comply with Division 5, Title 25, of the California Administrative Code, "Incidental Camp Areas." 
(Ord. 253B §24, 1972)  
CHAPTER 5.20 - STATE VIDEO SERVICE FRANCHISES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 966B , § 6, adopted May 8, 2018, repealed the former Ch. 5.20., §§ 5.20.010—5.20.570, and enacted a new Ch. 5.20 as set out herein. The former Ch. 5.20 pertained cable tv franchises and derived from Ord. 370B §§1—3, §4(A—F), §5, §6(A—H), §7(A—K), §8(A—E), §§9—11, § 12(A)(1—4), §12(B), §13(A—J), §§ 14—15, §16(A—J), §17, §18(A—C), 1980; Ord. 470B §§1—8, 1985; Ord. 502B §1, 1988; Ord. 669B §§1—8, 1999; Ord. 670B §1(part), 1999. 
 
5.20.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter applies to all cable service or video service providers who are applying for, or have been awarded a franchise under Public Utilities Code §§ 5800, et seq., the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 ("DIVCA") to serve any area within the city of Lincoln, including cable service or video service providers who are otherwise subject to DIVCA. By this chapter the city of Lincoln intends to exercise to the fullest extent possible all rights and privileges afforded to it by DIVCA and any other applicable law. 
( Ord. No. 966B, § 6, 5-8-2018 )  
5.20.020 - Definitions and interpretation of language. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. Unless otherwise expressly stated, words not defined in this chapter shall be given the meaning set forth in Public Utilities Code §§ 5800, et seq., as may be amended in the future. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the plural include the singular: words in the singular include the plural; and "including" and "include" are not limiting. The word "shall" is always mandatory. 
(1)  "Access," "PEG access," "PEG use," or "PEG" mean the availability of a cable or video system for public, educational, or governmental use by various agencies, institutions, organizations, groups, and individuals, including the city of Lincoln and its exclusive city use channels or any existing agreement between the city and any incumbent cable operator, to acquire, create, and distribute programming not under a state franchise holder's editorial control. 
(2)  "City" means the city of Lincoln, California. 
(3)  "City Council" means the City Council of the city of Lincoln. 
(4)  "City Manager" means the City Manager of the city of Lincoln, or his or her designee. 
(5)  "Director" means the Director of Public Services of the city of Lincoln, or his or her designee. 
(6)  "State franchise holder," "holder of a state franchise," "holder of the state franchise," or "holder" mean any person or group of persons who has been issued a franchise by the California Public Utilities Commission to provide cable service or video service, as those terms are defined in Public Utilities Code § 5830, within any portion of the city of Lincoln. 
( Ord. No. 966B, § 6, 5-8-2018 )  
5.20.030 - State franchise holder fee. 
Any state franchise holder operating within the city shall pay to the city a state franchise fee in the amount of five percent of gross revenues as defined by Public Utilities Code § 5860(d). Nothing in this section is intended to limit the city's ability to impose utility user taxes and other generally applicable taxes, fees, and charges that are applied in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner. 
( Ord. No. 966B, § 6, 5-8-2018 )  
5.20.040 - State franchise holder PEG fees. 
Any state franchise holder operating within the city shall pay to the city a public education and government ("PEG") fee in the amount of one percent of gross revenues, as set forth in Public Utilities Code § 5870(n) at such time as the city council determines, by resolution, to begin imposing and collecting this PEG fee. City shall provide a minimum of sixty days' written notice to the state franchise holders then operating within the city of the imposition of the PEG fee and the effective date that the PEG fee will commence. 
( Ord. No. 966B, § 6, 5-8-2018 )  
5.20.050 - PEG access channels 
Any state franchise holder operating within the city shall designate a sufficient amount of capacity on its network to allow the provision of the same number of public, educational, and government (PEG) channels as were activated and provided as of January 1, 2007 within the city by the then incumbent cable operator. Nothing in this section prevents the city from requesting up to a total of three PEG channels pursuant to Public Utilities Code § 5870. Upon the receipt of such a request, the state franchise holder shall provide the channel(s) no later than three months from the date of the request, unless the state franchise holder can demonstrate that the provision of one or more of the channels is technically infeasible, as set forth in Section 5870. 
( Ord. No. 966B, § 6, 5-8-2018 )  
5.20.060 - Interconnection for PEG programming. 
Each holder of a state franchise, and each incumbent cable operator operating under a city franchise issued pursuant to this Code, shall negotiate with each other in good faith to interconnect their networks for the purpose of providing PEG programming including, but not limited to, any exclusive city use channel. Interconnection may be accomplished by any means authorized under Public Utilities Code § 5870(h). Each holder of a state franchise and any incumbent cable operator shall provide interconnection of PEG channels including any exclusive city use channel on reasonable terms and conditions and may not withhold the interconnection. If a holder of a state franchise and an incumbent cable operator cannot reach a mutually acceptable interconnection agreement, the city may require the incumbent cable operator to allow the holder of the state franchise to interconnect its network with the incumbent cable operator's network at a technically feasible point on the state franchise holder's network as identified by the holder or as otherwise permitted by applicable law. If no technically feasible point for interconnection is available, the holder of a state franchise shall make an interconnection available to the channel originator and shall provide the facilities necessary for the interconnection. The cost of any interconnection shall be borne by the state franchise holder requesting the interconnection unless otherwise agreed to by the state franchise holder and the incumbent cable operator. To the extent not inconsistent with Public Utilities Code § 5870(h), the city manager or the city manager's designee may waive, modify or defer this requirement of interconnection in his or her sole discretion. 
( Ord. No. 966B, § 6, 5-8-2018 )  
5.20.070 - Payment of fees. 
The state franchise holder shall pay quarterly all fees required pursuant to this chapter in a manner consistent with Public Utilities Code § 5860. The state franchise holder shall deliver to the city by check or other means agreeable to the city manager, a separate payment for the state franchise fee and the PEG fee not later than 45 days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each payment made shall be accompanied by a report to the city manager summarizing the basis for the calculation of the payment. 
( Ord. No. 966B, § 6, 5-8-2018 )  
5.20.080 - Examination of state franchisee's business records. 
The city may examine the business records of the holder of a state franchise in a manner consistent with Public Utilities Code § 5860(i) and Chapter 5.36.640 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 966B, § 6, 5-8-2018 )  
5.20.090 - Late payments. 
In the event a state franchise holder fails to make a state franchise fee payment required by this chapter on or before the due dates specified herein, the city shall impose a late charge at the rate per year equal to the highest prime lending rate during the period of delinquency, plus one percent unless a different rate is set by applicable law or resolution adopted by the city council. 
( Ord. No. 966B, § 6, 5-8-2018 )  
5.20.100 - Lease of city property or network. 
To the extent not inconsistent with Public Utilities Code § 5840(q)(2)(B), in the event a state franchise holder desires to lease access to city property or to a network owned or controlled by the city, the city may set terms and charge a fee for access to the property or city network separate and apart from any franchise fee or other fee charged to the state franchise holders pursuant to this chapter or DIVCA. The city council may set any such fee by resolution. 
( Ord. No. 966B, § 6, 5-8-2018 )  
5.20.110 - Customer service and consumer protection standards. 
Each state franchise holder shall comply with all applicable customer service and consumer protection standards, including to the extent not inconsistent with Public Utilities Code § 5900, all existing and subsequently enacted customer service and consumer protection standards established by local, state or federal law and regulation. 
( Ord. No. 966B, § 6, 5-8-2018 )  
5.20.120 - Penalties for violations of standards. 
The city shall monitor compliance with and enforce the provisions of this chapter and DIVCA. 
For any material breach as defined in Public Utilities Code § 5900 by a state franchise holder of applicable customer service and consumer protection standards, the city manager or the city manager's designee, in his or her sole discretion may impose the following fines or penalties: 
For the first occurrence of a material breach a fine of $500.00 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $1,500.00 for each violation. 
For a second material breach of the same nature within 12 months, a fine of $1,000.00 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $3,000.00 for each violation. 
For a third or further material breach of the same nature within 12 months, a fine of $2,500.00 shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $7,500.00 for each violation. 
Any penalties imposed by the city shall be imposed in a manner not inconsistent with Public Utilities Code § 5900. 
To the extent not inconsistent with Public Utilities Code § 5900, the city, acting through its city manager or his or her designee in its sole discretion, may waive, modify, or defer the imposition of a penalty. 
( Ord. No. 966B, § 6, 5-8-2018 )  
5.20.130 - Encroachment permits. 
Prior to commencing any work upon, above or below any street, highway, sidewalk, parkway, alley or other public right of way of any kind whatsoever within the city, a state franchise holder shall apply for and obtain an encroachment permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and Title 12 of the Code, and shall comply with all other applicable laws and regulations, including but not limited to all applicable requirements of Public Resources Code §§ 21000, et seq., the California Environmental Quality Act. 
The director shall either approve or deny an application from a state franchise holder for an encroachment permit within 30 days of receiving a completed application. 
An application for an encroachment permit is considered complete when the applicant has complied with all statutory requirements, including the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) process. Any city denial of an application for an encroachment permit shall be in writing and shall contain a reasonably detailed explanation for the denial. 
A state franchise holder that has been denied a permit or whose permit has been revoked may appeal the denial or revocation to the city council in accordance with Chapter 12.02.120, which procedures and terms shall govern the appeal. 
( Ord. No. 966B, § 6, 5-8-2018 )  
5.20.140 - Identification required. 
Employees, agents, contractors, and subcontractors of any state franchise holder shall at all times be properly identified as employees or agents of the state franchise holder while performing any work or other activity within the city on behalf of the state franchise holder. Identification shall include the name of the employee or agent. The name and telephone number of the state franchise holder shall appear on all trucks and vehicles used by such personnel. 
( Ord. No. 966B, § 6, 5-8-2018 )  
5.20.150 - Emergency alert systems. 
Each state franchise holder shall comply with the emergency alert system requirements of the Federal Communications Commission in order that emergency messages may be distributed over the state franchise holder's network. 
To the extent not inconsistent with Public Utilities Code § 5880, each state franchise holder shall incorporate into its network the capability to permit the city in times of emergency to override the audio portion of all channels simultaneously. In addition, if feasible, each state franchise holder may be required to designate a channel, which may be a PEG channel, to be used for emergency broadcasts of both audio and video signals. The state franchise holder shall cooperate with the city in the use and operation of the emergency alert override system. 
( Ord. No. 966B, § 6, 5-8-2018 )  
5.20.160 - Notices. 
Each state franchise holder or applicant for a state franchise shall file with the city manager a copy of all applications that the state franchise holder or applicant is required to file with the public utilities commission. 
Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, all notices or other documentation that a state franchise holder is required to provide to the city under this chapter or the Public Utilities Code shall be provided to the city manager. 
( Ord. No. 966B, § 6, 5-8-2018 )  
5.20.170 - Rights reserved. 
The rights reserved to the city of Lincoln under this chapter are in addition to all other applicable rights of the city, whether granted or reserved by other provisions of the Lincoln Municipal Code or as otherwise authorized by federal or state law and no action, proceeding, or exercise of a right by the city of Lincoln shall affect any other rights which may be held by the city of Lincoln. 
( Ord. No. 966B, § 6, 5-8-2018 )  
5.20.180 - Compliance with law. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a state franchise holder from compliance with all applicable ordinances, rules or regulations of the city of Lincoln now in effect or which may be adopted that are not inconsistent with this chapter or Public Utilities Code §§ 5800, et seq., including but not limited to the provisions of Chapter 12.04 of this Code. Any reference in this chapter to these or other chapters does not exclude the applicability of any other provision of federal, state or local law. 
( Ord. No. 966B, § 6, 5-8-2018 )  
CHAPTER 5.24 - STREET VENDORS 
 
5.24.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, "person" means any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, corporation, or company. 
(Ord. 450B §6, 1984)  
5.24.020 - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person to sell, display for sale, or offer for sale any goods, wares, merchandise, food, or other personal property of any kind or description for which a price is asked and the article delivered on or from the public sidewalks, streets, or alleys of the city or from any other city-owned place unless such person has first been issued a street vendor's permit by the community development director and the police chief for each vending location and unless such person complies with all of the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 450B §1, 1984)  
5.24.030 - Permit application—Content. 
An applicant for a street vendor's permit shall submit an application to the community development director. The application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The true name of the applicant, together with the names of all persons directly or indirectly interested in the conduct of the street vending activity, including all members of any firm or partnership. A corporate applicant shall list the officers, directors, and principal owners, including all owners of ten percent or more of the corporate stock; 
(2)  Whether or not any street vendor's permit heretofore issued to the applicant to engage in street vending within the city or elsewhere has been revoked or denied, and if so, the circumstances surrounding the revocation or denial; 
(3)  The location at which the applicant proposes to vend; 
(4)  The type of goods, wares, merchandise, food or other personal property to be sold or offered for sale, the proposed hours of operation, and a description, drawing, or picture of any fixtures or equipment to be used at the location; 
(5)  Evidence of payment of the license tax required under Chapter 5.04 of this code for the then-current year; 
(6)  Such additional information bearing on the identity of the applicant or the applicant's employees and the location and nature of the proposed vending activity, as the community development director or the chief of police may require. 
(Ord. 450B §2, 1984)  
5.24.040 - Permit application—Review and investigation. 
(a)  An application shall be reviewed and investigated by the community development director and the chief of police. The investigation shall take into consideration the nature of the proposed vending activity, the location, and any law-enforcement problems issuance of the permit might tend to create. 
(b)  The community development director and the chief of police may deny a permit if, in their opinions, the vending activity will be located and operated in such a manner as to tend to cause law-enforcement problems or create a public nuisance, or where granting of the permit would not be compatible with the public health, safety, and welfare. The community development director and the chief of police shall deny the permit if there is currently due but not yet paid a license tax under Chapter 5.04 of this code. 
(c)  The community development director and the chief of police may impose reasonable conditions relating to the location and operation of the proposed vending activity as they deem appropriate. 
(Ord. 450B §3, 1984)  
5.24.050 - Permit—Term—Revocation. 
A street vendor's permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. A street vendor's permit may be revoked by the community development director or the chief of police if the license tax under Chapter 5.04 of this code becomes due and is not paid, the permittee violates any conditions imposed on issuance of the permit, or the permittee violates any requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 450B §4, 1984)  
5.24.060 - Days of operation. 
A street vendor's permit shall authorize street vending activity for no more than 12 calendar days per year per permittee. Days of operation shall be listed at the time the permit is issued. 
(Ord. 450B §5, 1984)  
5.24.070 - Exceptions. 
(a)  This chapter shall not apply to the following activities and businesses: 
(1)  The sale of newspapers, books, periodicals, and other printed materials; 
(2)  Outdoor sales conducted by a business, provided that the business is located within a building, and further provided that the sales are conducted at a location immediately contiguous to the business location; 
(3)  Automobile, boat, trailer, camper, and motorcycle sales and rentals; 
(4)  Retail lumber yards; 
(5)  Gasoline pumps, oil racks, and accessory items when located on pump islands; 
(6)  Christmas tree sales; 
(7)  Fireworks sales; 
(8)  Yard sales (a maximum of two per calendar year, not to exceed two consecutive days). All yard sales are to be operated only during daylight hours; 
(9)  Temporary circus and carnival activities (four days maximum per event); 
(10)  Mobile health and veterinary clinics; 
(11)  Fund-raising activities conducted by organizations exempted from the business operations tax; 
(12)  Sale of food from motorized vehicles which do not remain at one location in excess of 15 minutes. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not relieve persons engaged in the activities listed in subsection (a) of this section from obtaining any other permit or license or complying with any other law, ordinance, rule or regulation which may be applicable to such activity. 
(Ord. 735B §1, 2003; Ord. 450B §7, 1984)  
5.24.080 - Violation—Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed. 
(b)  A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 450B §8, 1984)  
CHAPTER 5.28 - PAWNBROKERS 
 
5.28.010 - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
"Pawnbroker" means any person, copartnership, firm, or corporation whose principle business is primarily that of engaging in buying, selling, trading, taking in pawn, or accepting for sale on consignment tangible personal property, or the business of loaning money for himself or herself, or any other person, upon personal property, or the business of purchasing articles of personal property, and reselling or agreeing to resell such articles to the vendors or their assigns, at prices agreed upon at or before the time of such purchase. Pawnbroker does not include any person who engages in the business of buying or selling secondhand tangible personal property in an amount less than 20 percent of the gross sales and purchases of goods or merchandise sold or purchased in that person's regular course of business. 
"Pawnshop" means any room, store, or place in which any pawnbroker engages in, carries on, or conducts his or her business. 
(Ord. 518B §1(part), 1989)  
5.28.020 - Daily reports to police—Contents. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker within the city shall, on each day at the close of each business day, make and deliver to the chief of police, in writing, a full, true, and complete report on a form to be furnished by the police chief, in chronological order of all dealings in secondhand goods, wares, and merchandise, including radios for use in or upon automobiles. Every such report made by such pawnbroker shall include the following information for each item purchased or received within the 24 hours preceding the making of the report: 
(1)  The name and place of business of the person preparing the report; 
(2)  The date and hour of preparation; 
(3)  The date and time of day each article was received or purchased; 
(4)  The name and address of the person from whom such article was received or purchased; a description of him as required by the chief of police, and identification evidenced by a motor vehicle operator's license, motor vehicle license, work badge number, and personal signature; 
(5)  The amount paid for each article; 
(6)  In the event any article received or purchased has engraved thereon any number, word or initial, or contains any settings of any kind, such report shall include such number, word, or initial and shall indicate the kind of settings and the number of each; 
(7)  A complete description of each article, including color, the manufacturer's name, model number, serial number, identification mark, and any peculiarities of the article; 
(8)  A certification by the intended seller that to his or her knowledge and belief the information is true and complete. 
(b)  Every pawnbroker shall maintain a complete record of all goods, wares, or merchandise purchased or received, which record shall contain all of the matters required to be shown in the report referred to in subsection (a) of this section. Such records and all goods, wares or merchandise purchased or received shall be open and available at all times during normal business hours to the inspection of the police chief or his authorized representative. Each such record shall be kept for at least one year from and after the date of the transaction to which it refers. 
(c)  The chief of police, upon receipt of such report, shall file the same in some secure place in his office, and such report shall be open to inspection only to members of police departments authorized to enforce the law within the state, the sheriff or his officers and deputies, the district attorney of the county or by others upon an order of the court having competent jurisdiction, made for that purpose. 
(Ord. 518B §1(part), 1989)  
5.28.030 - Daily report—Copy to be kept—Inspection. 
Every pawnbroker shall keep in his place of business a copy of every report required by section 5.28.020. Such copy shall be open at all times during business hours to the inspection of any police officer authorized to enforce the law within the state. Such report shall be kept in book form, and each transaction shall be kept in chronological order. 
(Ord. 518B §1(part), 1989)  
5.28.040 - Daily report—Failure or refusal to keep report. 
It is unlawful for any pawnbroker, or for any agent or employee of such pawnbroker, to fail, refuse or neglect to file a report as required in this chapter, in the manner, form and time, and in all respects in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, or to fail, refuse or neglect to exhibit to the chief of police, or to his officers, or to any officer authorized by law, immediately upon demand, any such form or record, or any goods, wares and merchandise, including radios for use in or upon automobiles so purchased or received by such pawnbroker, or by any agent or employee of such pawnbroker. 
(Ord. 518B §1(part), 1989)  
5.28.050 - Reports—Blank forms—Charges. 
The police chief shall, from time to time, provide the blank forms required by the provisions of Section 5.28.020 of this chapter to the persons from whom the reports are required, at a charge to be determined by resolution of the council. Such charge shall be paid to the city, upon receipt of the blanks, by the person from whom such reports are required. 
(Ord. 518B §1(part), 1989)  
5.28.060 - Articles to be kept for 30 days. 
All goods, wares and merchandise, including radios for use in or upon automobiles, purchased or received by any pawnbroker, shall be held for a period of at least 30 days after they have been purchased or received, before they may be sold or otherwise disposed of, excepting however, all goods, wares and merchandise, including radios for use in automobiles upon which any duly licensed pawnbroker has issued a pawn ticket, in accordance with the laws of the state. During the 30-day period all such property shall be kept separate and apart from all other goods, wares and merchandise, including radios for use in or upon automobiles, upon the premises in the possession of such pawnbroker. All such property shall, during the 30-day period, be kept and exposed for police inspection during business hours. 
(Ord. 518B §1(part), 1989)  
5.28.070 - Permit—Required—Issuance. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, manage or carry on the business of pawnbroker without having a valid, existing and unrevoked permit therefor. Such permit shall be issued by the chief of police on application therefor. The application for such permit shall be in a form as the chief of police shall require. Every permittee shall keep on display in the permittee's place of business the permit obtained from the chief of police. 
(Ord. 518B §1(part), 1989)  
5.28.080 - Permit—Revocation conditions. 
(a)  In the event that any person holding a permit authorizing him to engage in, conduct, manage or carry on the business of a pawnbroker, or any agent or employee of such person shall violate, or cause, or permit to be violated any of the provisions of this chapter, the chief of police shall, in addition to the other penalties, revoke such permit. If the permit of any such person shall be revoked, no permit shall be granted to such person to conduct or carry on such business within six months after such revocation. 
(b)  No permit shall be revoked until a public hearing shall have been had by the chief of police. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing, and shall state the grounds of complaint against the permittee and shall also state the time and place where such hearing will be held. Such notice shall be served upon the holder of such permit, or his manager or agent, at least three days prior to the hearing of the revocation of such permit, by delivering such notice in writing to the permittee, or his manager or agent, or any person in charge of or employed at the place of business of such permittee or if such permittee has no place of business, then his place of residence, or by leaving such notice at the place of business or residence of such permittee. At the hearing the permittee and any other interested person shall have the right to present evidence as to the facts upon which the chief proposes to revoke the permit, and any other facts which may aid the chief in determining whether this chapter has been violated and whether any of the prohibited acts have occurred. If after such hearing, the chief finds that any or all of the violations have occurred, he shall within five days after the hearing serve by certified mail upon permittee and all interested persons participating in the hearing and requesting the same, a written statement of the facts upon which he bases such finding and shall immediately revoke the permit. 
(Ord. 518B §1(part), 1989)  
5.28.090 - Permit—Revocation—Appeal. 
Within five days after receiving notification by certified mail that his or her permit under this chapter has been revoked, any permittee may file with the city clerk a written notice of appeal from said revocation, addressed to the council on the appeal, and stating therein written exceptions to the findings of fact upon which the chief of police based his revocation of the permit. Said exceptions shall include, but not be limited to, statements why permittee believes the chief acted improperly or failed to act properly. Upon the filing of said notice of appeal, the council shall fix a time, date, and place for a public hearing thereon and shall send by mail to permittee a notice of the time, date, and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be held at a regular meeting of the council not more than 30 days from the date on which the notice of appeal was filed with the city clerk. The council by resolution, shall, no later than 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing, make findings of fact and either affirm or reverse the chief's revocation of the permit. The council, in said resolution, shall state the facts upon which its decision is based and shall state its ruling upon any exceptions filed to the chief's original findings of fact. A copy of said resolution shall be served by mail upon the applicant and all parties to the hearing requesting the same. The council's decision by said resolution shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 518B §1(part), 1989)  
5.28.100 - Hours of operation. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, manage or carry on the business of a pawnbroker between the hours of 7:00 p.m. of each day and 8:00 a.m. of the following morning, except that on Saturday and days before legal holidays, and during the 24 hours next preceding Christmas Day, each such person may engage in, conduct, manage, or carry on such business until the hour of 9:00 p.m. 
(Ord. 518B §1(part), 1989)  
5.28.110 - Allowing or permitting unlicensed person to deal in secondhand goods prohibited. 
Every person, except pawnbrokers, as defined in this chapter, having an established and fixed place of business in the city, and the servants, agents, and employees of such person, who shall allow, permit, or encourage any person not possessing a permit as required by this chapter to manager or carry on the business of pawnbrokering in or about such established and fixed place of business, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 518B §1(part), 1989)  
5.28.120 - Construction with other laws. 
The restrictions imposed by Chapter 5.28 shall be in addition to any and all other laws of the state of California regulating pawnbrokers or pawnshops. 
(Ord. 518B §1(part), 1989)  
CHAPTER 5.32 - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND SERVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 877B, § 1, adopted Jan. 22, 2013, repealed Ch. 5.32 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 5.32 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 5.32, §§ 5.32.010—5.32.340, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 651B, § 1(part), adopted in 1998; Ord. 675B § 1(part), adopted in 1999; Ord. 810B § 1, adopted in 2006; Ord. No. 833B, § 1, 6-10-2008. 
 
5.32.010 - Definitions. 
Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in this chapter. 
"Accessory massage establishment" means an establishment as defined below which may offer massages or massage therapy as incidental (less than 50 percent) to the primary business. The following businesses may offer massage services as an accessory use: health clubs, hotels with 100 or more rooms, beauty salons, barber shops, chiropractor's offices, physical therapy offices, medical doctors' offices, and day spas. Massage must be administered by a certified massage therapist or practitioner or professionals identified in Section 5.32.020. 
"Certified" means any valid certificate issued in accordance with Sections 4600 through 4620 of the California Business and Professions Code. 
"Compensation" means the payment, loan, advance, donation, contribution, deposit, or gift of money or anything of value. 
"Council" means the California Massage Therapy Council created pursuant to Sections 4600—4620 of the California Business and Professions Code. 
"Massage" or "massage therapy" means any method of pressure on, or friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating the external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, or with or without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil, powder, cream, ointment, or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice. For purposes of this chapter, "massage" and "bodywork" shall have the same meaning. 
"Massage establishment" means any establishment having a fixed place of business where any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or combination of individuals, engages in, conducts, carries on or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, massages, baths or health treatments involving massage or baths. 
"Massage practitioner", "bodywork practitioner or "massage and bodywork practitioner" means a person who is certified by the California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC) under Subdivision (b) of Section 4601 of the California Business and Professions Code, and who administers massage for compensation. 
"Massage therapist", "bodyworker", "bodywork therapist", or "massage and bodywork therapist" means a person who is certified by the California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC) under Subdivision (c) of Section 4601 of the California Business and Professions Code, and who administers massage for compensation. 
"Operator" means the individual who manages the massage establishment. Evidence of management includes, but is not limited to, evidence that the individual has power to direct or hire and dismiss employees, control hours of operation, create policy or rules or purchase supplies. An operator may also be an owner. 
"Owner" means the individual(s) whose name appears on the city's business license. 
(Ord. No. 877B, § 1, 1-22-2013)  
5.32.020 - Massage certification required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, corporation or other entity to engage in, conduct or carry on, permit to engage in, in or upon any premises within the city limits the business of providing massages in exchange for compensation without being currently certified as a massage practitioner or massage therapist by the CAMTC in accordance with Sections 4600 through 4620 of the California Business and Professions Code. For those massage technicians currently operating under a city permit, certification by the CAMTC must be obtained when the current city permit expires. 
(Ord. No. 877B, § 1, 1-22-2013)  
5.32.030 - Business license required. 
(a)  Any person, association, corporation, partnership or other entity desiring to operate a massage establishment or provide massage services shall apply for and obtain a city business license. 
(b)  The application for the massage establishment business license does not authorize operation of a massage establishment or performing massage services until the business license is issued. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of each massage establishment business owner or operator to file copies or provide other evidence of the certificates held by the persons who are providing massage services at the business at the time of business license application. Certificates for new employees or independent contractors shall be submitted as employees or contractors are hired and prior to the employees or contractors performing any massages. 
(d)  It shall be the responsibility of each massage establishment business owner or operator to notify the city of any intention to rename, change management, or convey the business to another person. 
(Ord. No. 877B, § 1, 1-22-2013)  
5.32.040 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following classes of individuals or groups while engaged in or performing the duties of their respective professions. Exemptions do not apply to independent contractors of the listed exempted professionals: 
(1)  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, acupuncturists, and physical therapists duly licensed to practice in the state of California; 
(2)  Hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums, or other health care facilities duly licensed by the state of California, provided that at all times such physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths and physical therapists are acting in adherence with the provisions of state law which govern this field; 
(3)  Registered or licensed vocational nurses duly registered by the state of California; 
(4)  Barbershops and beauty parlors, barbers and beauticians (check estheticians) but only when engaged in the practice for which they are licensed by the state of California, i.e., massage above the neck and shoulders, hands and arms, and below the knee; 
(5)  Coaches and trainers employed by accredited high schools and colleges while acting within the scope of their employment. 
(6)  Trainers of any amateur, semi-professional or professional athlete or athletic team; 
(7)  Physical therapist students and massage therapist students earning practical hours for school/education, and who are currently enrolled in a licensed program for physical therapy, through a recognized school/education center, can work, under the direct supervision of an exempted professional as defined in this section. Direct supervision means that an exempted professional, as defined in this section, must be present at all times when a student is performing their duties. 
(8)  Holistic health practitioners who are nonmedical health care therapists and use a massage specialty and therapeutic approach in caring for clients and who present to the business licensing department or development services department individual satisfactory evidence of completion of 1,000 hours of instruction in such specialty or therapeutic approach at a school with a state-approved curriculum and proof of membership in a state or nationally charted organization devoted to the specialty or therapeutic approach. The practice of such health care therapists may include other such services as nutritional assistance or counseling, as long as all activities are directed toward health care. 
(Ord. No. 877B, § 1, 1-22-2013)  
5.32.050 - Facilities. 
Every massage establishment shall maintain facilities meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  Lighting. Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the electrical code adopted by the city and, in addition, at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts shall be provided in each room or enclosure where massage services are performed on patrons and shall be activated at all times while a patron is in such room or enclosure. 
(2)  Equipment. Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in performing the acts of massage shall be provided. 
(3)  Water. Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times. 
(4)  Linen Storage. Closed cabinets shall be provided and utilized for storage of clean linens, and approved receptacles shall be provided for the deposit of soiled linen. 
(5)  Separation of Sexes. If male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously at the massage establishment, a separate massage room or rooms and separate dressing, bathing, and toilet facilities shall be provided and utilized for male and female patrons. Each separate facility or room shall be clearly marked as such. 
(6)  Massage Table Pads. Pads used on massage tables shall be covered in a professional manner with durable, washable plastic or other waterproof material acceptable to the Placer County Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 877B, § 1, 1-22-2013)  
5.32.060 - Operation. 
Every massage establishment shall comply with the following operating requirements: 
(1)  a.  Each person employed or acting as a massage therapist or massage practitioner shall have a valid certificate issued by the CAMTC, a clearly legible copy of which shall be conspicuously posted in the room or location where massage services will be provided. 
b.  It is unlawful for the owner, operator, responsible managing employee, manager or certificate holder in charge of or in control of the massage establishment to employ or permit a person to act as a massage therapist or massage practitioner who does not possess a valid massage therapist or massage practitioner certificate issued by the CAMTC. 
c.  No business, except those exempted under Section 5.32 040 herein, may employ anyone to provide massage or allow anyone to massage unless the massage provider possesses a valid massage certificate issued by the CAMTC. 
(2)  Any massage establishment or business shall maintain on its premises evidence for review by local authorities that demonstrates that all persons providing massage services are certified by the CAMTC. 
(Ord. No. 877B, § 1, 1-22-2013)  
CHAPTER 5.36 - LICENSING OF CABLE TELEVISION SERVICES  
Article I. - Licensing Ordinance General Provisions 
 
5.36.010 - Purposes. 
The purposes of this chapter include, but are not limited to, the promotion of the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city of Lincoln as follows: 
(1)  Establishing a plan for the licensing of cable television ("CATV") services within the city; 
(2)  Promoting competition in CATV services among providers so that the residents of the city will benefit from the lowest possible price for CATV service; 
(3)  Providing for the equal and uniform provision of CATV services throughout the city, so that all residents of the city, regardless of income or minority status, have equal access to CATV services; 
(4)  Insuring that city property, as defined in this chapter, is protected from physical damage; 
(5)  To regulate the operations of licensees for the purpose of protecting and promoting the public health, peace, safety and welfare. 
The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to confer any right upon a licensee which is not otherwise conferred by another express provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms, phrases, and words shall be ascribed the following meanings, unless the context indicates otherwise. The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive. Words not defined in this chapter shall be given their common and ordinary meanings, consistent with the context in which such words are used and the purposes of this chapter. 
"Cable television system" or "CATV system" means a system of antennae, cables, wires, lines, towers, waveguides, or other conductors, converters, amplifiers, headend equipment, master controls, earth stations, equipment and facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving, transmitting, amplifying and distributing audio, video and other forms of electronic or electrical signals within the city, some part or portion of which occupies the city property as defined in this chapter. 
"City" means the city of Lincoln and its constituent bodies, officers and employees. 
"City property" includes all property in which the city has an ownership interest, either in fee, by easement, by dedication, by implication, by lease, or by other legal means. It includes, but is not limited to, streets, easements, rights-of-way, buildings and unimproved property. 
"Gross revenues" mean any and all revenue received by the licensee from the operation of the CATV system to provide cable service within the city, excluding, however: 
(1)  Any taxes, fees or assessments of general applicability collected by the licensee from its customers for pass-through to a government agency, including the FCC user fee; or 
(2)  Any PEG amounts recovered from customers. 
Gross revenues shall include licensee fee revenue, noncash revenue, and an affiliate's cable-related revenues, where such revenues would be ordinarily generated in the operation of a CATV system used to provide cable services within the city. It is the intent of this definition that, within the exceptions set forth above, "gross revenues" shall be as broad a term as is permitted by law. 
"License" means a permit issued to a licensee by the city which allows the person, firm, or entity to whom the license is issued the right to use city property for the installation and maintenance of a CATV system in accordance with the conditions and standards specified in this chapter. 
"Licensee" means the person, firm, or entity holding a valid CATV license issued under the provisions of this chapter. 
"Service activation plan" means the schedule of providing CATV services to individual customers. 
"Telecommunications Act" means that portion of federal statute regulating the delivery of cable television systems and services, specifically Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended (47 U.S.C. §521, et seq.). 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.030 - License or franchise required. 
Except as otherwise provided by this code, or by state or federal law, city property shall not be occupied by or used for a CATV system except under: 
(1)  A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; or 
(2)  A franchise issued pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 5.20 of this code. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.040 - Relationship to Chapter 5.20. 
(a)  Notwithstanding anything in this code, including, but not limited to, Chapter 5.20 of this code, to the contrary, a licensee pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be required to obtain a franchise pursuant to Chapter 5.20 of this code, nor shall a franchisee pursuant to Chapter 5.20 of this code be required to obtain a license pursuant to this chapter. Any person desiring to operate a new CATV system must obtain either a license pursuant to this chapter or a franchise pursuant to Chapter 5.20 of this code, but such person may choose either regulatory scheme. 
(b)  Any franchisee pursuant to Chapter 5.20 of this code may, at his or her option and in lieu of seeking renewal of the franchise, apply for a license pursuant to this chapter. 
(c)  This chapter is intended to provide an equivalent level of service and benefit to the city, its citizens and the customers of the cable television system as would a franchise issued pursuant to Chapter 5.20 of this code. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.050 - Licensee option to make payments; equivalence determinations. 
(a)  With respect to the provisions of Section 5.36.34 of this chapter regarding connection to governmental facilities, the licensee at its sole option may choose to provide an equivalent in-lieu payment to the city in-lieu of the requirements of this chapter. The amount of the in lieu payment shall be determined by the city council following a noticed public hearing. No such optional in-lieu payment shall be used as a credit against the license fee required by this chapter. 
(b)  In any case in which a determination of the equivalency of regulations or requirements under this chapter and Chapter 5.20 of this code is required, such determination shall be made by the city council. Such determination shall be legislative. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.060 - Utility poles. 
No license issued under this chapter shall be deemed to expressly or impliedly authorize the licensee to utilize above ground poles owned by any public utility or any publicly regulated private utility. A licensee shall obtain the permission of the owner of any utility pole to utilize the same. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.070 - Private property. 
No license issued under this chapter shall be deemed to expressly or impliedly authorize the licensee to enter on, or install any part of the CATV system on, any privately owned property without the express consent of the owner of such property. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.080 - Notices. 
All notices and other writings authorized or required by this chapter to be sent shall be deemed to have been given and served when deposited in the United States Mail, first class postage prepaid, and addressed to the address provided in the application made pursuant to this chapter in the case of a notice to a licensee or to the city manager at city hall, 640 Fifth Street, Lincoln, California in the case of a notice to the city. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.090 - Authority. 
It is declared that the provisions of this chapter are enacted pursuant to the authority conferred on the city by the California Constitution and the State Legislature to exercise police powers for the general health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city, including, but not limited to, Sections 53066 et seq. of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.100 - Ordinances affecting license. 
All zoning and other land use ordinances, building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical codes, business license ordinances and all other ordinances of general application now in existence or hereafter enacted by the city, whether or not codified, shall be fully applicable to the exercise of any license issued pursuant to this chapter, and the licensee shall comply therewith. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and those of an ordinance of general application, the provisions of such ordinance of general application shall prevail. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.110 - Communications with regulatory agencies. 
Copies of all petitions, applications, communications, and reports submitted by a licensee to the FCC, or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting construction or operation of a CATV system or cable services provided through such a system, shall be filed simultaneously with the city clerk. Copies of responses or any other communications from the regulatory agencies to a licensee likewise shall be filed immediately on receipt with the city clerk. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.120 - Possessory interest taxation. 
Any license issued pursuant to this chapter may result in a possessory interest in favor of the licensee which may subject the licensee to property taxation. The licensee, as the party in whom the possessory interest is vested, shall pay all property taxes levied upon that interest. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
Article II. - Issuance of Licenses 
 
5.36.200 - Application for license. 
Applications for a license shall be made upon a form or format approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.210 - Contents of application. 
Applications for a license shall include such information as shall be required by the city manager in order for the city to make an informed judgment as to whether to grant a license. The application requirements shall include at least the following: 
(1)  The identity of the applicant; 
(2)  Evidence that the applicant has sufficient liability insurance to protect the interests of the city and its citizens from any bodily harm and/or property damage resulting from the operations of the licensee as set forth in article VII of this chapter; 
(3)  Evidence that the applicant will be able to file with the city a surety bond, or similar security instrument, in an amount of not less than $250,000.00, which will protect city property from a failure of the licensee to repair any damage to city property or private property occasioned by its operations; 
(4)  A service activation plan (SAP) utilizing census tract or similar demographic data that demonstrates that the applicant will provide CATV service throughout the city on a basis that does not discriminate against lower income or minority residents. Such a plan shall provide, among other things, which subareas of the city will be served in what sequence and over such period of time; provided, however, that unless otherwise authorized by the city council the SAP shall provide for complete activation of CATV service throughout the entire city within not more than five years. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.220 - Application fee. 
Upon submitting an application for a license, or for the renewal or transfer of a license, an applicant shall submit an application fee deposit in the amount of $5,000.00. Applicants shall pay the full cost of the city's review of an application for issuance or renewal or a license, including the cost of any consultants or attorneys reasonably retained by the city. In the event that the city's cost of reviewing an application is less than the deposit, the city shall refund the difference. In the event that the city's cost of reviewing an application is greater than the deposit, the applicant shall pay the difference to the city prior to the issuance of the license. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.230 - Issuance of license upon meeting conditions. 
(a)  The city manager shall forward to the city council each application for a CATV license. The city council shall determine whether the conditions of this chapter are met and, if so, it shall issue the license. 
(b)  Granting of a license and the associated required construction permits are ministerial and are determined to be an exempt project for purposes of the California Environmental Quality Act pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 21080(a) and CEQA Guidelines Section 15268. The applicant shall be responsible for the city's cost of preparing and filing a notice of exemption, the cost for which shall be paid from the application fee deposit. 
(c)  No license shall be issued to any applicant who: 
(1)  Materially misrepresents any information on the license application or otherwise to the city in the course of pursuing a license; 
(2)  Fails to provide all information required by this chapter or as requested by the city manager; 
(3)  Is unable to demonstrate the ability to provide insurance as provided by article VII of this chapter or to provide a surety bond or other security instrument regarding the repair of city or private property; 
(4)  Who has been previously issued a license that has been terminated pursuant to article VIII of this chapter, or who has a financial interest in any such terminated license. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.240 - Duration of license. 
A license granted under this chapter shall be valid for a period of five years, which shall be automatically extended for an additional ten years if the licensee has completed construction under its approved SAP. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.250 - Universal service. 
Any CATV system licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall provide equal and uniform cable television service and rates, charges and fees throughout the city to all dwelling units which it serves, provided that a licensee shall be free to offer and/or charge non-uniform rates, charges and fees, consistent with federal law, to those customers or potential customers where: 
(1)  Cable television services are then presently available from another cable television provider offering such services pursuant to a franchise, license or other authorization issued by the city; and/or 
(2)  Promotional offers are offered with a reduced or waived rate, charge, or fee not to exceed 12 months for any customer for any given offer.  
Article III. - System Capability and Standards 
 
5.36.300 - Technical standards. 
Each licensee shall construct, install and maintain its CATV system in a manner consistent and in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements, and technical standards. In any event, the CATV system shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property within the city. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.310 - Public, educational and governmental access and interconnect. 
(a)  Every CATV System licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall provide up to five video channels for public, educational and governmental (PEG) access pursuant to the provisions of the Communications Act §611 (47 U.S.C. 531) to customers whose signal, from inception through delivery, passes through any equipment or device which is located on city property. The PEG channels shall be assigned by the city in its sole discretion as public, educational or governmental. PEG channels may, in the city's sole discretion and to the extent permitted by law, be utilized for intranet purposes, provided, however, that the city shall not sell or lease capacity on the PEG channels except to other governmental agencies (including schools). PEG channel(s) shall be active on the CATV system within 60 days of receiving notice from the city to activate such channel. 
(b)  The city may operate the PEG channels directly or contract with outside entities (including the licensee) to do so. All PEG channels shall be carried by the licensee on its least expensive tier of services, including its basic tier or lifeline services. 
(c)  In the event that the licensee is providing services beyond the corporate limits of the city, it shall limit the distribution of the PEG channels to the city unless the city authorizes wider distribution. The city may designate one or more of the PEG channels to be shared with other governmental entities for regional programming purposes. The licensee shall provide regional interconnection of its CATV system to adjoining or neighboring jurisdictions within the region and shall carry such PEG content originating in regional systems or other cable television systems within the city as the city may designate. Provided, however, that the licensee shall not be bound by these interconnection requirements if interconnection is impractical or infeasible due to the refusal of other cable operators to share equitably in the cost of interconnection. Any denial of interconnection by a licensee shall be subject to the reasonable review and reversal of the city council. 
(d)  The licensee shall be responsible for providing and maintaining at least two programming sources for each PEG channel, at locations within the city designated by the city manager. 
(e)  The licensee shall not gain any ownership rights to any of the content required to be carried over the PEG channels by this section by reason of the requirement to carry or broadcast such content. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.320 - Support for use of access. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to limit the authority of the licensee to make payments in support of the use of the CATV system for public, educational and/or governmental purposes. However, such payments are expressly not a requirement of any license granted hereunder and shall in no event be considered in the calculation of license fees pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.330 - Availability of access facilities. 
Use of facilities of the licensee for public, educational and governmental access on the CATV system pursuant to Section 5.36.310 of this chapter shall be made available, without rental, deposits, or any other charge whatsoever, for use 24 hours per day, seven days a week in connection with the production of public, educational and/or governmental access programming cablecast upon the CATV system. A licensee shall: 
(1)  Allow all persons and entities desiring to cablecast public, educational and/or governmental access programming to produce programming upon and electronically interface directly with the CATV system of licensee so as to effectively cablecast the public, educational and/or governmental access programming, or, in the alternative; 
(2)  Establish such reasonable rules and procedures, designed to promote the utilization of such public, educational and/or governmental access programming and subject to the approval of the city council, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, whereby the licensee shall accept and cablecast such public, educational and/or governmental access programming upon the cable television system as shall be provided to the licensee by such persons and entities. 
(3)  Make all reasonable efforts to coordinate the cablecasting of public, educational and/or governmental access programming upon the cable television system at the same time and upon the same channel designations as such programming is cablecast upon other cable television systems with the city. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.340 - Connection to government facilities. 
(a)  A licensee shall provide a connection of its basic tier of video service (including, without limitation, all PEG channels) to every local governmental facility (whether county, city, school district, or special district) without cost to the government owner or operator of the facility. This requirement shall apply to any newly-constructed or newly-acquired facility during the term of the license, and licensee shall provide connections to such newly-constructed or acquired facilities within 90 days of a notice to do so from the city. The service required by this section shall be provided without cost during the entire term of the license. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the licensee from agreeing to provide additional services and connections to those same facilities. 
(b)  In the event that licensee shall build a network capable of providing high speed access to the Internet or other nonvideo services, licensee shall, to the extent permitted by law, provide such services to every local governmental facility in the city without cost to the government owner or operator of the facility. This requirement shall apply to any newly-constructed or newly-acquired facility during the term of the license, and licensee shall provide connections to such newly-constructed or acquired facilities within 90 days of a notice to do so from the city. The service shall be provided without cost during the entire term of the license. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the licensee from agreeing to provide additional services and connections to those same facilities. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.350 - Use of licensee facilities by the city. 
Except as prohibited or regulated by state or federal law, the city shall have the right, free of charge, to make additional use, for public purposes only, of any poles, conduit, or similar facilities erected, controlled or maintained exclusively by or for the licensee on any city property, provided that such use does not interfere with the use of the same by the licensee. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
Article IV. - Construction Requirements 
 
5.36.400 - Dwelling units. 
As used in this chapter, the term "dwelling units" means residential living facilities, as distinguished from temporary lodging facilities such as hotel and motel rooms and dormitories, and includes single-family residential units and individual apartments, condominium units, mobile homes within mobile home parks, and other multiple-family residential units. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.410 - Use of streets—Interference. 
Each CATV system, including wires and appurtenances, shall be located and installed and maintained so that none of the facilities endanger or interfere with the lives or safety of persons, or interfere with any improvements the city, or other governmental agency, may deem proper to make, or unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets or other public property. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected or installed by a licensee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the streets or other public property. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.420 - Permits and approvals. 
During the term of each license, in advance of occupying, working upon or otherwise utilizing any city property, the licensee shall apply for and obtain from the director of public works a permit which authorizes the licensee to do so. The director of public works, under administrative regulations adopted by him, shall limit the use of the amount of public property as necessary to: 
(1)  Insure that the requirement to provide universal CATV service within the city on a nondiscriminatory basis is met consistent with the service activation plan approved for the licensee; 
(2)  Insure that the monetary value of any surety bond, or other comparable security instrument, is sufficient to repair and restore city property to its original condition should the licensee fail to do so. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.430 - Construction standards. 
(a)  It is the duty of a licensee to insure that all public property occupied by the licensee, and any private property occupied by the licensee as permitted by private landowners, to be restored, at the sole cost of the licensee, to a condition as close as is reasonably possible to the condition as it existed prior to any construction activity undertaken by the licensee in the installation of a CATV system. 
(b)  The director of public works shall adopt administrative regulations relating to the installation and maintenance of the CATV system installed by a particular licensee, which shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  A general timeline for construction throughout the city vis-a-vis the various residential areas; 
(2)  The number of dwelling units and/or other facilities that may be served under a single permit and the level of completion necessary under one permit before authorization to construct under another permit will be granted; 
(3)  The manner in which existing utility poles will be utilized for installation where no underground utility service is currently available; 
(4)  The manner in which improved city streets and easements will be physically utilized, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Whether trenching or boring should be utilized in a particular location, 
b.  The manner and method of backfilling trenches to insure the integrity and appearance of pavement; 
(5)  How notice will be provided to affected residents prior to the start of construction; 
(6)  A method for handling citizen complaints in an expeditious manner; 
(7)  Safety procedures during construction, including handling traffic detours; 
(8)  Handling of incidents where construction disrupts existing utility services; 
(9)  Parking of equipment and storage of materials during the construction process. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.440 - Undergrounding. 
(a)  Except as permitted by the director of public works where existing utility poles can be used for a CATV system in areas of the city which lack underground utilities, each licensee shall construct and install the various components of its CATV system underground. Amplifier boxes and pedestal mounted terminal boxes may be placed above ground if existing technology reasonably requires, but shall be of such size and design and shall be so located as not to be unsightly or unsafe. 
(b)  When an area of the city is served by utility poles and that area converts to underground utilities, it shall be the responsibility of the licensee, at its sole cost, to relocate its CATV facilities in a common underground facility along with other utility providers. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.450 - Relocation. 
If during the term of a license the city, or any public entity owning and operating utility facilities within the city, reasonably requires that the CATV facilities of a licensee be moved to accommodate the needs of the city or other public entity in the delivery of utility services, the licensee shall relocate such facilities to a location to be determined by the director of public works at the sole cost of the licensee. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.460 - Tree trimming. 
No licensee shall remove or trim any tree without the express written consent of the director of public works as to trees on city property or without the express written consent of the owner of any private property on which a tree is located. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.470 - Building permits requiring temporary relocation. 
Each licensee shall, upon the request by any person holding a permit or license issued by the city to build, demolish, or move any building or structure, to temporarily remove, raise or lower its CATV facilities to accommodate the necessary construction activity. The expense incurred by the licensee shall be paid by the person requesting the accommodation and a licensee may require such payment in advance. A licensee shall be given not less than 48 hours of the need for such accommodation. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.480 - Removal of CATV facilities; No further use of facilities. 
(a)  Upon the expiration or termination of a license, a licensee shall either convey its CATV facilities to another licensee or remove all of its above ground CATV facilities within 30 days after the expiration or termination of the license. A licensee may remove only those underground CATV facilities as do not require any digging, trenching, or other physical disturbance of city property. 
(b)  No installed CATV facilities may be used by a former licensee for cable television service after the license has expired or has been terminated. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.490 - Enforcement of licensee conditions. 
(a)  The director of public works shall enforce all provisions of this chapter and of any administrative regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter pertaining to the installation and maintenance of CATV facilities by a licensee. 
(b)  If a licensee fails to comply with any written directive to do, or cease doing, any activity regulated by this chapter from the director of public works within five business days, the director may take such steps as are reasonably necessary to effectuate compliance, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Stopping the construction activity of the licensee; 
(2)  Revoking any permit under which the licensee is then installing CATV facilities; 
(3)  Utilizing city forces, equipment and materials to remediate any situation which poses an imminent threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city; provided that the licensee shall be responsible for reimbursement to the city of all costs reasonably incurred; 
(4)  Recommending to the city council revocation of the license. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
Article V. - Services 
 
5.36.500 - System ownership. 
Legal and equitable title to the CATV system, including any and all facilities and equipment provided for public, educational and governmental access, and all channels of whatever kind or nature shall be vested in the licensee. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.510 - Anti-competitive practices. 
No license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to expressly or impliedly authorize the licensee to utilize its CATV system to provide any service in such a manner as to unlawfully damage any business competitor or other third party or violate any statutes or regulations of the United States or state of California. Nor shall any licensee, by act or omission, engage in any anti-competitive practice in violation of any statutes of regulations of the United States or state of California. The provisions of this section shall be enforceable in courts of competent jurisdiction against a licensee by any party who alleges injury as a result of an alleged violation thereof. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.520 - Discrimination in service provided. 
No licensee shall deny service, deny access or otherwise discriminate against customers on the basis of race, sex, sexual preference, gender, national origin, religion or political affiliation. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.530 - Privacy. 
Subject to federal and state law, each licensee shall operate in such a manner as to protect the privacy of its customers, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Neither the licensee nor any other person, agency, or entity shall tap, or arrange for the tapping or monitoring of any cable, line, signal input device, or customer outlet or receiver for any purpose whatsoever, except that the licensee may conduct tests of the functioning of the system where necessary in order to ensure proper maintenance of the system and to collect performance data for agencies regulating the quality of signals, and the licensee may conduct system-wide or individually addressed "sweeps" for the sole purpose of verifying system integrity (including individual security system integrity), controlling return path transmissions, billing for pay services, or collecting aggregate data on viewing patterns by channel. 
"Tapping" means observing a communications signal exchange where the observer is neither of the communicating parties, whether the exchange is observed by visual, aural or electronic means, for any purpose whatsoever. The provision of interactive service shall not be construed to be "tapping" or "monitoring" under this section. 
(2)  The licensee shall not place in any dwelling unit or other facility any equipment capable of two-way communications without the written consent of the customer, and shall not utilize the two-way communications capability of the system for customer surveillance of any kind without the written consent of the customer specifying how the data collected will be used and by whom. Tenants who occupy premises connected by the CATV system shall be deemed to be customers within the meaning of this section regardless of who actually pays for the service. The written consents shall be, and shall show on their face that they are, revocable by the customer at any time by written communication mailed by the customer to the licensee. No penalty shall be invoked for a customer's failure to provide a written consent or for his or her revocation thereof, and all written consents shall so state on their face. The licensee shall not make such written consent a condition precedent to receipt by a customer of noninteractive service. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to require consent as a condition precedent to system-wide or individually addressed "sweeps" for the sole purpose of verifying system integrity, controlling return-path transmissions, billing for pay services, or collecting aggregate data on viewing patterns by channel. 
(3)  No cable, line, wire, amplifier, converter, or other piece of equipment associated with CATV services shall be attached to any residence or other private property without first securing the written permission of the owner or tenant of the property. If such permission is later lawfully revoked, whether by the original or subsequent owner or tenant, the licensee shall remove forthwith all of the equipment and promptly restore the property to its original condition. The licensee shall perform all installations in a workmanlike manner and shall be responsible for any damage to residences or other property caused by the installation. 
(4)  No licensee or officer, agent or employee thereof shall sell, or otherwise make available, lists of the names and addresses of its customers, or any list which identifies, by name or otherwise individual subscriber viewing habits, to any person, agency, or entity for any purpose whatsoever except that the licensee shall, upon request, provide lists of names and addresses of its customers to authorized representatives of the city so that the city may enforce the conditions of any license or the provisions of this chapter. Names and addresses of customers within the possession of the city shall not be subject to public inspection or review. 
(5)  A licensee may release the number of customers, but only as a total number and as a percentage of the potential customers within the city or any given area within the city. When indicating the number of customers viewing a particular channel, a licensee shall indicate only the total number of customers viewing during the relevant time and, the percentage of all customers which they represent, but not the identity of any customer. 
(6)  No polls or other two-way responses of customers shall be conducted whether for commercial purposes, in connection with community use, or otherwise unless the program of which the poll is a part contains an explicit disclosure of the nature, purpose, and prospective use of the results of the poll. The licensee shall supervise and monitor all polls in which responses are received through the CATV system, and shall adopt and enforce measures which ensure that personally identifiable information concerning a customer, including his or her viewing habits and response or responses to the inquiry or inquiries, is not received by any third party, including the party sponsoring the poll. 
(7)  A licensee shall not tabulate any test results, nor permit the use of the system of such tabulation, which would reveal the commercial product preferences or opinions of individual customers, members of their families or their invitees, licensees or employees, without advance written authorization by the customers. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.540 - Nondiscrimination. 
No licensee shall discriminate in employment or selection of contractors or subcontractors on any basis prohibited by state or federal law. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
Article VI. - License Fees 
 
5.36.600 - License fees. 
For the use of city property each licensee shall pay license fees in the amount prescribed by Section 5.36.610 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.610 - Amount and payment of license fees. 
(a)  During the term of each license, each licensee shall pay to the city an amount equal to five percent per year of the licensee's annual gross revenue. 
The fees shall be paid quarterly not later than August 1, November 1, February 1, and May 1 for the preceding three-month period ending, respectively, June 30, September 30, December 31 and March 31. Not later than the date of each payment, each licensee shall file with the city manager a written statement signed under penalty of perjury by an officer of the licensee which identifies in detail the sources and amounts of gross revenues received by a licensee during the quarter for which payment is made. 
(b)  No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is, in fact, the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any claim which the city may have for further or additional sums payable under the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.620 - Interest on delinquent license fees. 
Any license fees which remain unpaid after the dates specified in Section 5.36.610 of this chapter shall be delinquent and shall thereafter accrue interest at the maximum legal rate until paid. As used in this section, the maximum legal rate shall be that rate set forth in Section 685.010 of the California Code of Civil Procedure, as amended from time to time, or any successor California statue establishing the rate interest accrues for money judgments. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.630 - Accounting standards. 
Not less than annually, the licensee shall provide the city with an unqualified certification of an independent certified public accountant certifying the accuracy of the quarterly license fee payments paid within the preceding 12 months pursuant to Section 5.36.610 of this chapter. The certification shall be prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting standards as established by the financial accounting standards board (FASB). 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.640 - Auditing and financial records. 
(a)  The director of finance may, from time-to-time during the term of a license prescribe accounting standards and procedures for reporting CATV service gross revenue. During the term of each license, the city may, not more frequently than once each year, conduct an audit of the books, records and accounts of the licensee for the purpose of determining whether the licensee has paid license fees in the amounts prescribed by Section 5.36.610 of this chapter. 
(b)  The audit may be conducted by director of finance or by an independent certified public accounting firm retained by the director of finance and shall be conducted at the sole expense of the city. The party conducting the audit shall prepare a written report containing its findings, and the report shall be filed by the city manager. 
(c)  Each licensee shall make available for inspection by authorized representatives of the city its books, accounts, and all other financial records at reasonable times and upon reasonable advance notice for the purpose of permitting exercise of the authorities conferred by this section. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
Article VII. - Insurance 
 
5.36.700 - Indemnification. 
(a)  Each licensee shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officer, agents, employees, representatives and volunteers from any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of action, damages, costs, expense, losses or liability, in law or in equity, of every kind and nature whatsoever ("claims"), arising out of or in connection with licensee's operations under this chapter, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Injury or death to persons, including, but not limited to, licensee's officers, agents, contractors or employees, or damage to property, including loss of use, caused or alleged to be caused in whole or in part by any act or omission of licensee, its officers, agents, contractors, employees, or representatives or anyone for whose acts licensee may be liable; 
(2)  Injury or damage arising out of invasion of the right of privacy, libel, slander, defamation of any person, firm or corporation, or the violation or infringement of any copyright, patent, service mark, trademark, trade name, or of any other right of any person, firm or corporation; 
(3)  Injury or damage arising out of anti-competitive practices alleged against the licensee; 
(4)  Claims, damages or penalties arising out of licensee's failure to comply with the provisions of any statute, regulation or ordinance of the United States, state of California or any local agency applicable to the licensee in its business; 
(5)  Injury or damage arising out of licensee's failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter relating to procurement and maintenance of insurance; 
(6)  Injury or damage arising out of licensee's failure to fulfill any of the covenants set forth in this chapter; 
(7)  Claims, causes of action, proceedings, and judgments, including reasonable attorneys' fees and other reasonable defense costs, arising out of any allegation that the license granted pursuant to this chapter is inconsistent with or fails to meet the requirements of Government Code Section 53066 et seq. or any other state law or the Telecommunications Act of 1996, or any other federal law. 
(b)  Licensee shall pay and satisfy any judgment or decree that may be rendered against the city, its officers, agents, employees or representatives, or any of them, arising out of any such claims. 
(c)  Licensee shall reimburse the city, its members, their officials, agents, employees or representatives, for any and all legal expense incurred by any of them in connection herewith or in enforcing the indemnity granted in this section. 
Indemnitees may, at their discretion, participate in the investigation and defense of any claims or litigation brought against them at any time, using legal counsel of their choice, and such expense shall be borne solely by licensee. Such participation shall not relieve licensee from its duty to defend, indemnify and hold harmless indemnitees as set forth in this section. 
(d)  The indemnification obligations of licensee set forth in this section shall apply regardless of any act or omission of the city, its officials, agents, employees, representatives or volunteers which may have contributed to the injury or damage, to the maximum extent allowed by California law. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.710 - Licensee insurance. 
(a)  Each licensee shall file with the application which it files pursuant to the provision of Section 5.36.210 of this chapter, and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect at its sole expense, the following insurance: 
(1)  General Liability. General liability insurance including, but not limited to, protection for claims of bodily injury and property damage liability, personal and advertising injury liability, and products and completed operations liability. Coverage shall be at least as broad as insurance services office commercial general liability coverage form GG 0001 (occurrence). The limits of liability shall be not less than: 
a.  Each occurrence, $5,000,000.00; 
b.  Personal and advertising injury, $5,000,000.00; 
c.  General aggregate, $2,000,000.00; 
d.  Products and complete operations aggregate, $2,000,000.00. 
The policy shall cover contractual liability applicable to the licensee's assumed liability under this contract. 
(2)  Automobile Liability. Automobile liability insurance providing protection against claims of bodily injury and property damage arising out of ownership, operation, maintenance, or use of owned, hired, and non-owned automobiles. Coverage shall be at least as broad as insurance services office automobile liability coverage form CA 0001, symbol 1 (any auto). The limits of liability shall not be less than: 
a.  Bodily injury and property damage combined single limit, $1,000,000.00. 
If general liability coverage, as required in subsection (a)(1) of this section, is provided by the commercial general liability form, the automobile liability policy shall include an endorsement providing automobile contractual liability. 
(3)  Workers' Compensation. Workers' compensation insurance, with coverage as required by the state of California (unless the licensee is a qualified self-insurer with the state of California), and employers liability coverage. The limits of employer's liability shall not be less than: 
a.  Each accident, $1,000,000.00; 
b.  Disease each employee, $1,000,000.00; 
c.  Disease policy limit, $1,000,000.00; 
(4)  Excess or Umbrella Liability. Excess or umbrella liability providing excess coverage at least as broad as the underlying coverage for general liability, automobile liability and employers liability with a limit of $4,000,000.00 per occurrence and in the aggregate. 
(b)  The licensee's general liability, automobile liability, and excess or umbrella liability policies, shall contain the following provisions: 
(1)  The city, its officers, agents, employees, representatives and volunteers, shall be covered as additional insureds as respects liability arising out of the activities performed by or on-behalf of the licensee, products and completed operations of the licensee, premises owned, occupied, or used by the licensee, or automobiles owned, leased, hired, or borrowed by the licensee. The policy shall contain no special limitations on the scope of coverage afforded to the commission, its members, their officials, agents, employees, representatives or volunteers; 
(2)  The licensee's insurance coverage shall be primary insurance as respects the city, its officers, agents, employees, representatives or volunteers. Any insurance or self-insurance maintained by city, its officers, agents, employees, representatives or volunteers shall excess of the licensee's insurance and shall not contribute with it. 
(3)  Any failure to comply with reporting or other provisions of the policies on the part of the licensee, including breaches of warranties or unintentional misrepresentations, shall not affect coverage provided to the city, its officers, agents, employees, representatives or volunteers. 
(4)  The licensee's workers' compensation and employer's liability policies shall contain an endorsement that waives any rights or subrogation against the city, its officials, agents, employees, representative or volunteers. 
(5)  Each insurance policy shall state that coverage shall not be suspended, voided, canceled by either party, reduced in scope or in limits, nonrenewed, or materially changed unless the insurer provides 30 days advance written notice by certified mail to the city manager prior to such change. The insurer shall provide ten days advance notice by certified mail to the city manager in the event of cancellation due to nonpayment of premium. 
(6)  All of the licensee's insurance coverage, except as noted below, shall be placed with insurance companies with a current A.M. Best's rating of at least A-VII. 
Exceptions: 
a.  Underwriters at Lloyd's of London; 
b.  Workers' compensation which is provided through a State Compensation Insurance Fund; 
c.  Licensee's qualified workers' compensation self-insurance under California law. 
(7)  The city will accept licensee's self-insurance of its general or automobile liability risks only if the licensee has a minimum net worth of at least $10,000,000.00. 
(8)  The licensee shall furnish the commission with certificates of insurance, including copies of all endorsements specifically required hereunder, signed by a person authorized by the insurer to bind coverage on its behalf, as evidence of the coverage required by this section. 
(9)  For unforeseen risks, the city, at its discretion, may increase the amounts and types of insurance coverage required hereunder at any time during the term of the contract by giving written notice to the licensee. Licensee shall immediately procure such insurance or increase the amounts of insurance coverage, and provide certificates of insurance as required in subsection (b)(8) of this section. 
(10)  The form and substance of the insurance required of the licensee shall be subject to the approval of city attorney. Any acceptance of insurance certificates by the city shall in no way limit or relieve licensee of licensee's duties and responsibilities set forth in this chapter. 
(11)  The failure of the city to enforce in a timely manner any of the provisions of this section shall not act as a waiver to enforcement of any of these provisions at any time during the term of the franchise. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.720 - Waiver of subrogation. 
Each licensee shall cause each insurance policy obtained by it to provide that the insurance company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the city and its officers, agents, employees, representatives or volunteers in connection with any damage covered by any policy, whether for nonpayment of premium, or otherwise, and whether at the request of the licensee or for other reasons, except after 30 calendar days advance written notice mailed by the insurer to the city manager. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
Article VIII. - Transfer and Termination 
 
5.36.800 - Transfers prohibited. 
(a)  Except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, all, or substantially all, of the assets of the licensee's CATV system shall not be sold, transferred, assigned, mortgaged, pledged, leased, sublet or otherwise encumbered for any purpose whatsoever, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right or interest therein pass to or vest in any party without the prior written consent of the city. Such consent of the city shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(b)  A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not, either in whole or in part, be sold, transferred, assigned, mortgaged, pledged, leased, sublet, or otherwise encumbered for any purpose whatsoever; nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right or interest therein, pass to or vest in any party, nor shall there be any transfer or change of control of the license without the prior written consent of the city. Such consent of the city shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
Any such sale, transfer, assignment, mortgage, pledge, lease, sublease or other encumbrance of whatever kind or nature made in violation of the provisions of this section shall be void. 
As used in this section, "transfer or change of control" shall mean the acquisition of sufficient dominance to determine the operational and financial policies of the licensee, including, but not limited to, the disposition of its assets. The word "control" as used in this section is not limited to major stockholders or financial interests, but also includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised, and includes, but is not limited to, (i) the acquisition of accumulation by any party or association of parties of ten percent or more of the voting shares or stock of the licensee or named owner of the licensee; (ii) a change in general partners of a licensee or named owner of the licensee; or (iii) a merger or consolidation of the licensee or named owner or the licensee. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.810 - Termination of license. 
The following material breaches of the obligation of a licensee under a license shall constitute grounds for termination of a license by the city: 
(1)  Any violation of Section 5.36.800 of this chapter; 
(2)  The failure to make any disclosure of fact within the application for the license which is required by this chapter, or the misrepresentation of such a fact in the application, or to the city in the process of applying for a license; 
(3)  The willful failure to make any payments required by Section 5.36.310 of this chapter; or 
(4)  The failure to comply with the provisions of the service activation plan submitted pursuant to Section 5.36.210 of this chapter having to do with activation of the licensee's CATV system for the entire city; or 
(5)  Any other act or omission by the licensee which materially violates the terms, conditions or requirements of this chapter or any order, directive, rule or regulation issued or adopted hereunder, and which is not corrected or remedied within the period specified in the written notice to the licensee of the violation. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.820 - Commencement of termination proceedings. 
The city council shall not determine that a license shall be terminated upon grounds identified by Section 5.36.810 of this chapter, until a hearing has been conducted upon the matter. Written notice of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be mailed to the licensee not later than 30 calendar days in advance of the date of commencement of the hearing. The notice shall state the reasons for the hearing, describe the basis for termination, and identify the terms, conditions or requirements with respect to which the breach has occurred. 
The hearing may be conducted either by the city council or by a hearing officer appointed by the city council to conduct the hearing. Any such hearing officer shall be an attorney licensed to practice under the laws of the state of California. 
The cost of providing facilities for the hearing, the compensation for the hearing officer, if any, and the per diem cost of any stenographic reporter retained to record the proceedings shall be borne by the city. The costs incurred by the parties for attorneys' fees, expert witness fees and other expenses shall be borne solely by the party incurring the costs. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.830 - Conduct of hearing. 
(a)  All witnesses testifying at the hearing concerning termination shall be sworn. Witnesses shall be subject to direct and cross-examination. However, formal rules of evidence applicable to the trial of civil or criminal proceedings in the trial courts of this state shall not be applicable to the hearing. The provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act, commencing at Section 11500 of the California Government Code, or any successor legislative enactment, shall not be applicable to any such hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer, the officer shall, upon conclusion of the hearing, prepare a recommended decision which includes findings of fact and conclusions. The recommended decision shall be filed with the city clerk and mailed to the parties not later than 30 calendar days after conclusion of the hearing, unless the parties agree to extend such time. Upon receipt of such a recommended decision, the city council may, without a hearing except as otherwise required below, either: 
(1)  Adopt the recommended decision, including findings of fact and conclusions, submitted by the hearing officer; 
(2)  Adopt the findings of fact and conclusions contained in the recommended decision, modify the decision, and adopt the decision as so revised; 
(3)  Based upon the record of the hearing, modify the findings of fact, conclusions or decisions, and adopt the decision as so revised; or 
(4)  Reject the recommended decision and conduct a new hearing. 
(b)  If the hearing is conducted by the city council, upon conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall adopt a decision which includes findings of fact and conclusions. 
(c)  If the decision by the city council is that there are grounds for termination of the license and that the license shall be terminated, the city council shall adopt a resolution which terminates the license and includes its decision. The effective date of termination shall be such date as is prescribed by the city council within its sole discretion, in the resolution. 
(d)  Review of the actions of the city council under this section must be venued in the Superior Court of Placer County and are limited to the remedies provided in Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 (Administrative Mandamus), subject to the limitation for filing an action within the time prescribed in Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.840 - Alternative remedies; Licensee remedies. 
(a)  No provision of this chapter shall be deemed to bar the right of the city to seek or obtain judicial relief from a violation of any provision of the license documents or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive promulgated thereunder. Neither the existence of other remedies identified in this chapter nor the exercise thereof shall be deemed to bar or otherwise limit the right of the city for such violation by the licensee, or judicial enforcement of the licensee's obligations by means of specific performance, injunction relief or mandate, or any other judicial remedy at law or in equity. 
(b)  No provision of this chapter shall be deemed to affect the right otherwise existing in law, if any, of a licensee to seek or obtain judicial relief from the enforcement of any provision of this chapter or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive promulgated thereunder, nor shall any provision of this chapter be construed to create such a right. 
(c)  As provided by federal law, an action by a licensee is limited to nonmonetary damages. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.850 - Nonenforcement. 
A licensee shall not be relieved of any obligation to comply with any of the provisions of the license or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive promulgated under this chapter by reason of any failure of the city to enforce prompt compliance. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
5.36.860 - City powers. 
Except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, the city shall, to the full extent permitted by applicable law, be authorized to regulate all CATV operations and services provided by a licensee for the purpose of promoting and protecting the public convenience, health, safety and welfare. The regulatory powers of the city council shall include, but not be limited to, the authority to interpret, clarify, make specific and apply the provisions of this chapter and to enact rules and regulations which impose specific duties or prohibitions for the purpose of implementing the duties, responsibilities and restrictions set forth in this chapter or such duties, responsibilities and restrictions as may be authorized to be imposed by state or federal enactments. The foregoing shall include, but not be limited to, consumer protection regulations and, to the extent now or hereafter allowed by state and federal law, rate regulation. Each licensee shall comply with all such rules and regulations. 
(Ord. 747B §3(part), 2003)  
CHAPTER 5.40 - FORTUNETELLING AND OCCULT ARTS  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
5.40.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of the city council that the operation of fortunetelling and/or occult arts establishments and persons operating as fortunetellers should be regulated so as to further the public interest, safety and welfare by providing minimum qualifications for such persons. It is the purpose of this chapter to prescribe means of licensing practitioners who engage in fortunetelling for profit so that information about those so engaged is available to the public and the city government. 
(Ord. 762B §1(part), 2004)  
5.40.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Fortuneteller" means any person who advertises by sign, circular, handbill, newspaper, periodical, magazine or other means whatsoever the practice of fortunetelling and/or occult arts, and shall include any person who advertises as a "psychic" or "spiritual reader" or "spiritual counselor" for the purpose of the practice of fortunetelling and/or occult arts. 
"Fortunetelling and occult arts" mean engaging for profit, directly or indirectly, in the act of telling of fortune and forecasting of futures by means of an occult, psychic power, faculty, force, clairvoyance, cartomancy, psychology, psychometry, numerology, hypnosis, phrenology, spirits, tea leaves or other craft, art, science, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or substance, cunning or foresight, crystal gazing, mysteries or magic of any kind or nature. 
(Ord. 762B §1(part), 2004)  
5.40.030 - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any person solely by reason of the fact that he or she is engaged in the business of entertaining the public by demonstrations or mind reading, mental telepathy, thought conveyance, or the giving or horoscopic readings, at public places and in the presence of and within the hearing of other persons and at which no questions are answered, as part of such entertainment, except in a manner to permit all persons present at such public place to hear such answers, when not conducted in connection with the business of fortunetelling; 
(2)  Any person who conducts or participates in any religious ceremony or service when such person holds a certificate of ordination as a minister, missionary, medium, healer or clairvoyant from any bona fide church or religious association maintaining a church and holding regular services, and having a creed or set of religious principles that is recognized by all churches of like faith; provided, further, that the fees, gratuities, emoluments and profits thereof shall be regularly accounted for and paid solely to or for the benefit of the church or religious association; 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as exempting any person from the payment of any applicable business license fee which may be required to be paid by the licensing provisions of this code. 
(Ord. 762B §1(part), 2004)  
Article II. - Licenses 
 
5.40.040 - License required. 
(a)  No person, association, partnership, or corporation shall conduct, operate or advertise for an establishment in which the practice of fortunetelling and occult arts is carried on for pay, compensation or gratuity without obtaining and maintaining in effect a license as required by this chapter. 
(b)  No licensee hereunder shall employ any person who practices fortunetelling and/or occult arts, and who offers to or solicits to perform fortunetelling and occult arts, or who holds himself/herself out to be a fortuneteller if the person does not hold a current, unrevoked license as required by this chapter. 
(c)  The license issued to a fortuneteller shall be prominently displayed at the licensed premises. 
(Ord. 762B §1(part), 2004)  
5.40.050 - License application—Fees. 
(a)  An application for a license to practice fortunetelling and occults arts shall be made to a duly authorized representative of the chief of police under penalty of perjury on forms provided by the chief of police. The application to practice fortunetelling and occults arts shall be accompanied by an investigation filing fee of $250.00, plus the fee charged by Department of Justice for fingerprint processing. This fee is not refundable in the event such application is denied. 
(b)  Licenses and fees required under this chapter shall be in addition to any license, permit or fee required under any other chapter of this code. 
(Ord. 762B §1(part), 2004)  
5.40.060 - Application contents. 
Any applicant for a license under this chapter shall submit the following information under penalty of perjury: 
(1)  The full name and present residence and business address and telephone numbers of the applicant; 
(2)  Any and all maiden, fictitious or other names ever used by the applicant; 
(3)  Prior residence and business addresses used by the applicant during the ten-year period preceding the date of the application; 
(4)  The birthdate and place of birth of the applicant; 
(5)  The social security number and a California driver's license or California identification card number or other satisfactory government issued identification number of the applicant; 
(6)  The applicant's height, weight, hair and eye color, and all distinguishing marks, scars or tattoos; 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for a period of ten years preceding the date of application; 
(8)  The name or names under which the applicant proposes to conduct the activity or practice and the business address of the premises where such practice is to be carried on and if is it to be in connection with a similar or other kind of business; 
(9)  The name or names, both true and fictitious, and addresses of any and all persons, associations, partnerships or corporations holding an interest or involvement in the activity; 
(10)  A statement of any and all criminal convictions, except minor traffic offenses not designated as a felony, including the nature thereof, where they occurred and the sentence therefor; 
(11)  A list of fortunetelling or similar licenses currently or previously held by the applicant and whether any such license had been revoked or suspended and the reason therefor; 
(12)  A list of at least three character references unrelated to the applicant by blood or marriage, and known to the applicant for at least five years. The list shall include true and fictitious names and current addresses and telephone numbers of the character references; 
(13)  Such other identification and information as is necessary to discover the validity of the matters hereinabove specified as required to be set forth in the application. 
(Ord. 762B §1(part), 2004)  
5.40.070 - Required information and documents. 
Before the application is considered to be complete, the applicant must produce, provide and submit to the following: 
(1)  California driver's license or California identification card, or other valid and satisfactory documentary evidence of the age and identity of the applicant. To be "satisfactory," the documentary evidence of age and identity must be of official issue of some governmental agency, be currently valid and furnish a photograph, weight, height, color of eyes and hair, sex, age and/or date of birth and signature of the applicant. Birth certificates are not satisfactory identification as they do not include evidence or identity by description of the person named; 
(2)  A photograph of the applicant, to be taken by an authorized employee of the chief of police at the time of application; 
(3)  Fingerprints of the applicant, to be taken by an authorized employee of the chief of police at the time of application; 
(4)  Consent in writing, on a form determined by the chief of police, for the use of all information available in the investigation provided in this chapter to be made. 
(Ord. 762B §1(part), 2004)  
5.40.080 - Investigation. 
The chief of police, or his authorized representative, shall conduct and complete an investigation of the moral character and business responsibility of the applicant and either grant or deny the license within a period of 45 days after the submission of the completed applications, except if good cause exists, the chief of police may extend the period of investigation for a period of time not to exceed 30 days, provided that applicant is notified in writing that the investigation has not been completed. 
(Ord. 762B §1(part), 2004)  
5.40.090 - Right to refuse license. 
(a)  If the chief of police finds that either the applicant's character or his or her business responsibility is unsatisfactory, or if the applicant fails to or refuses to furnish the information and documents required by this chapter, or who submits false or misleading information on the application, or that the applicant has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, the chief of police shall refuse to issue the license. The chief of police shall notify the applicant of his or her decision in writing not more than the number of days specified in Section 5.40.070 of this chapter. 
(b)  If the chief of police finds that both the applicant's character and his or her business responsibility are satisfactory, he or she shall notify the applicant of his or her intent to issue a license upon condition that the applicant obtains within 90 days a conditional use permit for a particular location as provided in Section 5.40.120 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 762B §1(part), 2004)  
5.40.100 - Revocation. 
(a)  The chief of police shall revoke any license upon any grounds for which he may have refused the issuance thereof or upon conviction or upon a plea of guilty or nolo contendere for any violation of this chapter or the operation of the establishment does not comport with the peace, health, safety and general welfare of the public. 
(b)  To revoke a license, the chief of police, or his authorized representative, shall serve upon the holder thereof, a written notice either by personal service or by deposit in a United States Mail receptacle with appropriate postage affixed, to the address shown on the application or otherwise more recently of record, that the license shall be revoked effective upon personal service or five days after the date of mailing of the notice. 
(c)  A revoked license shall be immediately surrendered to the chief of police or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. 762B §1(part), 2004)  
5.40.110 - Appeal. 
(a)  A notice of appeal must be deposited with the city clerk within 30 days after denial of the application or revocation of the license has been served. Upon the filing of a notice of appeal, the revocation of a license shall remain in effect until such time a decision has been rendered. 
(b)  Upon the filing of the written notice of appeal, the city clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the city council, which hearing shall be within 30 days after the date of the notice. The city council shall receive a copy of the denial or revocation notice and shall conduct a hearing to determine whether or not the license should be granted or reinstated. The scope of evidence presented to the city council shall be limited to evidence regarding the reasons for denial or revocation. The burden of proof shall be upon the appellant/applicant. 
(c)  The decision of the city council shall be final with no right of further appeal. 
(Ord. 762B §1(part), 2004)  
5.40.120 - Conditional use permit required. 
(a)  If the chief of police decides that a license may properly be issued, the applicant shall then file an application with the planning commission for a conditional use permit for a particular location. 
(b)  The applicant shall comply with the provisions of law and the ordinances of the city governing the issuance of a conditional use permit, as specified in Chapters 18.54 and 18.56 of this code. The planning commission may not issue a conditional use permit for the conduct of the business of fortunetelling in any district except the commercial district or the highway commercial district. 
(c)  In the proceedings for a conditional use permit for this purpose, the planning commission has the discretion to: 
(1)  Fix and prescribe the signs, exterior appearance and exterior elevations of the premises where the business is proposed to be conducted; 
(2)  Limit number of employees, hours of operation, and other businesses conducted on the premises; and 
(3)  Impose other conditions customarily attached to conditional use permits. 
(d)  The planning commission may not issue a conditional use permit for the operation of the business of fortunetelling from a trailer, vehicle or temporary structure. 
(e)  The planning commission may not consider an application for a conditional use permit for the business of fortunetelling until the chief of police notifies the applicant of a favorable decision by the chief of police under Section 5.40.080 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 762B §1(part), 2004)  
5.40.130 - Issuance of license. 
If the chief of police acts favorably upon the application as provided in Section 5.40.090 of this chapter and the planning commission approves a conditional use permit as provided in Section 5.40.120 of this chapter then, upon the issuance of a conditional use permit, the chief of police shall issue a license to the applicant. 
(Ord. 762B §1(part), 2004)  
5.40.140 - Additional terms and conditions of license. 
The chief of police may impose additional terms and conditions upon the issuance of a license if the chief of police finds that it is necessary to do so in order to protect the general public from the threat of fraud or misrepresentation or public nuisance. 
(Ord. 762B §1(part), 2004)  
5.40.150 - License fee. 
The fee for the issuance of a license is $250.00 a year. The fee is due when the license is issued. The first annual fee shall be prorated from the date of issuance to December 31. 
(Ord. 762B §1(part), 2004)  
5.40.160 - License not transferable. 
A licensee may not assign or transfer a license. 
(Ord. 762B §1(part), 2004)  
5.40.170 - Separate licenses for individuals. 
Each and every person engaged in or who proposes to engage in the practice of fortunetelling and occult arts shall file a separate and individual application as set forth in this chapter and shall pay separate and individual filing and renewal fees. This shall include persons who engage in the practice under one common establishment. 
(Ord. 762B §1(part), 2004)  
5.40.180 - Duration and renewal of license. 
The fortunetelling license authorizes the holder to engage in the activity for a period of not more than one year. The licensee and permit holder may renew the privilege of engaging in the activity by filing an application for a renewal upon a form prescribed by the chief of police and paying the annual license fee. The renewal fee is not prorated and is not refundable. 
(Ord. 762B §1(part), 2004)  
Article III. - Prohibited Acts 
 
5.40.190 - Certain activity prohibited. 
No person may engage in the activity of fortunetelling: 
(1)  Without a license to do so; 
(2)  In violation of this chapter; or 
(3)  In violation of a term or condition of the license; 
(4)  Upon any premises for which a conditional use permit is not issued; 
(5)  In violation of any condition of a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 762B §1(part), 2004)  
5.40.200 - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of this city, any material fact in procuring the license provided for in this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 762B §1(part), 2004)  
CHAPTER 5.44 - ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
 
5.44.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section. 
"Adult-oriented business" includes: 
(1)  "Adult live entertainment theater" means any place partially or entirely used for "live adult entertainment." "Live adult entertainment" means any physical human body activity in which the employees expose to public view "specified anatomical areas" for entertainment value or appear in a state of "partial nudity" or "nudity" for any form of consideration. 
(2)  "Adult theater" means any business that provides paying customers with exposure to images that depict "specified sexual activities," "specified anatomical areas" or men and/or women in a "state of nudity" or "state of partial nudity." Motion pictures receiving up to an "NC17" rating from a generally recognized movie rating organization are not included within the definitions of this section. 
(3)  "Adult-related book and video store" means an establishment with more than 25 percent of its display area devoted to adult-related book or video products. "Adult-related book and video products" means books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, paintings, sculptures, photographs, drawings, motion pictures, slides, films, tapes, video cassettes, records, DVD, CD-ROM, or other visual or audio representations or any material in digital format, which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(4)  "Adult related sexual device store" means an establishment that rents or offers for sale any of the following products: 
a.  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed or reasonably intended to be used in connection with "specified sexual activities," or 
b.  Goods which stimulate, are intended to be placed on, or are intended to depict "specified anatomical areas," or goods that are reasonably intended to be used in conjunction with "specified sexual activities." 
c.  The following items are expressly not included within the definitions in this section: 
1.  Devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy; 
2.  Candles and incense; 
3.  Body oils, creams and lotions; 
4.  Lingerie, stockings and undergarments; 
5.  Massage devices that are not replicas of human genital organs; 
6.  Health care or personal hygiene products; and 
7.  Food products. 
"Chief of police" means the chief of police or his authorized representative. 
"Employ, employee," and "employment" describe and pertain to any person who performs any service on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. "Employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
"Establish" includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any adult-oriented business as defined in this section; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult-oriented business, to any adult-oriented business as defined in this section; 
(3)  The relocation of any adult-oriented business; or 
(4)  The addition of any of the "adult-oriented businesses" as defined in this section to any other existing adult-oriented business. 
Exceptions. An "adult-oriented business" does not include: 
(1)  Bona fide medical establishments operated by properly licensed and registered medical and psychological personnel with necessary medical or professional credentials for the treatment of patients. 
(2)  Persons depicting "specified anatomical areas" in a modeling class operated: 
a.  By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partially by public revenue; 
b.  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partially by public revenue; or 
c.  In a structure operated either as a profit or not-for-profit facility which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing, and where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class. 
"Nudity" or "state of nudity" means the showing of genitals or pubic area with less than a fully opaque fabric covering. 
"Partial nudity" or "state of partial nudity" means a state of dress that exposes a "specified anatomical area." 
"Operate" means to own, lease, rent, manage, conduct, or direct an adult-oriented business. 
"Manager" means the person in charge of an adult-oriented business at any given time, irrespective of their job title. Depending upon their role, this may include the owner of the adult-oriented business. 
"Religious institution" means any church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or building which is used primarily for religious worship, religious education incidental thereto and related religious activities. 
"School" means any public or private educational or day care facility primarily attended by minors. 
"Sexual encounter center" means any business, agency, or person who, for any form of consideration, provides a place where three or more persons may assemble for the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
"Specified anatomical area" includes the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, anus, and/or the areola and nipple of a female breast, and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
"Specified sexual activity" includes the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation and intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, sodomy, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sapphism; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Human or animal masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, ejaculation; 
(4)  Erotic or lewd touching of nude human genitals or pubic region; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, lewd fondling or other lewd contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigations, that are intended to stimulate the prurient interests. 
"Zoning district" means the zoning designation on the city zoning map or the corresponding designation on the general plan land use map. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 3, 1-22-2013)  
5.44.020 - Permits required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult-oriented business unless the person first obtains and continues to maintain a valid permit. This permit is referred to in this chapter as "adult-oriented business license." 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall be a manager or employee of an adult-oriented business unless the person first obtains and continues to maintain a valid permit. This permit is referred to in this chapter as "adult employee permit." A manager that has a current and valid "adult-oriented business license" need not obtain or maintain an "adult employee permit." 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 3, 1-22-2013)  
5.44.030 - Application for adult-oriented business license or adult employee permit. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain an adult-oriented business license or adult employee permit shall apply to the chief of police on a form provided by the city clerk. Before submitting the application, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable fee established by resolution of the city council to defray, in part, the cost of the investigation required by this chapter. Upon payment, the city shall issue a receipt to the applicant showing that such permit application fee has been paid The applicant shall provide the receipt or a copy thereof to the chief of police at the time of applying for a permit under this section. 
(b)  The application shall include the following information about the applicant: 
(1)  The full name; 
(2)  The present address; 
(3)  The telephone number; 
(4)  A copy of a current and valid: 
a.  U.S. passport; 
b.  Driver's license issued by a U.S. state; or 
c.  Identification card issued by a U.S. state. 
(5)  A list of nolo contendere or guilty pleas, or convictions which have occurred within the previous five years for offenses specified in subsection 5.44.050(b)(2); 
(6)  A list of all other licenses and/or permits issued to and/revoked from the applicant by any city or county, in the five years prior to the year of the permit application; 
(c)  If the application is for an adult-oriented business license, in addition to the information required by subsection (b) of this section, the following information is required: 
(1)  The address of the business; 
(2)  If the location of the business is not a legal nonconforming use a diagram of the site and interior of the building as the business will be operated. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The drawing of the site and interior of the building must be a configuration of the premises demonstrating it will comply with the requirements of this chapter and of Chapter 18.34; 
(3)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown on its articles of incorporation If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the exact name of the partnership and the name and address of the partner(s) owning the largest share of the partnership. If the applicant is either a corporation or partnership, the application need not contain the information required by subsections (b)(4), (b)(5), (b)(6), and (d) of this section; 
(4)  A description of the security measures that the applicant intends to implement at the business. 
(d)  Upon completion of the application, the applicant will be fingerprinted for the purpose of conducting a background check to verify the information provided pursuant to subsection (b) of this section; 
(e)  The application for an adult-oriented business license does not authorize conducting an adult-oriented business until a permit has been granted. A temporary adult employee permit may be granted pursuant to subsection 5.44.060(a); 
(f)  All personal information provided by an applicant shall be deemed confidential and not disclosed except as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 3, 1-22-2013)  
5.44.040 - Investigation and recommendations for an adult-oriented business license or adult employee permit. 
(a)  Upon receiving an application for an adult-oriented business license or adult employee permit, the chief of police will stamp the application as received on the date of receipt, and determine whether the application contains all the information required by Section 5.44.030. If the chief of police determines that the application is incomplete or has been completed improperly, the chief of police shall mail a notice to the applicant at the address provided by the applicant in the application. If the applicant requests an extension within ten days after the mailing of the notice, the chief of police shall grant the applicant an extension of time of an additional ten calendar days to complete the application properly. The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time. 
(b)  If the application is for an adult-oriented business license: 
(1)  Within ten calendar days of the date of filing of a complete application, the chief of police shall refer the application to the development services department and the fire department. 
(2)  The development services department and the fire department shall inspect the proposed premises and make separate recommendations to the chief of police, within 35 calendar days after the filing of the completed application. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 3, 1-22-2013)  
5.44.050 - Issuance of adult-oriented business license. 
(a)  The chief of police shall grant or deny a completed application for an adult-oriented business license within 60 calendar days after the date of filing a completed application. 
(b)  The chief of police shall grant an adult-oriented business license unless the chief of police finds: 
(1)  That the proposed operation fails to meet the requirements of this chapter or Chapter 18.34 of the Lincoln Municipal Code; 
(2)  That during the past five years the applicant or any manager has pled guilty, nolo contendere, or been convicted of any of the following offenses or convicted of an offense outside of the state of California that would have constituted any of the following offenses if committed within the state of California - Sections 243.4, 261, 266a, 266b, 266d, 266e, 266f, 266g, 266h, 266i, 266j, 267, 288, 314, 315, 316, 318, 653.22 or subdivisions (a), (b) or (d) of Section 647 of the California Penal Code; any offense requiring registration under provisions of either Section 290 of the California Penal Code or Section 11590 of the California Health and Safety Code; or any felony offense involving the possession, possession for sale, sale, transportation, furnishing, giving away, of a controlled substance specified in Section 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code, or as those sections may thereafter be amended or renumbered, or any other crime with substantially similar statutory elements to the ones listed herein; 
(3)  That the applicant has made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  That the applicant has had a permit for an adult-oriented business denied, revoked or suspended for cause by this city or any other city or county within the last five years; 
(5)  That the applicant is not at least 18 years of age; or 
(6)  That the applicant has not paid the required application fee. 
(c)  Not later than five calendar days after the date of the decision of the chief of police, a notice of the decision shall be sent to the applicant, postage prepaid, at the address shown in the application and shall state whether the decision of the chief of police was to grant or deny the permit. If the application is denied, the chief of police shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for the denial. If the application is granted, the chief of police shall attach to the application an adult-oriented business license. 
(d)  If the chief of police neither grants nor denies the permit within the time frames established in subsection (a) of this section, the permit shall be deemed granted. 
(e)  If the application is for renewal, a denial of the application does not constitute a revocation of the prior license, if said license has not yet expired. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 3, 1-22-2013)  
5.44.060 - Issuance of adult employee permit and temporary adult employee permit. 
(a)  Upon completion of the application for an adult employee permit, the chief of police shall issue a temporary permit to the applicant that shall expire 40 days from the date of issuance. The temporary permit shall allow the employee to begin working as an adult employee until the city makes a final decision to either grant or deny the application for an adult employee permit. 
(b)  The chief of police shall grant or deny a completed application for an adult employee permit within 30 calendar days after the date of filing a completed application 
(c)  The chief of police shall grant an adult employee permit unless the chief of police finds: 
(1)  That during the past five years the applicant has pled guilty, nolo contendere, or been convicted of any of the offences listed in 5.44.050(b)(2); 
(2)  That the applicant has made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(3)  That the applicant is not at least 18 years of age; 
(4)  That the applicant has had a permit for an adult-oriented business denied, revoked or suspended for cause by this city or any other city or county within the last five years; or 
(5)  That the applicant has not paid the required application fee. 
(d)  Not later than five calendar days after the date of the decision of the chief of police, a notice of the decision shall be sent to the applicant, postage prepaid, at the address shown in the application and shall state whether the decision of the chief of police was to grant or deny the permit. If the application is denied, the chief of police shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for the denial. If the application is granted, the chief of police shall attach to the application an adult employee permit. 
(e)  If the chief of police neither grants nor denies the permit within the time frames established in subsection (a) of this section, the permit shall be deemed granted. 
(f)  If the application is for renewal, a denial of the application does not constitute a revocation of the prior permit, if said permit has not yet expired. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 3, 1-22-2013)  
5.44.070 - Term and renewal of adult-oriented business license and adult employee permit. 
(a)  An adult-oriented business license and an adult employee permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance of the permit, unless sooner suspended or revoked. 
(b)  A permit which has not been suspended or revoked may be renewed for one year on written application to the chief of police. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided in this chapter for permit applications. 
(c)  The application for an adult-oriented business license shall be filed at least 60 calendar days but not more than 90 calendar days prior to the expiration date of the current valid permit. The application for an adult employee permit shall be filed at least ten calendar days but not more than 60 calendar days prior to the expiration date of the current valid permit. 
(d)  When a timely and complete application for renewal is filed, the expiration of the permit or license shall be stayed until a decision on the renewal application is issued by the chief of police. When the application for renewal is filed after the limitations specified in subsection (c) of this section, the expiration of the permit or license shall not be stayed. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 3, 1-22-2013)  
5.44.080 - Name and place of business—Change of location. 
No person granted a license for an adult-oriented business shall operate the adult-oriented business under any name or at any location not specified in the license. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 3, 1-22-2013)  
5.44.090 - Suspension and revocation of adult-oriented business license and adult employee permit. 
(a)  The chief of police shall suspend an adult-oriented business license or an adult employee permit for a period of ten days if the licensee or permittee is convicted under this section of violating a provision of this chapter. 
(b)  The chief of police shall revoke a license or permit issued pursuant to this chapter if the licensee or permittee: 
(1)  Is convicted of three or more violations of this chapter in any 12 month period; 
(2)  Is convicted or pleads guilty or nolo contendere to an offense listed in subsection 5.44.050(b)(2); 
(3)  Is determined to have filed inaccurate information required under Section 5.44.030 or 5.44.050, and that information constitutes a material misrepresentation. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 3, 1-22-2013)  
5.44.100 - Procedures for denial, revocation, nonrenewal or suspension; appeal. 
(a)  If the chief of police determines that grounds exist for denial, suspension or revocation of a license or permit under this chapter, the chief of police shall notify the applicant, licensee or permittee (respondent) in writing of the intent to deny, suspend or revoke, including a summary of the grounds and the code sections violated. 
(b)  The notification sent pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be by certified mail to the address on file with the chief of police. Within ten working days of receipt of such notice, the respondent may provide to the chief of police in writing a response which shall include a statement of reasons why the license or permit should not be denied, suspended or revoked and may include a request for a hearing. If a response is not received by the chief of police in the time stated, the notification shall be the final administrative action of denial, suspension or revocation and notice of such will be sent to the permittee or licensee within five working days after the expiration of the period for submitting a response. Within five working days after receipt of a response, the chief of police shall either withdraw the intent to deny, suspend or revoke, and send notification of the withdrawal to the respondent in writing by certified mail, or shall schedule a hearing before a hearing officer and send notification to the respondent in writing by certified mail of the date, time and place of the hearing. If the chief of police fails to send a timely notification either withdrawing the intent or scheduling a hearing, the intent to deny, suspend or revoke shall be deemed withdrawn. 
(c)  The hearing, if requested under subsection (b) of this section, shall be scheduled not less than 15, nor more than 30 working days after receipt by the chief of police of the request for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner. The respondent may be represented by counsel. If respondent is represented by counsel, attorneys' fees shall be at the expense of respondent. The rules of evidence shall not apply. Respondent shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the denial, suspension or revocation was arbitrary or capricious and an abuse of discretion. The hearing officer shall render a written decision within five working days after completion of the hearing and shall mail a copy of the decision by certified mail to the address of the respondent on file with the chief of police. If more than 45 days elapse between receipt by the chief of police of a request for a hearing and mailing by the hearing officer of a final decision to the respondent, a decision in favor of the applicant, licensee or permittee shall be deemed to have been rendered. In the case of an intent to revoke, suspend or nonrenew a license or permit, the permittee or licensee may continue to function under the license or permit pending receipt of the final decision of the hearing officer. The decision shall be final at the end of five working days after it is mailed and shall constitute final administrative action. 
(d)  Any applicant or licensee or permittee whose permit has been denied, suspended, or revoked pursuant to this section shall be afforded prompt judicial review of that decision as provided by California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.8. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 3, 1-22-2013)  
5.44.110 - Register of adult-oriented business employees. 
(a)  The manager of an adult-oriented business shall maintain a register on the premises of all employees and managers of the business and their permit numbers. 
(b)  The register required by subsection (a) of this section shall include the current employees and managers, as well as employees and managers during the previous 12 months. The register shall remain confidential, except that it shall be available for inspection by law enforcement personnel or the county health officer for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The manager of the business shall provide the register immediately upon demand during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 3, 1-22-2013)  
5.44.120 - Adult employee identification card. 
The chief of police shall provide to the person granted an adult employee permit or temporary adult employee permit an identification card containing the name, photograph and permit number of the adult employee. The identification card shall remain confidential, except that an adult employee shall deposit his or her identification card with the on-site manager of an adult-oriented business while the adult employee is on the premises. The on-site manager shall make the identification cards available for inspection by law enforcement personnel or the county health officer at all times while the adult-oriented business is open for business. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 3, 1-22-2013)  
5.44.130 - Persons under the age of 18 years prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the licensee or manager of an adult-oriented business to employ, or permit to perform services or entertainment on the premises, any person who is under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  It shall further be unlawful for anyone under the age of 18 to enter, or remain within, the adult-oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 3, 1-22-2013)  
5.44.140 - Display of license. 
Every adult-oriented business granted a permit shall display the permit in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance of the adult-oriented business at all times during business hours. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 3, 1-22-2013)  
5.44.150 - Transfer of adult-oriented business license and adult employee permit. 
Adult-oriented business licenses and adult employee permits are not transferable. Upon sale or relocation of an adult-oriented business, the license therefore shall be void, provided, however, that upon the death or incapacity of the licensee, the establishment may continue in business for 90 days to allow for an orderly transfer of the license pursuant to this section, provided, however, that the executor of the estate shall be required to renew the application within the 90 days and shall comply with all other requirements of this code. Any attempt to transfer a license or permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void, and upon such attempt the permit shall be deemed revoked. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 3, 1-22-2013)  
5.44.160 - Employment of adult-oriented business employees. 
(a)  No licensee or manager of an adult-oriented business shall employ any person unless that person possesses a valid adult employee permit under the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee and the manager to ensure that each employee shall have first obtained a valid permit pursuant to this chapter and shall comply with all other requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  No licensee or manager of an adult-oriented business shall employ at an adult-oriented business, any person who has pled guilty, nolo contendere, or been convicted of an offense specified in subsection 5.44.050(b)(2) within the previous five years. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 3, 1-22-2013)  
5.44.170 - Hours of operation. 
An adult-oriented business may not provide "live adult entertainment" between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 3, 1-22-2013)  
5.44.180 - Development and operational standards. 
The following development and operational standards shall apply to all adult-oriented businesses, including those providing "live adult entertainment" and shall be in addition to those found in the zoning code: 
(1)  No images of partial nudity or nudity may be viewable from outside the premises of the adult-oriented business. 
(2)  Subject to the exception in subsection 5.44.190(b), no person may publically appear in a state of partial nudity or nudity in an adult-oriented business. 
(3)  All off-street parking areas and the exterior areas of an adult-oriented business shall be illuminated as specified in the zoning ordinance. 
(4)  The building entrance to an adult-oriented business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under 18 years of age are precluded from entering the premises. 
(5)  The adult-oriented business shall provide and maintain separate restroom facilities for male patrons and female patrons and male employees and female employees. No person of the opposite sex may enter a male or female restroom, except an employee may enter to carry out duties of repair, maintenance or cleaning while the restroom is closed for use. The restroom shall be free of any adult material and shall not contain television monitors, or other motion picture or video projection, recording, or reproduction equipment. Only one person shall be allowed in each restroom at any time, unless otherwise required by law. 
(6)  No employee shall make physical contact with the person or the clothing of any patron and no patron shall make physical contact with the person or the clothing of any employee except for purposes of collecting money by hand-to-hand transfer (subject to the limitations of subsection 5.44.049(h)), rendering emergency medical aid or handing something to the other in the ordinary course of business. It is the intent of this section to prohibit any touching of a sexual nature between patrons and employees. 
(7)  Adult-oriented businesses shall employ a reasonable number of security guards in order to maintain public peace and safety and to ensure compliance with the regulations relating to adult-oriented businesses. 
(8)  The manager on duty shall make reasonable efforts to control the conduct of patrons so as to prevent or minimize disorderly or unlawful conduct within the establishment and within 50 feet of the establishment. Such efforts shall include keeping an orderly line to enter the establishment that does not block public sidewalks, entrances, exits, or other public rights-of-way, and preventing patrons from loitering outside the establishment. 
(9)  If a viewing area in an "adult theater" provides for occupancy of five or more patrons, the viewing area must conform to the following requirements: 
a.  Have individual, separate seats, not couches, benches, or the like, to accommodate the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium areas; and 
b.  Have a continuous main aisle alongside the seating areas in order that each person seated in the hall or auditorium areas shall be visible from the aisle at all times. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 3, 1-22-2013)  
5.44.190 - Adult-oriented businesses providing live adult entertainment. 
In addition to the development and operational standards provided in Section 5.44.170 and those found in the zoning code, the following additional requirements shall also apply to adult-oriented businesses providing "live adult entertainment" as defined in this chapter: 
(1)  No person shall perform "live adult entertainment" for patrons of an adult-oriented business except upon a stage which is at least 18 inches above the level of the floor and which is separated by a distance of at least ten feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons; and no patron shall be permitted within ten feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by an adult employee. Fixed rail(s) at least 30 inches in height shall be maintained at the ten-foot perimeter point to establish the separation between adult employees and patrons as required by this subsection. Nothing in this section is intended to exempt the adult-oriented business from compliance with the provisions of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations pertaining to handicapped accessibility. 
(2)  While performing on stage, employees providing "live adult entertainment" may appear partially nude but may not appear nude. 
(3)  The adult-oriented business shall provide separate dressing rooms for adult employees which are exclusively dedicated to the adult employees' use, and to which no patron shall be admitted. No patron shall be permitted in the employees' dressing room. The adult-oriented business shall provide a separate walkway between the dressing room facilities and the stage in a location which is not open to patrons, located at least ten feet from patrons and which is at least three feet wide with a fixed solid barrier at least 30 inches in height separating the adult employees approaching or leaving the stage from all patrons. 
(4)  The adult-oriented business shall provide an entrance/exit from the adult-oriented business premises for an employee that is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons. 
(5)  No employee shall solicit tips or other gratuities from any patron or other employees. No gratuity or tip may be given to an employee providing "live adult entertainment" except by placing the tip or gratuity into a nonhuman receptacle placed at the rail separating the employees from the patrons and at least ten feet from the stage. Employees, other than those providing "live adult entertainment," may accept gratuities or tips but only by means of hand-to-hand transfer or another method not involving physical contact between the patron and the employee. Any transfer of tips or gratuities between patrons and employees shall comply with this section's prohibitions on physical contact between adult employees and patrons. 
(6)  Patrons shall be advised of the separation and no touching requirements by signs conspicuously displayed and placed on the barrier between patrons and performers and utilizing red or black printing of letters not less than one inch in size. And, if necessary, patrons shall also be advised of the separation and no touching requirements by employees or independent contractors of the establishment. 
(7)  Manager stations. All indoor areas of the adult-oriented business providing "live adult entertainment" within which patrons are permitted, except restrooms, shall be open to view within a direct line of sight at all times by the management from a designated manager station. Manager stations shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. Manager stations may include video monitoring of the adult-oriented business, but all areas of the business must be visible by a direct line of sight as described in this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 3, 1-22-2013)  
5.44.200 - Management requirements. 
There shall be present on the premises of an adult-oriented business at all times while the business is open, a manager who is at least 18 years of age, who shall be in charge of all of the activities on the premises and who shall be responsible to ensure compliance with all requirements set forth in this chapter. No performer may serve as the manager. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 3, 1-22-2013)  
5.44.210 - Service of alcoholic beverages. 
Adult-oriented businesses are prohibited from serving or offering alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 3, 1-22-2013)  
5.44.220 - Inspection. 
To the extent authorized by law, an applicant or licensee shall permit representatives from city departments or government agencies to inspect the premises of an adult-oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with this code and the development and operational standards applicable to adult-oriented businesses, at any time it is open for business. A person who operates an adult-oriented business or his or her agent or employee is in violation of the provisions of this section if he/she refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is open for business. Nothing in this section shall permit or authorize warrantless searches of property on the premises, except as otherwise permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 3, 1-22-2013)  
5.44.230 - Applicability; violations. 
(a)  The requirements of Chapter 5.44 shall apply to all persons and businesses engaging in the activities described in Chapter 5.44, whether or not such activities were commenced prior to the effective date of Chapter 5.44. Persons and businesses engaging in activities regulated by Chapter 5.44 shall be in full compliance, including receipt of any required adult-oriented business license or adult employee permit, within 180 days after the effective date of Chapter 5.44. 
(1)  If a person or business was engaging in the activities described in Chapters 5.44 and/or 18.34 prior to the effective date of Chapters 5.44 and 18.34, and said person or business appeals the denial of an adult-oriented business license or adult employee permit pursuant to the procedures outlined in this chapter, said person or business may, without an adult-oriented business license or adult employee permit, continue to engage in the activities regulated by Chapter 5.44 until a final decision is rendered on appeal. 
(2)  If a location of an adult-oriented business is a legal nonconforming use, the requirement to receive an adult-oriented business license shall not include the requirement to conform to the locational provisions of Chapter 18.34. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to establish or operate an adult-oriented business in violation of this chapter or Chapter 18.34. It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager, patron or employee to knowingly violate any provision of this chapter. Any person who knowingly violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as follows: 
(1)  Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(2)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day which any such person commits, continues, permits, or causes a violation thereof, and shall be punished accordingly. 
(3)  In addition to the penalties set forth in this chapter, any adult-oriented business that is operating in violation of these provisions regulating adult-oriented businesses is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and, as such, may be abated or enjoin from further operation by any civil proceeding otherwise authorized by law for the declaration and/or abatement of a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 3, 1-22-2013)  
5.44.240 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter and the ordinance to which it is a part, or any part thereof is held for any reason to be unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases shall not be affected thereby. The city council hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter and the ordinance to which it is a part regardless of the fact that one or more sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases may be determined to be unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 3, 1-22-2013)  
Title 6 - ANIMALS  
CHAPTER 6.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
6.04.010 - Definitions. 
The terms used in this title, if not otherwise defined, shall have the same meaning as ascribed in such terms by Placer County Ordinance 5149-B. 
"Animal" means any dog, cat, livestock, wild animal, or fowl subject to regulation pursuant to this title. 
"Animal control center" means the facilities provided by the county for the impounding and care of animals. 
"Animal control officer" means that person and his or her duly authorized assistants and deputies employed by the county of Placer who are authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this title and carry out the intent thereof. 
"At large" means an animal off the premises of its owner and not under restraint by leash, or not under the control and in the immediate presence of the owner. "At large," as applied to dogs, also means any dog on any road or street, whether publicly or privately maintained, and not under restraint by leash, and not under the control and in the immediate presence of the owner. A privately maintained road or street shall not include any such road or street serving two or less residences or businesses. For animals other than dogs, it also means any unattended animal not confined by an adequate fence or restrained by a tether. 
"City" means the city of Lincoln. 
"City manager" means the manager of the city of Lincoln. 
"County" means county of Placer. 
"Domestic fowl" means any common farm fowl including, but not limited to, turkeys, geese, ducks, chickens and pigeons. 
"Health officer" means the health officer of the county or any of his or her duly authorized representatives. 
"Impoundment" means the taking up and confining of an animal by the animal control officer in a manner consistent with recognized standards of humane treatment. Animals impounded pursuant to this title shall be impounded at the animal control center or at such other place as may be approved by the animal control officer for the impoundment of animals. 
"Keep" means keep, harbor, maintain or permit to keep, harbor or maintain. 
"Kennel" means any enclosure, premises, building, structure, lot or area, in or on which four or more dogs of at least four months of age are kept for commercial or noncommercial purposes. 
"Livestock" means any common farm animal including, but not limited to, cows, horses, sheep, goats, and pigs, but excluding fowl. 
"Owner" means a person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, trust or organization of any kind, having an interest in, harboring or having control, custody or possession of, an animal. 
"Person" means one or more individual human beings or any fictitious entity or entities. 
"Premises" means any parcel(s) of property owned, leased, occupied, or under the control of a person. 
"Vaccination" means the inoculation with an antirabies vaccine approved by, and administered in the manner prescribed by, the State Department of Public Health. 
"Vicious animal" means any animal which has, on one or more occasions, attacked, mauled, maimed or injured any person or other animal without provocation by such person or other animal. 
"Wild animal" means any of the following: 
(1)  Following members of the Class Reptila: Order Ophidia (such as, but not limited to, racers, boas, water snakes and pythons) over eight feet in length, and Order Loricata (such as, but not limited to, alligators, caymans and crocodiles) over four feet in length. 
(2)  Following members of the Class Aves: Order Falconiformes (such as, but not limited to, hawks, eagles and vultures which are not kept pursuant to federal or state permit), and Subdivision Ratitae (such as, but not limited to, ostriches, rheas, cassowaries, and emus). 
(3)  Following members of the Class Mammalia: Order Carnivora, expressly excepting the domestic dog (Canis familiaris) and the domestic cat (Felis Catus), but including, but not limited to, the family felidae (such as ocelots, margays, tigers, jaguars, leopards and cougars), the family canidae (such as wolves, dingos, coyotes and jackals), and Order Marsupialia (such as kangaroos and oppossums), and Order Chiroptera (bats), and Order Edentata (such as sloths, anteaters and armadillos), and Order Proboscidea (elephants), and Order Primata (including, but not limited to, monkeys, chimpanzees and gorillas), and Order Ungulata (expressly excluding any animal which would be included within the definition of "Livestock" in this section and including, but not limited to, antelope, deer, bison and camels). 
(4)  Any nondomestic species when kept, maintained or harbored in such numbers or in such a manner as to constitute the likelihood of danger to the animals themselves, to human beings or to the property of human beings. 
(5)  Any species of animal which is venomous to human beings whether its venom is transmitted by bite, sting, touch or other means, except honey producing bees. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.04.020 - Liability. 
No liability shall be incurred by the city for the disposition of any animal made pursuant to the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
CHAPTER 6.08 - ADMINISTRATION 
 
6.08.010 - Duties of chief of animal control. 
The city manager is the chief of animal control and may designate or contract for those services. The chief of animal control is responsible for the enforcement of this title, and all laws of the state of California pertaining to the control of dogs and other animals and the humane treatment of animals, and his duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  To administer the animal control center and keep such records as may be required. 
(2)  To take up and impound animals found within the city which are in violation of this title. 
(3)  To remove and dispose of the carcass of any animal found on any public highway, street, alley or other public place within the city. 
(4)  To quarantine animals and to cooperate with the county health officer. 
(5)  To administer licensing programs as provided for in this title. 
(6)  To administer rabies clinics. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.08.020 - Dogs killing livestock. 
The chief of animal control may kill any dog found in the act of killing, wounding or persistently pursuing or worrying livestock or poultry on land or premises which are not owned or possessed by the owner of the dog. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.08.030 - Rules and regulations. 
The chief of animal control may formulate rules and regulations in conformity with, and for the purposes of carrying out the intent of this title, and compliance with such rules and regulations shall be prerequisite to the issuance and continued validity of any license or permit provided. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.08.040 - Authority to carry firearms. 
The chief of animal control and such animal control officers as he or she may specifically designate in writing are authorized to carry firearms when acting in the course and scope of their employment pursuant to Penal Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.08.050 - Violations. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this title shall be guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished according to the punishment prescribed for an infraction in the general laws of the state. In addition to all remedies provided in this title, the city on behalf of the people of the state of California, may institute appropriate action in any court of competent jurisdiction to restrain or abate any violation of this title as a public nuisance. It is hereby declared that the keeping, harboring or maintaining of any animal in violation of the provisions of this title constitutes a public nuisance and may be restrained by any court of competent jurisdiction in the manner set forth above. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.08.060 - Authority to use tranquilizers. 
In performance of his or her duties, the animal control officer shall have the authority to employ the use of a tranquilizer gun and all animal control devices in common use with the state. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.08.070 - Authority to enter property. 
Except in cases where there is an imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare, whenever it is necessary to make an inspection or whenever the animal control officer or his duly authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises or property any condition which may be in violation of this title, the animal control officer, or his authorized representative, may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the animal control officer by this title or any other ordinance of the city; provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he or she shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and if such building or premises is unoccupied he or she shall first make reasonable efforts to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the animal control officer or his authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
When the animal control officer or his or her authorized representative shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant, no owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made, to permit entry by the animal control officer or his or her authorized representative for the purpose of inspection or performance of his or her duties pursuant to this title. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.08.080 - Summary action. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, if in the judgment of the animal control officer: 
(1)  There is an immediate threat to the health or safety of any person or animal, the animal control officer may enter upon a building or premises to abate the same. 
(2)  An animal at large is found to be unfit, dangerous, injured or ill and should be destroyed, the animal control officer may, at any time, in a humane manner, destroy such animal. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
CHAPTER 6.12 - CONDUCT REGULATIONS AND VACCINATION 
 
6.12.010 - Prohibited acts. 
It is unlawful for the owner of any animal to violate any of the provisions of this title, or to commit any of the following acts: 
(1)  To allow any animal, except the domestic cat, to run at large; 
(2)  To allow any animal to trespass upon public property or upon any private property without the consent of the owner of the property; 
(3)  If unauthorized, to remove from any dog any collar or harness or other device to which a license tag is attached, for the current year, or to remove such license tag therefrom; 
(4)  To attach to, or keep upon, or cause or permit to be attached to or kept upon any dog, any license tag, except a tag issued for such dog under the provisions of this title; or to attach or keep upon, or cause or permit to be attached to or kept upon any dog, or to make or cause or permit to be made, or to have in possession, any counterfeit or imitation of any tag provided for in this title; 
(5)  To possess any unlicensed dog in the city, or to maintain, conduct or operate, or to cause or permit to be maintained or operated in the city, any unlicensed dog kennel; 
(6)  To interfere with, oppose or resist the chief of animal control while he or she is engaged in the performance of any act authorized by this title; 
(7)  To fail to confine any female dog, while in heat or breeding condition; 
(8)  To abandon any animal in the city of Lincoln; 
(9)  To possess any dog over four months of age which does not have a current vaccination for rabies as evidenced by an official certificate thereof, except as otherwise provided in this title; 
(10)  To allow any animal to go without adequate food, water, shelter or proper care; 
(11)  To damage, harm, mutilate, maim, tease or in any other way mistreat any animal; 
(12)  To allow any animal to habitually make loud noise or act in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.12.020 - Animals causing property damage. 
If any person has any loss or damage to property, livestock or poultry, which is caused by animals, the person may file a complaint in writing with the chief of animal control. Such complaint shall state when and where the damage occurred and how much damage was done; if known, the name of the person who owns the animal(s) or is the custodian in charge of the animal(s). The animal control officer shall investigate the complaint and, if he or she finds such conditions to exist, he may issue an order to conform requiring the owner or custodian to abate such conditions within a reasonable length of time. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.12.030 - Nuisance dogs. 
Whenever the chief of animal control receives in writing by three or more persons each having separate residences or regularly employed in the neighborhood, that any dog is a habitual nuisance by reason of its howling, barking or by its actions, potentially vicious or in any manner causing undue annoyance, the animal control officer shall investigate the complaint and if he or she finds such conditions to exist, he or she may issue an order to conform requiring said owner or custodian to abate such conditions within a reasonable length of time. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.12.040 - Control of animals. 
The owner of any animal shall have the duty to take such reasonable steps as are necessary to prevent his or her animal from biting or attacking another human being or from killing, attacking, or causing damage to any other animal. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.12.050 - Reporting animal bites. 
It is the duty of any person having knowledge that any animal capable of transmitting rabies has bitten a human being within Placer County to immediately report the fact to the Placer County health department, the chief of animal control or the Placer County sheriff and to furnish complete information thereof. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.12.060 - Taking up strays. 
It is the duty of any person that takes up a stray animal to notify the chief of animal control within 48 hours of taking up the animal. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.12.070 - Cats damaging persons or property. 
No owner of a domestic cat shall permit or suffer the cat to damage property, public or private, real or personal, or to bite, scratch or claw any human being or other animal which is the property of another. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.12.080 - Vaccination—Required when. 
(a)  Every dog over four months of age shall have a medically current vaccination with a canine antirabies vaccine approved by the Placer County health department of the state of California. Such vaccination shall be administered by a veterinarian or as provided through county-recognized vaccination clinics. 
(b)  Every person who owns or comes to own an unvaccinated dog shall have ten days in which to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.12.090 - Vaccination—Not required when. 
Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary in this chapter, no dog need be vaccinated for rabies where: 
(1)  A licensed veterinarian has examined the dog and certified at such time that a vaccination would endanger the dog's health because of physiological reasons. 
(2)  Such certificate is presented to the Placer County health officer within five days of such examination. 
(3)  The Placer County health officer concurs in the opinion of the veterinarian, contained in such certificate his approval thereof. Such certificate must bear the date of issuance and must be renewed each year. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.12.100 - Vaccination—Certificate. 
Every veterinarian, after vaccinating a dog for rabies, shall issue a certificate and furnish one copy of the certificate to the owner of the dog and one copy to the chief of animal control. The certificate shall be in the form prescribed by the chief of animal control. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.12.110. - Feeding wild animals on public property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to feed any wild squirrel, wild rodent, or other wild animal at any time in any city park or on any other city property, without the express written authorization from the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 895B , 2-10-2015)  
CHAPTER 6.16 - IMPOUNDMENT 
 
6.16.010 - Animals in violation to be impounded. 
Any animal which is, to the knowledge of the chief of animal control, engaged in activity or existing in a condition prohibited by this title shall be taken and impounded at the animal control center for disposition under this title. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.16.020 - Impoundment—Peace officer. 
In addition to the power vested in the chief of animal control for the impoundment of animals found at large or otherwise in violation of this title, any peace officer is hereby empowered to impound such animal and to turn such animal over to the chief of animal control for disposition under this title. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.16.030 - Animals—Period of impoundment—Notice to owner. 
Any animal which is, to the knowledge of the animal control officer, engaged in an activity or is existing in a condition prohibited by this title shall be impounded. Once impounded at the animal control center, the disposition or redemption of the animal shall be governed by the regulations of the county. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.16.040 - Animals voluntarily surrendered or deposited. 
Any animal which is voluntarily surrendered to or deposited with the animal control center or authorized personnel thereof by the owner shall not be deemed to be impounded, and need not be kept or retained for any minimum period of time. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.16.050 - Redemption. 
The owner of any animal impounded may, at any time before the disposition of the animal, redeem it by offering proof of ownership, and by redeeming all proper fees and charges accrued as provided for by this title; provided, however, that if the animal is one which is subject to a license in this title, the licensing requirements must be satisfied before the animal's release, except that an impounded dog that has not been vaccinated against rabies, (or exempted therefrom by an exemption certificate as provided in this title) may be released to an owner who has paid all fees required in this chapter, including the license fee, on condition that such owner shall: 
(1)  Have the dog vaccinated for rabies within ten days; and 
(2)  Exhibit a valid certificate of vaccination to the chief of animal control within ten days, at which time the license will be issued. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.16.060 - Fees. 
The chief of animal control shall charge and collect fees, as established by Placer County, for every impounded animal when claimed and before release: 
(1)  Food and ordinary care; 
(2)  Extraordinary care or expense; 
(3)  Redemption fee; 
(4)  For taking into custody any dog or cat at the request of its owner. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.16.070 - Disposal. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this title, an impounded animal which is not redeemed within the applicable holding period specified in this title may, in the discretion of the chief of animal control, be sold, destroyed or otherwise disposed of. 
(b)  If an animal is sold, the receipt signed by the chief of animal control shall be valid title to the purchases. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this title to the contrary, an impounded animal which is determined by the chief of animal control to be unfit and of no further use, dangerous, or injured or ill may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of as ordered by the chief of animal control. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
CHAPTER 6.20 - RABID ANIMALS 
 
6.20.010 - Quarantine or isolation required when. 
The chief of animal control shall ensure that all animals falling into the following categories are isolated or quarantined at the place and under the conditions prescribed by the health officer and pertinent state laws and regulations: 
(1)  Known rabid animals; 
(2)  Suspected rabid animals; 
(3)  Animals that have bitten or otherwise exposed a human to rabies; 
(4)  Animals, of a species subject to rabies, which have been bitten by a known rabid or suspected rabid animal or have been in intimate contact with a rabid or suspected rabid animal. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.20.020 - Violation of quarantine or isolation. 
It is unlawful for the owner or keeper of an animal to violate any of the conditions of isolation or quarantine prescribed by the health officer. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.20.030 - Delivery of carcasses. 
Upon the death of any rabid animal, clinically suspected rabid animal, or animal which has bitten or otherwise exposed a human to rabies, the chief of animal control shall obtain and turn over to the health officer the carcass of the animal or an adequate specimen thereof. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
CHAPTER 6.24 - LICENSES 
 
6.24.010 - Term and issuance generally. 
The dog licenses and kennel licenses required by this title shall be issued upon payment of the fees fixed by Placer County. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.24.020 - Dogs—Required when. 
The canine licenses required by this chapter shall be issued upon the payment of the fees herein fixed for a period of 12 months or 24 months commencing upon the date of application and upon the showing of a valid certificate of rabies vaccination. Such canine licenses shall expire on the anniversary date of the rabies certificate, but in no case shall a canine license be valid past the expiration date of the rabies certificate. 
(1)  Every canine over four months of age shall be subject to an annual license fee in the amount established by the county of Placer. 
(2)  Any person failing to procure a license prior to the expiration date of a previously issued license shall pay the amount established by the county of Placer as a penalty for such failure. 
(3)  Any person failing to procure a license within 30 days after the canine becomes four months of age shall pay the amount established by the county of Placer as a penalty for such failure. 
(4)  Any person failing to procure a license within 30 days of bringing such canine into the county shall pay the amount as established by the county of Placer as a penalty for such failure. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.24.030 - Dogs—Tag and collar. 
The director of animal control shall procure and issue serial numbered license tags stamped with the name of the county. Such tags shall only be issued upon the application of owners who have complied with the vaccination and fee provisions of this chapter, and such license tag will be permanently issued for each animal and shall remain with that animal. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.24.040 - Dogs—Seeing eye. 
A fee shall not be levied for any license issued for a service dog owned by a person with a demonstrated need for assistance as determined by written order of a licensed physician, a dog used by any law enforcement personnel, or any dog owned by a senior citizen over the age of 65 with a current rabies vaccination. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.24.050 - Dogs—Duplicate tags. 
In the event a license tag is lost from the body of any dog for which the same was issued, the owner shall, within ten days thereafter, procure another and new license for such dog, for which he or she shall pay a fee established by Placer County. As often as any license is lost, the same shall be replaced in the same manner as hereinabove provided, within the same license year. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.24.060 - Renewal notices. 
At least 30 days prior to the expiration of a license or a kennel permit, the director of animal control shall mail a renewal notice to the owner of the canine or the owner of the kennel. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
CHAPTER 6.28 - KENNELS 
 
6.28.010 - Prohibited. 
No person shall keep a commercial kennel except a licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
CHAPTER 6.32 - DISPOSAL OF DEAD ANIMALS 
 
6.32.010 - Dead animal defined. 
"Dead animal," as used in this chapter, means the dead body of any horse, mule, cow, ox, bull or other animal which weighs 50 pounds or more at the time of death. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.32.020 - Failure to bury within 24 hours. 
It is unlawful for any person owning or having under his control a dead animal to permit such dead animal to remain unburied for a period in excess of 24 hours. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.32.030 - Slaughtered animals excepted. 
This chapter shall not apply to any animal killed for purposes of consumption provided that the remains of such dead animal are processed in such a manner as to prevent such dead animal from spoiling. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.32.040 - Disposal by county. 
In addition to any other penalty herein, the county shall be entitled to dispose of any dead animal coming within prohibitions of this chapter if such animal remains unburied for a period in excess of 24 hours. Such costs of removal and burial shall be a lien and charge against the property owner and person in control of such animal immediately prior to its death. The county shall attempt to contact the owner of such dead animal prior to disposing of it. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
CHAPTER 6.34 - SWINE 
 
6.34.010 - Keeping of domestic swine. 
No person shall keep or maintain within the city any domestic Vietnamese potbellied pig (PBP) which is more than 18 inches at the shoulder or which weighs more than 95 pounds. No other species of pig or hog may be permitted to be kept or maintained with the city. Vietnamese potbellied pigs within these limitations may be kept as household pets on property on which there is an occupied single-family dwelling, subject to the provisions and restrictions of this chapter and title. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.34.020 - Minimum lot area. 
(a)  No person shall keep or maintain any PBP in or about any duplex, triplex, fourplex, mobile home park or apartment unit. 
(b)  No person shall keep or maintain any PBP in or about a single-family dwelling located on a lot of less than 6,000 square feet. 
(c)  No person shall keep or maintain two PBPs in or about a single-family dwelling located on a lot less than 10,000 square feet. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.34.030 - Number of domestic swine. 
No person shall keep or maintain more than two Vietnamese potbellied pigs. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.34.040 - Domestic swine to be spayed/neutered. 
No person shall keep or maintain any male Vietnamese potbellied pig that has not been neutered or any female PBP that has not been spayed. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.34.050 - Vaccinations. 
Every Vietnamese potbellied pig kept under the provisions of this chapter and title shall have an annual leptospirosis vaccination. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.34.060 - Minimum yard area. 
Any person who keeps or maintains any Vietnamese potbellied pig in the city shall provide in the rear yard of the single-family dwelling at which the PBP is kept, an outdoor, paved and securely fenced enclosure of no less than 120 square feet. The PBP shall be restricted to the enclosure while out-of-doors, unless on a leash or tether under the control of a person physically capable of retaining control of the animal. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.34.070 - License required. 
It is unlawful for any person to maintain within the city a Vietnamese potbellied pig without first obtaining a license authorizing the maintaining of such PBP within the city. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.34.080 - License—Issuance. 
(a)  The license required by this chapter shall be issued upon satisfaction of all of the following requirements: 
(1)  Payment of a fee in the amount established by resolution of the council; 
(2)  Showing proof of current leptospirosis vaccination for the PBP to be licensed under this title; 
(3)  Certification that the PBP has been spayed or neutered; 
(4)  Certification by the chief of animal control that the premises were the PBP is or is to be kept and maintained, comply with the provisions of this title and chapter and are clean and sanitary; and 
(5)  Determination of the chief of animal control, upon a review of the number and nature of complaints and citations filed against the applicant concerning maintenance and treatment of animals regulated by this title, that the applicant is not likely to violate this title or create a nuisance in the keeping and maintaining of Vietnamese potbellied pigs during the term of a license. 
(b)  The license shall be issued for a period not to exceed 12 months, commencing upon the date of application, and shall be renewed annually for as long as the PBP is kept or maintained. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.34.090 - Fees—Penalty for nonpayment. 
(a)  The license fee shall be paid on the date of application. The license fee shall become due on the expiration of the current license. Any person failing to procure and pay for such license on or before the due date shall pay a late fee in the amount established by resolution of the council as a penalty for such failure. Such late fee shall be in addition to the license fee payable for the Vietnamese potbellied pig. 
(b)  Any person who acquires ownership, custody or control of a PBP not currently licensed pursuant to this title shall be immediately liable for payment of the license fee. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.34.100 - Identification tags. 
The chief of animal control for Placer County shall annually procure and issue one permanent, serial numbered Vietnamese potbellied pig license tag stamped with the name of the county for each PBP licensed under this chapter. Such tags shall only be issued upon the application of the owners who have complied with the provisions of this title. The license tag shall be permanently issued for each PBP and shall remain with the PBP. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.34.110 - Collars. 
Every Vietnamese potbellied pig shall be provided by the owner with a suitable collar, harness or other device to which the PBP license tag shall be attached. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.34.120 - Lost license tags—Replacement fee. 
In the event a license tag is lost from the body of any Vietnamese potbellied pig for which the same was issued, the owner shall, within ten days thereafter, procure another license tag for the PBP from the Placer County chief of animal control for which he or she shall pay a fee in the amount established by resolution. As often as any license tag is lost, the same shall be replaced in the same manner as provided in this section. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
6.34.130 - Renewal notices. 
The Placer County chief of animal control shall mail renewal notices to the owners of Vietnamese potbellied pigs whose licenses are due to expire the following month. 
(Ord. 804B § 2(part), 2006)  
CHAPTER 6.36 - SMALL AGRICULTURAL ANIMALS 
 
6.36.010 - Purpose and applicability. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to address the raising and keeping of small agricultural animals and the areas in which the raising and keeping of small agricultural animals are allowed. It is the intent of this section to allow for the keeping of small agricultural animals based upon the provisions herein. 
(b)  Applicability. The raising and keeping of small agricultural animals shall only take place in compliance with the requirements of this section on properties zoned for single family residential. 
( Ord. No. 697B, § 3, 5-22-2018 )  
6.36.020 - Definitions. 
"Accessory structure" means for the purposes of this chapter, a structure or building, no larger than 120 square feet in size, no taller than 16-feet in height, designed and built to store small animals. 
"Prohibited small agricultural animals" means, for the purposes of this chapter roosters, turkeys, geese, peafowl, or crowing birds. 
"Small agricultural animal" means, for the purposes of this chapter, chicken hens and rabbits. 
"Small agricultural animal raising and keeping" (land use) means the keeping, feeding or raising of animals, subordinate to the land use. 
( Ord. No. 697B, § 3, 5-22-2018 )  
6.36.030 - Allowed land use. 
The keeping of small agricultural animals is allowed in the R-1 Single-Family Residential zoning district, and lands zoned for single-family residential located within an adopted specific plan area. 
( Ord. No. 697B, § 3, 5-22-2018 )  
6.36.040 - Location provisions. 
(a)  Minimum lot size—5,000 square feet. 
(b)  Small agricultural animals are allowed to be kept in a residence or garage. 
(c)  Small agricultural animals are allowed to be kept in a rear or side yard a minimum of 15-feet from property lines. 
d.  Small agricultural animals are allowed to be kept in an accessory structure a minimum of 15-feet from property lines. 
( Ord. No. 697B, § 3, 5-22-2018 )  
6.36.050 - Number of small agricultural animals allowed. 
(a)  Chickens hens—No more than five. 
(b)  Rabbits—No more than five over the age of six months. 
(c)  Combined—No more than five. 
( Ord. No. 697B, § 3, 5-22-2018 )  
6.36.060 - Prohibited small agricultural animals. 
The following animals, for the purpose of this chapter are prohibited—roosters, turkeys, geese, peafowl, and crowing birds. 
( Ord. No. 697B, § 3, 5-22-2018 )  
6.36.070 - Permitting. 
A permit is not required for the keeping of small agricultural animals. If applicable, a permit is required for any utility services proposed to the accessory structure. 
( Ord. No. 697B, § 3, 5-22-2018 )  
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— For provisions within this code on noise, see Ch. 9.04. 
 
CHAPTER 8.04 - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION 
 
8.04.010 - Findings. 
The city council finds and declares: 
(1)  The city, its duly authorized agents or employees, shall have the exclusive right to gather and collect solid waste within the city and it is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, to collect solid waste within the city. 
(2)  The accumulation of solid waste within the city is unhealthy and unsanitary. 
(3)  A continuing program of mandatory solid waste collection is necessary for the public health, safety and welfare. 
(4)  The benefit derived by each residence and business establishment from routine solid waste collection requires that each such person and establishment pay the minimum monthly service charge for solid waste collection whether or not the service is actually used. 
(Ord. 356B §2, 1979)  
8.04.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the words set out in this section shall mean as follows: 
"Business establishment" means a commercial or industrial enterprise, including any multiple-family dwelling unit where refuse is gathered collectively for all residents. 
"Collection" means the accumulation and disposal of solid waste. 
"Food establishment" means any restaurant, cafe, food store, food stand, food processor or other business establishment which sells, processes, manufactures or prepares food and food products. 
"Garden refuse" means grass, tree or shrub trimmings and other plant material accumulated as a result of noncommercial gardening, and fireplace ashes. 
"Multiple-family dwelling" means a residential building designed for and approved for occupancy by two or more families. 
"Person" includes any person, firm, corporation, association, public agency or other legal entity. 
"Residence" means any single-family or any multiple-family dwelling. 
"Solid waste" means all refuse, garbage, rubbish, putrescible and nonputrescible wastes, and garden refuse, excluding construction refuse, junk automobiles, automobile parts, appliances and contaminated matter, rock, concrete or large quantities of earth. 
(Ord. 356B §3, 1979)  
8.04.030 - Deposit or storage of refuse. 
It is unlawful for any person to deposit, store or maintain solid waste within the city except as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 356B §4, 1979)  
8.04.040 - Mandatory collection service—Exemptions. 
(a)  There is imposed a mandatory scheme of solid waste collection within the city. The owner of a single-family dwelling, multiple-family dwelling or business establishment is liable for the minimum collection service charge applicable to the collection of one container per week of the type specified in Section 8.04.050, whether or not the collection service is used. If a person does not use the service, he must maintain his property in the same manner as though he subscribed to the service, by disposing of all solid waste not less often than if the waste were collected. 
(b)  No minimum charge shall be made where the premises are vacant for a period in excess of 14 days if the city receives notification of such vacancy prior to the commencement of the vacancy. 
(c)  A person whose residence is located such a distance from a public or private street that a substantial hardship results to that person from the requirement that solid waste be presented for collection on a mandatory basis may apply to the city council for an exemption from the mandatory provisions of this chapter. An exemption shall be granted only upon a finding by the council that the hardship to the person outweighs the public need for routine solid waste collection at the residence in question. The granting of an exemption shall not relieve the person receiving the exemption from disposing of solid waste not less often than if it were collected. 
(Ord. 356B §5, 1979)  
8.04.050 - Containers. 
(a)  All solid waste except garden refuse shall be kept and presented for disposal in watertight containers as follows: 
(1)  Residences. Metal or plastic containers (cans) not greater than 32 gallons in capacity, with a filled weight not exceeding 60 pounds, or such containers as are required by the city administrator, shall be used unless within an area designated by the city administrator as being an automated refuse collection area. 
(2)  Business Establishments. Metal or plastic containers (cans) of the type specified for residential use in a number not to exceed three, or metal bins or roll-off containers (debris boxes) of a type approved by the city administrator, or such other container as specified by the city administrator, shall be used. The city may require that a bin, roll-off container, or automated refuse container be used even though the number of cans which would otherwise be used does not exceed three when necessary to prevent an unhealthy or unsightly condition. 
(b)  (1)  Except in areas designated as an automated refuse container area, garden refuse may be kept and presented for collection in reasonable condition (container) provided the waste is readily capable of being handled for collection without spillage or breakage, and provided it is properly covered where necessary to prevent the escape of odor or the attraction of flies or vermin. 
(2)  Garden refuse shall be limited to that which may reasonably be handled by the equipment and manpower provided for ordinary collection. 
(c)  Items of extraordinary size, shape, weight, or bulk shall be disposed of by the person accumulating them. 
(Ord. 492B §6, 1987: Ord. 356B §6, 1979)  
8.04.060 - Placement of containers. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, all containers except bins and roll-off containers shall be placed within five feet of the curb or, if there is no curb, then within five feet of the edge of pavement or, if there is no pavement, then within five feet of the edge of the public or private right-of-way. No container shall be placed for collection more than 24 hours prior to the time of collection, or allowed to remain at the place of collection for more than 24r hours after collection. 
(b)  A person who demonstrates to the city that he has a physical impairment or disability which makes it difficult or impossible to place containers for collection in the location required by subsection (a) of this section, and that no one occupying the premises is capable of so doing, may place such containers at a location not more than 50 feet from the curb, edge of pavement or right-of-way. 
(c)  All bins and roll-off containers shall be placed in a convenient location, accessible to the loading apparatus used to empty them. 
(Ord. 431B §1(B, C, D), 1982: Ord. 356B §7(B, C, D), 1979)  
8.04.065 - Scavenging. 
No person, except a duly authorized city employee, shall scavenge, search through, pick up, or remove any solid waste or other material which has been placed in any trash container or bin owned or maintained by the city or set out by the city for recycling or collection without written permission from the department of public works to do so. 
(Ord. 541B §1, 1990)  
8.04.070 - Frequency of collection. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, all solid waste shall be presented for collection not less than once weekly. 
(b)  Where a business establishment has a bin or rolloff container which, because of the amount of solid waste generated, does not require weekly service, the bin or rolloff container may be presented for collection on any reasonable periodic basis approved by the city, provided the bin or roll-off container does not contain putrescible waste. 
(c)  Where necessary to prevent an unsanitary or unsightly condition, the city may require that a residence or business establishment present solid waste for collection more often than once per week. 
(d)  The schedule for collection of solid waste shall be as determined by the city, and solid waste shall be presented for collection on the day or days specified. 
(Ord. 431B §1(A, E, F, G), 1982: Ord. 356B §7(A, E—H), 1979)  
8.04.080 - Refuse service charges. 
The city council shall establish, by resolution, a schedule of fees for the collection of solid waste by the city. Such fees shall be contained in a master fee schedule. The city council shall review the master fee schedule annually, at the beginning of each fiscal year, for possible revisions and amendments. 
(Ord. 781B §1, 2005: Ord. 710B §10, 2001: Ord. 601B §2, 1993)  
8.04.083 - Due date. 
Charges for service shall be due and payable on the first day following the month or other established billing period such services were used unless otherwise provided. 
(Ord. 508B §1, 1988)  
8.04.085 - Penalty—Interest. 
All fees or charges which are not paid on or before the thirtieth day following the date such charges were due and payable are delinquent and a penalty of ten percent of the charge shall be imposed on the thirtieth day following the date such charge was due and payable. In addition, a penalty of one-half of one percent per month of the basic charge plus the ten percent penalty shall be imposed on the sixtieth day following the date such charge was due and payable and on each thirtieth day thereafter until there is payment in full of the charge plus all penalties. Penalties imposed pursuant to this section shall be billed and collected in the same manner as other fees and charges imposed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 482B §1, 1986)  
8.04.087 - Deposit required for new service. 
The customer, upon requesting new service, shall be required to pay a deposit prior to service being established. Such deposit shall be returned to the customer immediately following six months in which no charges become delinquent. In the event the customer requests termination of service, any outstanding deposit shall first be applied to outstanding charges. Any remaining deposit shall then be returned to the customer within 30 days following request for termination of service. The amount of the deposit shall be set from time to time by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 508B §2, 1988)  
8.04.090 - Delinquent fees or charges. 
Delinquent fees or charges which remain unpaid for a period of 60 or more days after the date upon which they were billed together with all penalty and interest charges thereon, may be collected in the manner authorized by Sections 25831 and 38790.1 of the Government Code. In addition, service may be terminated as provided in Section 13.04.240 and Section 13.14.020. 
(Ord. 482B §2, 1986: Ord. 356B §10(C), 1979)  
8.04.095 - Civil action. 
In addition to any other remedy that the city may have for the collection of delinquent fees or charges, all fees, charges, penalties and interest imposed by this chapter shall constitute a debt of the city and the city may institute a civil action to recover delinquent fees, charges, penalties, and interest. In such action, reasonable attorneys' fees shall be awarded to the city. 
(Ord. 482B §3, 1986)  
8.04.097 - Billing with other utilities. 
The city council may provide that fees and charges for the collection of solid waste pursuant to this chapter shall be collected with the rates and charges for any other utility services furnished by the city and that any or all such charges may be itemized and billed upon the same bill and collected as one item. 
(Ord. 482B §4, 1986)  
8.04.100 - Enforcement. 
The superintendent of public works is authorized to enforce this chapter and issue citations in the event of a violation. 
(Ord. 356B §9, 1979)  
8.04.110 - Violations. 
Violations of the provisions of this chapter constitute: 
(1)  In the case of any person allowing the accumulation or maintenance of solid waste in violation of this chapter and/or in any manner which creates a condition inimical to the public health, safety and welfare, a public nuisance; and 
(2)  In all instances, including those specified in subsection (1) of this section, a misdemeanor, as it is defined as of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter or as it may thereafter be defined by the laws of the state of California. 
(Ord. 356B §10(part), (A, B), 1979)  
CHAPTER 8.06 - COMMERCIAL DEBRIS HAULERS FRANCHISE 
 
8.06.010 - Purpose and declarations. 
(a)  It is declared and determined that the business of collecting and subsequently transporting, transferring, disposing of commercial debris generated, kept or accumulated in the city of Lincoln (hereinafter referred to as ("city") affects the health, safety, public welfare and quality of life of the inhabitants of the city. The city further declares that the business of collecting and disposing of commercial debris is a public service and should be regulated by the city. The use of any public street or public property in connection with such business is of great concern to the city and should be regulated by the city. Therefore, it is the purpose of this chapter to provide such regulation. 
(b)  It is the further purpose of this chapter to regulate such business in order to ensure its orderly operation, and to minimize the adverse effects it may have on the local environment. It is also the purpose of this chapter, aside and apart from regulation, to require compensation for the value of the franchise issued by the city. 
(c)  It is the further purpose of this chapter to provide for the uniform regulation of commercial debris collection, removal and transportation within the city. 
(d)  The city elects to have the grant of franchises governed by the ordinance codified in this chapter, and any ordinances amendatory thereof, and these provisions shall constitute the exclusive procedure applicable to the granting of franchises for the conduct of the business of collecting, transporting or disposing of commercial debris. 
(e)  If any portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining part of this chapter. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.020 - Definitions. 
Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions set forth in this section shall govern the interpretation of this chapter. 
"Administrator" means the city manager or his or her designee. 
"City" means the city of Lincoln. 
"City clerk" means the clerk for the city of Lincoln. 
"City council" means the city council for the city of Lincoln. 
"Collection" means the act of collecting and removing solid waste at the place of waste generation. 
"Commercial debris" means solid waste generated by residential, commercial or industrial sources exceeding five cubic yards. This includes recyclables for which there is no net value including the cost of removal. 
"Franchise" means a commercial debris collection franchise issued under the provisions of this chapter to engage in the business of collecting, removing and transporting solid waste generated by commercial, industrial, or residential units within the city. 
"Franchisee" means a person or entity holding a franchise issued pursuant to this chapter. 
"Person" means an individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever. 
"Recyclable material" or "recyclables" means materials that have been separated from the solid waste stream prior to disposal and returning them for use or reuse in the form of raw materials for new, used or reconstituted products which meet the quality standard necessary to be used in the market place, and that are not landfilled. 
"Removal" means the act of taking solid wastes from the place of waste generation. 
"Rubbish" means nonputrescible solid wastes such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard waste, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, plastics, rubber byproducts and litter. 
"Solid waste" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, discarded home and industrial appliances, dewatered, treated or chemically-fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous waste, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semi-solid wastes, and other discarded solid and semi-solid wastes. Solid waste does not include hazardous waste or low-level radioactive waste regulated under Chapter 7.6 (commencing with Section 25800) of Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code or medical waste. Solid waste does not include recyclable materials set out for separate collection for the purposes of recycling, that are not landfilled, and that have a positive net value at time of collection. 
"Treated medical waste" means medical waste as defined in subsection (a) of Health and Safety Code Section 117695. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.030 - Collection or transportation prohibited. 
Except as authorized by ordinance, it is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of collecting, removing or transporting, or otherwise organize, direct or sponsor the collection, removal or transportation of, commercial debris within the city without possessing a valid franchise granted by the city. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.040 - Franchise agreement. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of collecting, transporting or disposing of commercial debris kept, accumulated or generated in the city unless: 
(1)  A franchise therefor has first been granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and such franchise is in full force and effect; and 
(2)  A written franchise agreement therefor has been executed between such person and the city and such agreement is in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.050 - Exempt collection or transportation. 
The following persons shall be authorized to organize, direct or sponsor the collection, removal or transportation of commercial debris within the city, or collect, remove or transport such debris, without a franchise: 
(1)  The owner, operator or occupant or employee of a farm or ranch consisting of five acres or more, when transporting for off-site disposal solid waste accumulated as a result of operation of the farm or ranch; 
(2)  An owner or occupant of a residential unit, when collecting or transporting rubbish, not containing garbage, from his or her residential premises; 
(3)  A residential construction contractor, commercial gardener or those engaged in the business of cleaning residential or commercial properties and employees thereof, when collecting or transporting rubbish consisting of by-products in conducting their business; 
(4)  A person or employee thereof, when collecting or transporting dead animals, bones, meat scraps or food waste resulting from food processing plants for tallow or fertilizer, or other waste material to be used as raw material in manufacturing, or solid waste that is collected without charging a fee to the customer for purposes of salvage, provided that such persons shall reuse or recycle or cause to be reused or recycled all materials collected, and shall not transport or arrange for the transport of any collected materials to a disposal site; 
(5)  An operator or employee thereof of one or more industrial plants which are under single ownership, when collecting or transporting wastes which cannot be handled by standard solid waste collection equipment or which involve significant health, operating or handling hazards, including but not limited to, rice hulls, tomato pulp, chemical residues, explosives, and other toxic, noxious or hazardous substances, provided that all such wastes shall be deposited at an appropriate disposal area permitted pursuant to California State Solid or Hazardous Waste Management Standards; 
(6)  Hazardous waste, medical waste and designated waste regardless of its source; 
(7)  By-products of sewage treatment, including sludge, sludge ash, grit and screenings; 
(8)  Residue or nonprocessible waste from a solid waste management facility, including material recovery, composting and transformation facilities. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.060 - City council authority to grant. 
(a)  The city council may and is empowered to grant to a qualified applicant a nonexclusive franchise to engage in the business of collecting, transporting or disposing of commercial debris kept, accumulated or generated in the city. 
(b)  The city council may grant a franchise to an applicant based on compliance with this chapter. Any grant of a franchise by the city council may be subject to such terms, conditions, rules, regulations, restrictions, and limitations as the city council deems necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare. 
(c)  The city council empowers and grants to the administrator the authority to administer and negotiate nonsubstantive changes to the franchise agreements. The city council may delegate authority by resolution to the administrator to administer, negotiate and execute franchise agreements. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.070 - Franchise terms and conditions. 
(a)  All franchises granted to persons pursuant to this part shall be nonexclusive to allow franchisees to compete with each other for commercial debris accounts. No provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to require restricting the number of franchises to one or any particular number, and no provision of this chapter shall be deemed to require the city council to grant any franchise if the city council finds or determines that the grant of any such franchise is not for the public good. 
(b)  All franchises shall be subject to the terms and conditions specified in this chapter, in the franchise agreement and in all other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
(c)  In granting any franchise, the city council may prescribe such other additional terms and conditions, not in conflict with this chapter, as in the judgment of the city council are in the public interest. 
(d)  Each franchisee shall provide commercial debris collection, removal, and transportation services consistent with the provisions of this chapter, the terms and conditions of the franchise issued to the franchisee, and any applicable federal, state or local statute, ordinance, rule or regulation. 
(e)  Each franchisee shall provide services without undue interruptions caused by mechanical failures or other inadequacies of equipment and shall utilize equipment in quantities and of an age and quality adequate for the provisions of reliable service and to provide preventive and repair maintenance of such equipment sufficient to ensure reliability. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.080 - Application for franchise. 
(a)  All applications for franchises pursuant to this chapter shall be in writing and shall be filed with the administrator. 
(b)  Each application for a franchise shall be on a form provided by the administrator, shall include all attachments required by the administrator, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Identification. 
a.  The name and address of the applicant. 
b.  Business address and telephone number of the applicant. 
c.  Address where all vehicles and operating equipment used within the city will be kept. 
d.  If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall include the name and address of each partner, general, limited or otherwise, owning more than ten percent ownership in the partnership and their percentage of ownership. 
e.  If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall state the names and addresses of the corporation's directors, date and place of incorporation, main offices, major stockholders and associates, and the names and addresses of the parent and subsidiary companies. 
f.  If the applicant is a corporation whose stock is traded on a national exchange, the names of persons owning or controlling less than one-half of one percent of the outstanding shares need not be listed in the application and transfers of less than one-half of one percent of the outstanding shares need not be reported unless such a transfer results in the transferee owning or controlling one-half of one percent or more of the outstanding shares; provided, however, that upon reasonable request of the administrator, the applicant or party submitting an application shall provide a list of all stockholders or shall provide to the administrator the source material from which the names of such stockholders may be readily obtained. 
g.  If the applicant is an affiliate or a franchised operation of another corporation (not to be confused in this instance with a commercial debris collection franchisee of the city), the applicant shall list the names and addresses of the parent or subsidiary companies, together with a description of their business interests and/or ownership. 
h.  If the applicant is a joint venture or other combination of persons and corporations, identify separately the names and addresses of each member of the joint venture or combined effort, together with their percentage interest. 
(2)  Business Operations. The names of the executive, operational and financial managers to be used in connection with the solid waste collection services, together with documentation that such persons and the applicant have sufficient experience in solid waste handling to perform solid waste collection services in the city. 
a.  Attestation that books and accounts of all revenue and income arising out of its operations will be kept in a manner that conforms with generally accepted accounting principals. 
b.  A statement that the applicant shall obtain insurance prior to commencing business subject to the franchise agreement. 
c.  A statement that the applicant shall maintain and report on a timely basis all operational information and data elements reasonably required by the city to comply with its reporting requirements as defined in the franchise agreement. 
d.  A complete listing and explanation of any civil or criminal rulings or judgments in excess of $5,000.00, or convictions against applicant, any of applicant's partners, major stockholders, corporate directors or parent or subsidiary companies, occurring within the last five years. Applicants that are subject to the periodic reporting requirements of Section 13(a) of the Securities Exchange Act, may, in lieu of the information required by Section (8)(B)(1)(f) and (8)(B)(2)(d), submit the information reported pursuant to 17 CFR §§229.103 (Legal proceedings) and 229.403 (Security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management) on the most recent form 10-K filed by the applicant with the securities and exchange commission. 
(3)  Facilities and Equipment. 
a.  A description of all vehicles and equipment that the applicant owns, has control of, or intends to acquire for the collection, transportation, or disposal of commercial debris in the city and which are subject to the provisions of the franchise agreement. A statement as to whether the vehicles and equipment are self-unloading and equipped with audible automatic back-up warning devices. The minimum vehicle description for existing vehicles shall include vehicle identification number (VIN) and license plate number. 
b.  Evidence demonstrating that the applicant owns or will have access to suitable facilities for keeping vehicles and equipment clean and in good repair, and that the applicant owns or will have access to reasonable office and billing facilities. 
c.  Evidence demonstrating that the applicant owns or will have the legally enforceable right to use a collection vehicle, the body of which is closed, leak resistant, and constructed for the purpose of solid waste collection, transportation and disposal. In the alternative, for the purposes of this provision, an applicant may demonstrate by the evidence that they service and transport open-top roll-off boxes for the collection, transportation, and disposal of nonputrescible waste and/or roll-off compaction boxes which are closed, leak resistance, and are constructed for the purpose of solid waste collection, transportation and disposal. 
(4)  Financial Resources. Applicant shall provide proof satisfactory to the administrator that the applicant has adequate financial resources to conduct commercial debris collection services. 
(5)  Other. 
a.  Any other evidence that demonstrates that the applicant is able to render collection and subsequent transportation, and/or disposal services in accordance with applicable federal, state and local statutes. 
b.  Such additional information as may be reasonably requested by the administrator. 
c.  During the application or proposal period and during the full term of any franchise, all information contained in the franchise application shall be kept up-to-date by the applicant who shall file a new verified statement within 48 hours of any change indicating in detail the nature of any change in the information. 
(c)  The application shall be signed by the person applying for the commercial debris collection franchise or, in the case of a partnership or corporation, by a person authorized to bind the partnership or corporation. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.090 - Franchise application review process. 
(a)  The city council may award franchises for the collection of commercial debris within the city. The franchises awarded by the city council shall be granted to currently licensed private haulers meeting all terms and conditions of both this chapter and the franchise agreement. 
(b)  Applicants may submit their completed application for a franchise, as provided in ordinance, to the administrator for review and consideration at any time during a designated application period. The administrator shall review such submittals and either make a recommendation to the city council to award such franchise, or notify applicant of denial, within 60 days of receiving a completed application. 
(c)  The administrator shall take into consideration all components of the completed application, including but not limited to: 
(1)  The ability of the applicant to meet all terms of the ordinance; 
(2)  Any history of civil or criminal convictions that may compromise the public's interests; and 
(3)  The completeness, accuracy, and validity of the application. 
The administrator, or his designee, shall also have the authority to verify independently any and all statements made and implied in the application. The administrator may also request clarification from applicant of any or all elements of the submitted application. 
(d)  After the 60-day review period, the administrator shall either: 
(1)  Deny an award and notify the applicant in writing of the reasons why the award was denied; or 
(2)  Recommend to the city council that a franchise be awarded. 
(e)  Upon concurrence with a positive recommendation, the city council will award the franchise or will delegate authority to the administrator to award the franchise within a reasonable period of time. The administrator will notify applicant in writing of an award. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.100 - Appeal upon denial of award. 
(a)  Within 30 days of written notification of award denial or within 60 days of administrator's failure to act on the franchise application, applicant has the right to meet with the administrator to review the items cited in the written notice and provide any additional evidence to support an award. Within 15 days of such meeting, the administrator will make a final, written determination of the application, based on the reviews of additional evidence, together with the original application. Administrator will send a copy of all final, written determinations, including reasons for denial, if any, to both applicant and the city council. 
(b)  Applicant may, within ten days after receiving the administrator's final denial, request a public hearing before the city council by submitting to the city clerk a written petition for an appeal hearing. If a public hearing is requested, the city clerk shall set the matter for hearing at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting or any later date as agreed upon by the applicant and city clerk. At such hearing, applicant may present evidence in writing and through testimony of its employees and others relevant to the application. During such hearing, the city council may demand from the applicant such additional information as the city council may deem relevant and necessary. Standard rules of evidence are not in effect at such public hearing, and the applicant shall have the burden of proof to show facts demonstrating that the applicant does, in fact meet the requirements of this chapter. Any hearing may be continued or adjourned to a stated time and place without the giving of further notice. The city council will provide applicant with a written explanation of its determination on the application within 30 days of such hearing. The city council's decision is final. 
(c)  If the term of an applicant's existing franchise expires while the application is under city review, the city council or the administrator may administratively extend the term for such period of time as is required to complete the appeal process. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.110 - Awarding of franchise. 
(a)  A franchise shall become effective only once the applicant and the city have signed a written agreement, and upon applicant's satisfying all of the requirements and conditions set forth in both this chapter and the franchise agreement. 
(b)  Prior to performing any services provided under the award of a franchise, franchisee must provide to the city copies of all required certificates of insurance, and copies of all required truck inspection forms as enumerated in the franchise agreement and this chapter. Should franchisee fail to maintain all such insurance and bonding requirements, uninterrupted for the term of the agreement, the city will immediately suspend or terminate the franchise. 
(c)  If the franchisee's description of vehicles and equipment, as required under ordinance, has changed between the application date and the effective date of the franchise agreement, franchisee must submit to administrator an amended description, including all identification elements required under ordinance, prior to commencing services authorized in the agreement. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.120 - Requirements for franchise effectiveness. 
A franchise granted pursuant to this part shall not become effective unless and until all of the following requirements have been satisfied: 
(1)  The ordinance granting the franchise is effective; 
(2)  The applicant and the city have executed a franchise agreement; 
(3)  Within 20 days from the date of adoption of the ordinance granting the franchise, or delegating authority to the administrator to grant the franchise, the applicant to whom a franchise has been granted has filed with the city clerk evidence of compliance with the insurance requirements specified in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.130 - Term of franchise. 
The initial term for any franchise agreement shall not exceed five years. The city council may extend any such agreement under the terms and conditions provided for in agreement. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.140 - Termination or suspension of franchise. 
(a)  The city council shall have the right to terminate any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter if the city council finds, after a public hearing following not less than 14 days' written notice to the franchisee, that: 
(1)  The grantee has failed to comply with, or to do anything required of the grantee by, provisions of this chapter, or provisions of the franchise agreement; or 
(2)  Any provision of this part becomes or is declared to be invalid and the city council expressly finds that such provision constitutes a material consideration to the grant or continuation of such franchise. 
(b)  Any franchise granted pursuant to this part shall automatically be suspended whenever the grantee: 
(1)  Fails to keep in full force and effect the insurance required by the franchise agreement; or 
(2)  Fails to keep in full force and affect any applicable licenses or permits required by federal, state or local law. 
The suspension shall remain in effect until the grantee provides documentation satisfactory to the administrator verifying that the reason for the suspension specified above no longer exists. 
(c)  The administrator may suspend any franchise granted under this part if the grantee fails to submit timely reports as described in Section 8.06.190 of this chapter within 15 days after written notice from the administrator that a report is delinquent. The suspension shall remain in effect for the period specified in the administrator's notice unless the suspension is reversed or modified by the administrator or, upon appeal by the franchisee, by the city council. 
(d)  In the event the franchise granted pursuant to this part is terminated, the grantee shall have no right or authority to engage in commercial debris collection, transportation or disposal operations in the city unless and until a subsequent commercial debris collection franchise is granted to the grantee. Nothing in this chapter shall require the city to grant any subsequent franchise to the grantee. 
(e)  In the event the franchise granted pursuant to this part is suspended, the grantee shall have no right or authority to engage in commercial debris collection, transportation or disposal operations in the city during the period of suspension. 
(f)  In the event any franchise granted pursuant to this part is terminated under subsection (a) of this section, then within the time period specified by the city council, the grantee shall: 
(1)  Remove all of the grantee's, and any subcontractor's, solid waste containers from all service locations where services have been provided pursuant to such franchise; and 
(2)  Properly dispose of any and all solid wastes in the containers at the time of removal. 
(g)  If the grantee fails to remove any solid waste container or to properly dispose of any solid waste in any container within the time specified in subsection (f) of this section, the city may remove the container and/or dispose of the solid waste therein and may charge the grantee for the city's costs. The grantee shall pay to the city all of the costs incurred by the city in such removal and/or disposal within ten days of the date of the city's invoice for such costs. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.150 - Franchise transfer or assignment. 
Any franchise granted pursuant to this part is a privilege to be held in trust by the original grantee. Any franchisee shall not sell, lease, transfer, assign or otherwise dispose of, either in whole or in part, whether by forced sale, merger, consolidation, bankruptcy, reorganization under bankruptcy laws or otherwise, a franchise issued pursuant to this chapter without the prior consent of the city council. Any such consent of the city council shall be subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the city council. This restriction includes the transfer of ownership of the franchise, or a majority of the ownership or control of the franchisee, or the conveyance of a majority of the franchisee's stock to a new controlling interest. Franchises shall become void upon the abandonment of same by franchisee. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.160 - Franchise fees. 
(a)  Each person engaging in the business of collecting, transporting or disposing of commercial debris kept, accumulated or generated in the city shall pay a franchise fee to the city. The city council shall set the franchise fee by resolution. 
(b)  Franchise fees shall be payable on a monthly basis, and shall be due and payable on the first day of the second month immediately following the month in which collection services were provided. Each payment shall be calculated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  The required franchise fee shall be paid to the city administrator. Each payment shall be accompanied by a written statement, verified by the person making the payment, or a duly authorized representative of the person, showing the calculation of the franchise fee payable in such form and detail as the administrator may require and such other information as the administrator may determine is material to a determination of the amount due. 
(d)  No statement filed under this section shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth in such statement, nor shall the filing of such statement preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action the sum that is actually due and payable. 
(e)  The payment of franchise fees to the city pursuant to this part shall be in addition to any license fee or business tax prescribed by any local jurisdictions for the same period. 
(f)  If franchise fees are not paid by the grantee at the times required by this section, then in addition to the franchise fees, the grantee shall pay a late payment charge in an amount equal to two percent of the franchise fee that is due plus interest equal to one and one-half percent for each month in which the franchise fee was not timely paid. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.170 - Franchise operations. 
(a)  All new customer agreements executed after the effective date of the franchise must contain clauses that automatically terminate such customer agreements in the event that the franchise or franchise agreement is terminated. Upon termination of any franchise, franchisee is required to notify all its customers in writing with 30 days of such termination. 
(b)  The agreement shall provide for the requirements relating to the frequency and hours of collection, the size, placement and care of the containers and special collections. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.180 - Transition period. 
Within 45 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, all existing permittees seeking to continue to operate in the city shall submit to the city an application for franchise pursuant to this chapter. All existing permits issued by the city to commercial debris collection businesses for the collection of commercial debris shall expire on the date that a permittee's franchise becomes effective or upon the final determination by the city council to deny the permittee's application for franchise. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.190 - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  The grantee shall file with the administrator a quarterly report of the quantities of commercial debris collected, transported, diverted, and/or disposed. Such report shall be in such form and detail as required by the administrator. Specifically, the report shall include the following information, the commercial debris tonnage collected and removed within the city during the previous quarter. 
(b)  To the extent permitted by the California Public Records Act, any reports, plans, and information required by this chapter or the franchise agreement shall be deemed confidential and shall not be subject to public disclosure except for each franchisee's aggregate totals. 
(c)  If the quarterly report required under subsection (a) of this section, is not filed by the due date specified in the franchise agreement, the report shall be deemed delinquent, and the grantee shall pay to the city a delinquent report charge in the amount of $50.00. If the report remains delinquent for more than 15 days, the grantee shall pay to the city a delinquent report charge in the amount of $100.00. Such delinquent report charge shall be in addition to any franchise fees or other charges payable by the grantee for the same period of time. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.200 - Restrictions on franchisees. 
The following restrictions shall be applicable to franchisees: 
(1)  No franchisee shall, by contract, subcontract, or otherwise, share with another franchisee any office space associated with operations under a franchise; 
(2)  No franchisee by contract, express understanding or indirectly, shall, in cooperation with another franchisee, divide, segregate or apportion any territory within the city for the purpose of restricting competition within a particular territory; 
(3)  No franchisee shall, directly or indirectly, enter into any contract, express understanding or other transaction with another franchisee for the purpose of fixing customer rates or charges or otherwise maintaining rates or charges at a particular level; 
(4)  No franchisee or any director, officer, partner, joint venturer, sole proprietor or corporate owner thereof, shall be a controlling shareholder of, be a partner, joint venturer or sole proprietor, owner of any other interest in or be employed by another franchisee. No franchisee which is owned in whole or in part by a corporation shall be effectively controlled by a person or entity by virtue of that person or entity's ownership of shares in the corporation, if the same person or entity otherwise controls another franchisee. The sole remedy for violation of the provisions of this subsection shall be revocation or refusal to renew a franchise. 
(5)  Each franchisee shall provide to the administrator such information as the administrator determines is reasonably necessary to facilitate effective administration of the franchise under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.210 - Inspection authority. 
(a)  Each franchisee shall at all times maintain accurate and complete accounts of all revenues and income arising out of its operations under the franchise granted pursuant to this chapter; all solid waste collected, transported and/or disposed of; the source of such solid waste; and the final destination of such solid waste. Grantee's books, accounts and records reasonably necessary for the enforcement of this chapter and the franchise agreement shall be made available for inspection, examination and audit during normal business hours by authorized officers, employees and agents of the city. The city shall give written notice at least three days prior to any inspection, audit or examination of these records. 
(b)  If the administrator determines that an audit is necessary, franchisees shall be responsible for reimbursement of audit costs, including any WPWMA or consultant services, to perform audits of accounts of all franchisee revenues and income arising out of operations under the franchise granted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.220 - Enforcement. 
Except as otherwise expressly provided, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced within the city on behalf of the city by the public works department. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.230 - Abatement proceedings. 
Any operation or activity contrary to the provisions of this chapter or a franchise agreement, including the terms and conditions of any franchise, is unlawful and shall constitute a public nuisance. The administrator is authorized to commence in the name of the city actions or proceedings to abate and enjoin any such operation or activity. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.240 - Notice. 
(a)  Whenever a provision of this chapter authorizes or requires a public hearing to be conducted by the city council, notice of the time, date, place and purpose of the hearing shall be posted. 
(b)  Any written notice or other communication to a franchisee which is authorized or required by this chapter shall be deemed served and effective for all purposes when deposited in the United States Mail, postage prepaid, and addressed to the latest address of the franchisee shown in the city records pertaining to the franchise. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.250 - Signs. 
Each franchisee shall have permanently displayed in a prominent place on the exterior of each truck utilized in the collection, removal or transportation of commercial debris under its franchise a sign which contains such information as is required by regulation of the public works department adopted pursuant to the provisions of the California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Section 17344. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.260 - Office required. 
Every franchisee shall at all times maintain a central office within Placer County, or within the metropolitan area immediately adjacent to Placer County, where the agent, servant or representative of the franchisee can be reached by telephone 9:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m., Mondays through Fridays, legal holidays excepted. Such office shall have a local telephone number so that customers served by the franchisee may contact the franchisee without the necessity of making a long distance telephone call. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.270 - Use of containers. 
No person other than a customer who has contracted for service with a franchisee, or a person with such customer's consent, shall deposit solid waste into a commercial debris bin, drop box or compactor placed in the city by a franchisee for the purpose of receiving solid waste. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.280 - Commercial debris and recyclables ownership. 
Commercial debris and recyclables lawfully deposited in bins, drop-boxes or other containers used by a franchisee for collection for either disposal or recycling shall become the property of the franchisee upon its deposit in any such container. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.290 - Indemnification. 
Each franchisee must agree to defend, with counsel to be approved by the city, indemnify, and hold harmless, the city and its agents, officers, servants, and employees from and against any and all claims asserted or liability established for damages or injuries to any person or property, including injury to city employees, agents, or officers which arise from, or in any manner connected or related with, or are caused or claimed to be caused by acts or omissions of franchisee, or their agents, officers or employees, in the performance of the nonexclusive franchise agreement, or in performing the work or services therein, and all costs and expenses of investigating and defending against same; provided, however, that franchisee's duty to indemnify and hold harmless shall not include any claims or liability to the extent arising from the established active negligence, sole negligence, or sole willful misconduct of the city, its agents, officers, or employees. This indemnification requirement shall be included in every franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.300 - Insurance. 
(a)  Each franchisee shall maintain, at its own expense, insurance coverages, as provided in the franchise agreement or as established from time to time by the administrator. All such insurance shall remain in effect, uninterrupted, through the term of the franchise agreement. 
(b)  Minimum insurance coverage shall include the following items, in amounts to be determined by the administrator: comprehensive general liability and insurance services office covering broad form comprehensive general liability automobile liability; worker's compensation insurance as required by the Labor Code of the state of California and employer's liability insurance. 
(c)  The city in its capacity as such, its officers, agents and employees shall be named as primary insureds in such policies. All such policies shall contain a provision requiring that written notice be mailed to the administrator by the insurer not less than 30 days in advance of the cancellation, modification or reduction of the insurance, or failure to renew such insurance, whether by the insurer or insured, and whether for nonpayment of premium or otherwise. Certificates of insurance shall be filed with the administrator prior to the issuance of any permit. 
(d)  Any act, omission or circumstance which results in the holder of a franchise being out of compliance with the requirements of this section during the term of the franchise shall constitute grounds for the immediate suspension of the franchise, without advance notice or hearing, pending re-establishment of compliance by the franchisee with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.310 - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  The collection and subsequent transportation and disposal of commercial debris within the city is under the supervision of the administrator who shall have the power to promulgate rules and regulations regulating such collection and subsequent transportation and disposal, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Commercial debris generation, storage, recycling, recovery, accumulation, collection, removal, transportation and disposal; 
(2)  The manner in which commercial debris collection and recycling services are provided; 
(3)  Types of commercial debris and recycling containers and vehicles used therefor; 
(4)  The operation and maintenance of sanitary methods of commercial debris disposal. 
The administrator shall have the power to establish and impose fines for violations of any of the rules and regulations. 
(b)  A copy of the rules and regulations and all amendments thereto shall be sent by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, to all affected franchisees addressed to their last place of business. To the extent not otherwise provided by law, it is unlawful for a franchisee to collect and subsequently transport or dispose of commercial debris contrary to any regulation, order, permit or requirement promulgated by the administrator. 
(c)  All such rules and regulations shall be consistent with the provisions of this chapter and shall be effective on the thirtieth day following the filing of any such rules and regulations with the city clerk. 
(d)  Any person who asserts that he or she is aggrieved by the terms or application of a regulation issued pursuant to this section may appeal the issuance of such regulation by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk. The notice of appeal shall specifically identify the regulation or regulations from which the appeal is taken and the reasons for the appeal. Upon receipt of such notice, the city clerk shall schedule the appeal for a public hearing by the city council, notice of which shall be given in the manner prescribed by Section 8.06.240 of this chapter. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council shall be vested with jurisdiction to deny the appeal or to rescind or modify the regulation. The city council determination in this regard shall be final. 
(e)  Any regulation from which an appeal is filed prior to its effective date shall not become effective until the date of a determination by the city council of the appeal. Any regulation from which an appeal is filed on or subsequent to the effective date thereof shall remain in full force and effect during the pendency of the appeal, and any decision that rescinds or modifies the regulation shall apply prospectively. 
(f)  It is unlawful and constitute a violation of this chapter for any person to violate or otherwise fail to comply with any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.320 - Vehicle inspection and tags. 
(a)  All vehicles and other equipment used in the collection and subsequent transportation, and disposal of commercial debris in the city shall be inspected as often as the administrator deems necessary and at such times and places as shall be designated by the administrator. No vehicle shall be used in the collection and subsequent transportation, and/or disposal of debris waste within the city unless it carries a current, unrevoked tag or decal issued by the city authorizing such activity. The administrator shall provide for each vehicle operated by franchisee, a durable tag or decal upon payment of the applicable fee. Such tag or decal shall be securely fastened and maintained by the franchisee on each vehicle so as to be clearly visible. The administrator may suspend the tag or decal of any vehicle that fails to meet the requirements of this section, and such vehicle shall not be used for the collection and subsequent transportation or disposal of refuse until the tag or decal has been reinstated by the administrator. In the event any vehicle fails to meet the requirements of this chapter, or in the event any vehicle becomes temporarily or permanently inoperable or unavailable, the franchisee may transfer the vehicle's tag or decal to another vehicle to be operated by franchisee, which vehicle has passed inspection and does meet the requirements of this section. The franchisee must notify the administrator of any changes to its vehicles or tags. 
(b)  All trucks and containers used in the collection, removal, transportation or storage of commercial debris in the city shall be subject to inspection by the public works department for the purpose of determining whether or not the trucks and containers comply with California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Sections 17341 through 17345. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.330 - Vehicle requirements. 
(a)  The bodies of vehicles used in the collection, removal or transportation of commercial debris in the city shall have beds of metal or other impervious material which can be cleaned, and shall otherwise be of a type approved by the public works department adopted pursuant to the California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Section 17341. 
(b)  The public works department shall be authorized to issue administrative regulations pertaining to specifications for vehicles and containers, the cleansing and disinfection thereof, and other sanitary measures in connection therewith. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.340 - Covered load requirement. 
All franchisee vehicles shall have their vehicle loads covered, with a tarp or equivalent cover, to ensure protection from littering during transportation from the origin of the trip to the WPWMA. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.350 - Rights reserved to the city. 
In addition to all other rights reserved to the city under this chapter, the following shall apply: 
(1)  There is reserved to the city every right and power, and the exercise thereof, which is reserved or authorized by any provision of any lawful ordinance or resolution of the city, whether enacted before or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(2)  Neither the granting of any franchise nor any provision of any franchise shall constitute a waiver of or a bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the city. 
(3)  The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city, its officers, employees, or agents for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this chapter or of any franchise issued under this chapter or because of the enforcement of this chapter. 
(4)  There is expressly reserved to the city the power and authority to amend any section of this chapter so as to require additional or greater standards on the part of the grantee and the power and authority to increase the franchise fees to be paid by the grantee pursuant to Section 8.060.160 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.360 - Other franchise provisions. 
(a)  The city council may expand or contract the scope of franchise agreements over time due to changes in law or interpretations of law. 
(b)  The administrator, or his designee, shall have the right to inspect franchisee's records for purposes of determining reporting requirements. The administrator may also inspect franchisee's records to determine proper calculation and payment of franchise fees. The administrator will provide franchisee with at least three days advanced written notice of its intent to inspect any of franchisee's records. 
(c)  The administrator retains the right to terminate or suspend the agreement, as provided in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
8.06.370 - Violations. 
Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violations of terms and conditions established in connection with franchises issued pursuant to this chapter, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than six months in the county jail, or both. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. 732B §1(part), 2003)  
CHAPTER 8.08 - NUISANCE ABATEMENT 
 
8.08.010 - Authority. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted pursuant to section 38771 et seq. of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 414B §1, 1982)  
8.08.020 - Purpose. 
(a)  It is the intent of the city council in adopting the ordinance codified in this chapter to provide a comprehensive method for the identification and abatement of certain public nuisances within the city. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter are to be supplementary and complementary to all of the provisions of the city's ordinances and state law and nothing in this chapter shall be read, interpreted or construed in any manner so as to limit any existing right or power of the city to abate any and all nuisances. 
(Ord. 414B §2, 1982)  
8.08.030 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  "Owner" or "property owner" means the owner of record of real property, occupant, lessee or interest holder in the same, as the case may be. 
(2)  "Premises" means any real property or improvements on real property. 
(3)  "Property" means premises. 
(4)  "Hearing officer" means the officer designated by the city manager pursuant to Section 1.20.070 to conduct hearings pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 414B §4, 1982; Ord. 700B §1, 2001; Ord. No. 911B , § 9(Exh. B), 4-26-2016)  
8.08.040 - Property maintenance responsibility. 
(a)  Every owner of real property within the city is required to maintain such property in a manner so as not to violate the provisions of this chapter of any ordinance of the city and such owner remains liable for violations thereof regardless of any contract or agreement with any third party regarding such property. 
(b)  Every occupant, lessee and holder of any interest in property other than as property owner thereof is required to maintain such property in the same manner as is the property owner, and the duty imposed on the property owner shall in no instance relieve those persons referred to in this subsection from the similar duty. 
(Ord. 414B §3, 1982)  
8.08.050 - Nuisances described. 
(a)  It is declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises in this city to maintain such premises in such a manner that any one or more of the conditions or activities described in the following subsections is found to exist: 
(1)  Any dangerous, unsightly or blighted condition which is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the public; 
(2)  The accumulation of dirt, sand, gravel, concrete or other materials of this type for an unreasonable period, so as to cause visual blight and reduce the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood; 
(3)  Any violation of the Uniform Building Code; 
(4)  The maintenance of the exterior of any vacant or unoccupied building or the interior of any such building which is readily visible from any public street or adjacent parcel of property, in a state of unsightliness so as to constitute a blighted condition detrimental to the property values in the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare; 
(5)  Any condition declared to be a nuisance pursuant to an ordinance of the city, or the laws of the state, or recognized in law or in equity as constituting a public nuisance; 
(6)  Any other condition declared by the city council to be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the public. 
(b)  Once proceedings have been commenced pursuant to this ordinance to declare a building a public nuisance, no such building shall be deemed to be in compliance with this chapter or any ordinance of the city solely because such building thereafter becomes occupied. 
(Ord. 414B §5, 1982)  
8.08.060 - Administrative citation. 
Where the city manager or his or her designee determines a nuisance exists, the city manager or his or her designee may issue an administrative citation to the responsible person. The administrative citation shall be subject to the procedures in Chapter 1.20 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 9(Exh. B), 4-26-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 911B , § 9(Exh. B), adopted April 26, 2016, amended § 8.08.060 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former § 8.08.060 pertained to resolution and order to abate and derived from Ord. 414B §6, adopted in 1982; and Ord. 710B §§2 and 3, adopted in 2001.  
8.08.070 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 911B , § 9, adopted April 26, 2016, repealed § 8.08.070 in its entirety. Former § 8.08.070 pertained to service of resolution and derived from Ord. 414B §7, adopted in 1982.  
8.08.080 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 911B , § 9, adopted April 26, 2016, repealed § 8.08.080 in its entirety. Former § 8.08.080 pertained to hearing and derived from Ord. 414B §8, adopted in 1982; and Ord. 710B §§ 4 and 5, adopted in 2001.  
8.08.090 - Failure to abate—City abatement. 
In the event a nuisance is not abated as ordered by an administrative citation, the city may cause the nuisance to be abated by any lawful method. 
(Ord. 414B §9, 1982; Ord. 710B §6, 2001; Ord. No. 911B , § 9(Exh. B), 4-26-2016)  
8.08.100 - Assessment for city abatement—Determination. 
(a)  The city shall keep an itemized record of its expenses, including attorney's fees, in abating nuisances. It shall serve a copy of the statement of expenses in the manner prescribed by Section 1.20.030, together with a notice of the time, date, and place at which the statement will be submitted to the hearing officer for confirmation, and at which time the hearing officer will consider protests to the cost of the work. 
(b)  The hearing officer shall, at the time specified in the notice, hear protests to the cost of the abatement. The hearing officer may correct or modify the cost amount as may be reasonable, and shall adopt the amount by resolution. 
(c)  The resolution setting the amount of cost shall be served as provided in Section 1.20.030. If the amount, or any part thereof, is not paid within ten days of service, it shall become a special assessment against the property from which the nuisance was abated. Attorney's fees incurred in abating the nuisance and recovering the amount shall be included in the amount due and assessed against the property. The unpaid amount shall also be a personal obligation of the property owner and may be collected in any manner provided by law. 
(Ord. 414B §10, 1982; Ord. 710B §§7 and 8, 2001; Ord. No. 911B , § 9(Exh. B), 4-26-2016)  
8.08.110 - Assessment for city abatement—Collection. 
If the unpaid amount becomes a special assessment, it shall be collected in the same time and manner as ordinary municipal taxes. It shall be subject to all laws, including penalties applicable to such taxes. 
(Ord. 414B §11, 1982)  
8.08.120 - Assessment for city abatement—Notice. 
The city clerk shall cause to be filed in the office of the county recorder a notice of assessment against the property in the form prescribed by the city attorney. 
(Ord. 414B §12, 1982)  
8.08.130 - Summary abatement by city. 
(a)  Dangerous Condition. If, in the opinion of the city manager, there exists a condition on any premises which is of such a nature as to be imminently dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare, which, if abated according to the proceedings of this chapter would, during the pendency of the proceedings, subject the public to potential harm of a serious nature, the condition may be abated forthwith without compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Approval of City Attorney. No action shall be undertaken under this section unless it is first approved by the city attorney or his authorized representative. 
(c)  Costs Incurred by City. Costs incurred by the city shall be recoverable in the same manner as provided by Sections 8.08.100, 8.08.110 and 8.08.120. 
(Ord. 414B §13, 1982)  
CHAPTER 8.12 - WEED AND RUBBISH ABATEMENT 
 
8.12.010 - State provisions to govern. 
Weed and rubbish abatement in the city shall be performed pursuant to the provisions of Title 4, Division 3, Part 2, Chapter 13, Article 2 of the Government Code (sections 39560 et seq.), except as modified by this chapter. 
(Ord. E276B §1, 1974)  
8.12.020 - Performance of street superintendent or city clerk duties. 
Any duties imposed upon the street superintendent or city clerk by the Government Code sections mentioned in Section 8.12.010 may, in the alternative, be performed by the fire chief, his assistants, deputies or designees. 
(Ord. E276B §2, 1974)  
CHAPTER 8.14 - GRAFFITI ABATEMENT 
 
8.14.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a program and additional enforcement tools to those already provided by state law for removal of graffiti from walls and structures on both public and private property and to prevent and control the further spread of graffiti in the city. Graffiti on both public and private buildings and structures threatens the public welfare with potential violence and/or instills the fear of crime. Graffiti also reduces property values, is detrimental to the rights and values of private property owners and reduces the quality of life in the community. 
(Ord. 600B §1(part), 1993)  
8.14.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
Graffiti. "Graffiti" includes any unauthorized inscription, word, figure or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn or painted on any structural component of any building, structure or any other facility or surface; or otherwise deemed by the city council to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 600B §1(part), 1993)  
8.14.030 - Declaration of nuisance. 
The city council finds and declares that the existence of graffiti anywhere within the boundaries of the city is a public and private nuisance, and may be abated according to the provisions and procedures contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. 600B §1(part), 1993)  
8.14.040 - Removal by person applying graffiti. 
Any person applying graffiti within the city shall have the duty to remove the same immediately, but not longer than 72 hours after notice by the city or the public or private owner of the property involved. Failure of any person to so remove graffiti shall constitute a separate violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $250.00 for the first violation; $350.00 for the second violation; and $450.00 for each additional conviction within one year. Every day that said graffiti is not removed after notice shall constitute a separate offense. When graffiti is applied by minors, the parent or guardian shall be responsible for such removal or payment for the cost thereof. 
(Ord. 600B §1(part), 1993)  
8.14.050 - Abatement at owner's expense. 
Graffiti located on privately or publicly owned property within the city so as to be capable of being viewed by a person utilizing any public right-of-way, may be removed by the city at the owner's expense as a public nuisance after service of a notice to abate as herein set forth. 
(Ord. 600B §1(part), 1993)  
8.14.060 - Notice to abate. 
Whenever the city is apprised of the presence of graffiti located on privately or publicly owned property within the city, the city may serve a written notice to abate such graffiti upon the owner of the affected property as such owner's name and address appears on the last equalized assessor roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current. Said notice shall identify the property affected and advise that if the graffiti is not removed within the time set forth in the notice, the city shall abate the graffiti and that the cost of such abatement shall become a charge against property. The notice should also state that the property owner may, during the abatement period, file a request for hearing if the owner contends that the property does not contain graffiti. 
(Ord. 600B §1(part), 1993)  
8.14.070 - Hearing. 
The request for hearing must be received by the director of public safety within seven days. The hearing shall be an informal opportunity for the property owner to present arguments as to why the property does not contain graffiti. The determination of the director of public safety, or his/her designee, after this hearing, shall be final and not appealable. If, after the hearing, the director of public safety, or his/her designee, determines that the property contains graffiti, the director or designee shall give written notice of an order to abate and a deadline for abatement. 
(Ord. 600B §1(part), 1993)  
8.14.080 - Abatement at owner's expense—Costs. 
(a)  If the graffiti is not completely abated by the owner or occupier of the property within the time prescribed in the notice to abate or, if the owner timely requests a hearing, within the time period prescribed in the notice following said hearing, the city manager or his/her designee is authorized and directed to cause the graffiti to be abated by city personnel or private contract, and the city, or its private contractor, is expressly authorized to enter upon the premises for such purposes. 
(b)  The city shall keep an itemized record of its expenses in abating the graffiti. It shall serve a copy of the statement of expenses to the owner advising said owner that he or she may, within ten days after the date of said notice concerning the cost of the abatement, file a request for a hearing with the city manager protesting the cost of the abatement. 
(c)  If the owner fails to request a hearing regarding the cost, or if requested and a hearing on the cost is conducted and after such a cost hearing the city manager, or his/her designee, determines that all or a portion of the cost of abatement are appropriately chargeable to the abatement of the graffiti, then such amount, as determined appropriate by the city manager, or his/her designee, shall be due and payable by the owner within 30 days at which time such costs shall be assessed against the property pursuant to the Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. The unpaid amount shall also be a personal obligation of the property owner and may be collected in any manner provided by law. 
(Ord. 600B §1(part), 1993)  
CHAPTER 8.16 - JUNKYARDS 
 
8.16.010 - Fence required. 
When a junkyard, automobile wrecking yard or unsightly storage yard is located within the city limits, it shall have a fence surrounding it having a minimum height of eight feet above the ground. When necessary due to peculiar topography or other considerations, all fences shall be of sufficient height to totally hide from the view all wrecked or partly wrecked cars, junk or scrap material and all debris and trash of every description and nature. 
(Ord. 146B §1, 1959)  
8.16.020 - Violation—Misdemeanor. 
Every person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 146B §2, 1959)  
CHAPTER 8.20 - TIRE STORAGE 
 
8.20.010 - Findings. 
The city council finds that the storage or accumulation of excessive numbers of used tires is a public nuisance in that it tends to reduce the value of private property, promotes blight and deterioration, invites plundering, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to health and safety of minors, creates a haven for rodents and insects and is injurious to the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Ord. 368B §1, 1980)  
8.20.020 - Number of tires limited. 
No person, firm or corporation may store or permit the accumulation of used tires: 
(1)  In excess of 250 on property located in the following zoning districts: commercial, highway commercial, light industrial and industrial; except for gasoline service stations; 
(2)  In excess of 50 on property located in all other zoning districts; and 
(3)  In excess of 50 on property upon which a gasoline service station is located. 
(Ord. 368B §2, 1980)  
8.20.030 - Violations. 
(a)  Every person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, as the same is now or in the future may be, defined by the laws of the state. 
(b)  Violations of this chapter may be abated pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 8.08. 
(Ord. 368B §3, 1980)  
CHAPTER 8.24 - COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL STORAGE 
 
8.24.010 - Screening required near Highway 65. 
Outside storage areas utilized in connection with a commercial or industrial use located within 150 feet of the centerline of State Highway 65 in the city must be completely screened by a solid wooden or masonry fence no less than six feet in height. The design and location of such fence must be approved by the city administrator prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. 256B §1, 1972)  
8.24.020 - Appeals. 
Any person or firm aggrieved by the action of the administrator may appeal such decision by filing, in writing, such appeal within ten days with the city clerk. 
(Ord. 256B §3, 1972)  
8.24.030 - Violation—Misdemeanor. 
Every person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 256B §4, 1972)  
CHAPTER 8.28 - BURNING 
 
8.28.010 - Permit required for open burning. 
No person shall burn or cause to burn paper, waste boxes, refuse of any type, leaves, trash and/or any such similar materials on any city right-of-way, in the open or in an uncovered burner within the city limits without first obtaining a written permit issued by the office of the chief of police or by the office of chief fire officer. 
(Ord. 169B §1, 1960)  
8.28.020 - Receptacle, burner or incinerator. 
Burning of refuse materials generally described in Section 8.28.010 will be permitted provided all such burning is done in an approved-type burn receptacle or other approved burner and/ or incinerator. An approved-type burn receptacle, burner or incinerator must have a fitted cover, solid or openings of such dimensions that will obstruct the escape of sparks or live embers or otherwise create a fire hazard. Such burning shall not create a danger and/or fire hazard to surrounding buildings or property in close proximity. Burning of all such described refuse that would tend to create offensive odors or smoke nuisance is strictly prohibited by the chapter. 
(Ord. 169B §2, 1960)  
8.28.030 - Daylight-only burning. 
The burning of all paper, rags, rubber, waste, boxes, rubbish or refuse shall be done between daylight hours of any day as prescribed in this chapter and it is unlawful to do any burning of any material set forth in this chapter at any other time. 
(Ord. 169B §3, 1960)  
8.28.040 - Violation—Misdemeanor. 
Any person who violates or fails to comply with this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 169B §4, 1960)  
CHAPTER 8.32 - FIREWORKS  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
8.32.010 - Title for citation. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Lincoln Fireworks Ordinance." 
(Ord. 409B §1.04, 1982)  
8.32.011 - Fireworks—Defined. 
The term "fireworks" as used in this chapter shall be held to mean firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes, roman candles, toy cannons, detonating canes, blank cartridges, sparklers, squibs and other devices designed and intended for pyrotechnic display. Included within this definition are all "safe and sane" products. 
(Ord. 493B §1, 1987)  
8.32.020 - Intent. 
The city council declares that it is not its intention in adopting the Uniform Fire Code to prohibit the sale and use of safe and sane fireworks or the public display of fireworks with the city. The ordinance codified in this chapter is, therefore, adopted to provide for the regulation of the sale and use of fireworks in accordance with the state fireworks law (Health and Safety Code section 12500 et seq.) and the regulations of the State Fire Marshall (19 Cal. Admin. Code section 976 et seq.). 
(Ord. 409B §1.01, 1982)  
8.32.030 - Uniform Fire Code superseded. 
The city council declares that the provisions of this chapter shall control the sale and use of fireworks within the city, notwithstanding any provision of any edition of the Uniform Fire Code which is currently, as of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or may thereafter be adopted by the city pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. 409B §1.03, 1982)  
Article II. - Regulations Generally 
 
8.32.040 - Period of lawful possession, use and sale. 
Possession, use and retail sale of "safe and sane" fireworks as defined in the Health and Safety Code of the State of California shall be permitted as provided in this chapter. Retail sales of "safe and sane" fireworks shall be permitted only between the period of noon on June 28 through noon on July 6 in the same calendar year. Public displays of fireworks shall be permitted pursuant only to permit designating the time and place and conditions of such public display. 
(Ord. 409B §2.01, 1982)  
8.32.041 - Use or discharge of fireworks prohibited within McBean Park. 
Except for public displays as authorized by Article IV of this chapter, no person shall use or discharge fireworks or substances designed or intended for pyrotechnic display within McBean Park. 
(Ord. 493B §2, 1987)  
Article III. - Retail Sales 
 
8.32.050 - Permit—Scope. 
A retail sales permit for fireworks authorizes only the sale of "safe and sane" fireworks as defined in the Health and Safety Code of the State of California and approved by the State Fire Marshall of the state of California. 
(Ord. 409B §3.01, 1982)  
8.32.060 - Permit—Required. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell fireworks at retail within the city without having first obtained a city permit pursuant to the provisions in this article, in addition to the required state of California license. 
(Ord. 409B §3.02, 1982)  
8.32.070 - Permit—Application—Filing. 
All applications for permits for the retail sale of fireworks shall be filed in writing with the city clerk on forms supplied by the city. Applications must be filed ten days prior to the actual sale. Applications shall set forth the proposed location of the sale of fireworks. 
(Ord. 409B §3.03, 1982)  
8.32.080 - Permit—Application—Certificate of insurance to accompany. 
Applications shall be accompanied by a certificate of insurance showing insurance coverage in the amount required by section 12610 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California. The certificate of insurance shall name the city as an additional insured. 
(Ord. 409B §3.04, 1982)  
8.32.090 - Permit—Application—State license to accompany. 
All applications for permits shall be accompanied by a license issued by the State Fire Marshall in accordance with the state fireworks law (Health and Safety Code section 12500 et seq.). Applications shall furnish such other data or information as may be reasonably required by the fire chief relating to the issuance of such retail sale of fireworks permits. 
(Ord. 409B §3.04, 1982) 
Editor's note— Ord. 409B contains two sections numbered 3.04.  
8.32.100 - Permit—Application—Fire chief approval. 
Applications for the sale of "safe and sane" fireworks shall be approved by the fire chief. 
(Ord. 409B §3.05, 1982)  
8.32.110 - Permit—Assignment. 
The permit issued pursuant to this article shall be personal to the licensee and shall not be assigned. 
(Ord. 409B §3.06, 1982)  
8.32.120 - Stand location and specifications. 
All retail sales of "safe and sane" fireworks shall be permitted only from within a temporary fireworks stand, and the sale from any other building or structure is prohibited. Temporary stands shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Fireworks stands shall be located on property zoned C, H-C, L-I or I. 
(2)  No fireworks stand shall be located within 25 feet of any other building or within 50 feet of any gasoline station, fuel pump, storage tank or bulk plant. 
(3)  Fireworks stands shall be located at least 150 feet apart. 
(4)  Fireworks stands need not comply with the provisions of the building code of the city; provided, however, that all stands shall be erected under the supervision of the city building inspector, who shall require that stands be constructed in a manner which will reasonably ensure the safety of attendants and patrons. 
(5)  Each stand must have at least two approved exits spaced an equal distance apart. 
(6)  Any relocation of the fireworks stands shall be subject to prior approval of the fire chief. 
(7)  Each fireworks stand shall be provided with two-gallon "water-type" fire extinguishers approved by the fire chief, in good working order, and easily accessible for use in case of fire. 
(8)  All weeds and combustible materials shall be cleared from the location of the fireworks stand, and for a distance of at least 30 feet surrounding the stand. 
(9)  "No Smoking" signs shall be prominently displayed on each fireworks stand. 
(Ord. 428B §1, 1982; Ord. 409B §3.07, 1982)  
8.32.130 - Sales personnel. 
No person other than the licensee and his or her spouse and adult children or members of the licensee organization, or the wives or husbands or adult children of such members, shall operate the stand or sell or otherwise participate in the sale of fireworks at such stand. 
(Ord. 409B §3.08, 1982)  
8.32.140 - Watchman. 
Each fireworks stand shall have an adult watchman in attendance and in charge thereof while the stand is being used for the sale, offering for sale, display or storage of fireworks. 
(Ord. 409B §3.09, 1982)  
8.32.150 - Location of fireworks. 
All fireworks shall be retained at the approved location of the fireworks stand at all times, and in no event shall fireworks, other than those which have been sold, be removed from the approved location to any other place without the approval of the fire chief. 
(Ord. 409B §3.10, 1982)  
8.32.160 - Alcoholic beverages. 
There shall be no drinking of alcoholic beverages in or about the fireworks booth or storage site at any time. 
(Ord. 409B §3.11, 1982)  
8.32.170 - Discharge of fireworks near stand. 
It is unlawful to discharge or ignite fireworks within 150 feet of a fireworks stand. 
(Ord. 409B §3.12, 1982)  
8.32.180 - Hours—Removal of stand. 
The sale of fireworks may be limited to specified time periods and hours of operation. Fireworks stands and any other material used in connection with the sale of fireworks shall be removed within 48 hours after expiration of the permit and the site shall be left free of litter or refuse. 
(Ord. 409B §3.13, 1982)  
Article IV. - Public Displays 
 
8.32.190 - Permit—Required. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to maintain or conduct a public display of fireworks within the city without having first obtained a city permit pursuant to the provisions in this article, in addition to the required state of California license. 
(Ord. 409B §4.01, 1982)  
8.32.200 - Permit—Application—Filing. 
All applications for permits for the public display of fireworks shall be filed in writing with the city clerk on forms supplied by the city. Applications must be filed a minimum of 15 days prior to the date proposed for the public display. 
(Ord. 409B §4.02, 1982)  
8.32.210 - Permit—Application—Contents. 
(a)  All applications for permits for the public display of fireworks shall be accompanied by a license issued by the State Fire Marshall in accordance with the state fireworks law (Health and Safety Code section 12500 et seq.). 
(b)  All applications shall contain the information required by and listed in section 983.2(a) of Title 19 of the California Administrative Code. 
(c)  All applications shall be accompanied by a certificate of insurance showing insurance coverage in the amount required by section 12610 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California. The certificate shall name the city as an additional insured. 
(d)  All applications shall contain such other data or information as may, from time to time, be reasonably required by the fire chief or the city council relating to the issuance of a permit for the public display of fireworks. 
(Ord. 409B §4.03, 1982)  
8.32.220 - Permit—Application—Approval. 
Applications for public displays of fireworks shall be approved by the city council upon recommendation of the fire chief. 
(Ord. 409B §4.04, 1982)  
8.32.230 - Permit—Assignment. 
Any permit issued shall be personal to the licensee and shall not be assigned. 
(Ord. 409B §4.05, 1982)  
8.32.240 - Time restrictions—Cleanup after display. 
The public display of fireworks may be limited to specified time periods. Fireworks stands and other material used in connection with the public display of fireworks shall be removed within 48 hours after expiration of the permit and the site shall be left free of litter or refuse. 
(Ord. 409B §4.06, 1982)  
Article V. - Enforcement 
 
8.32.250 - Violation—Misdemeanor. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as misdemeanors are punishable by the laws of the state of California. 
(Ord. 409B §5.01, 1982)  
8.32.260 - Violation—Nuisance. 
A violation of this chapter is a nuisance. The city may institute, in any court of competent jurisdiction, an action to restrain, prevent, correct or abate any violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 409B §5.02, 1982)  
CHAPTER 8.36 - FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS 
 
8.36.010 - Permitted storage generally—Permission required when. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, company or corporation to keep or store or permit the keeping or storing of, within any public building or upon any premises, street or place in the city, any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, crude petroleum or products of petroleum, or any hydrocarbon liquid which will flash or emit any inflammable vapor at a temperature below 110 degrees Fahrenheit, in quantities of more than five gallons, without the written permission of the fire chief. No more than five gallons of any of the articles mentioned in this subsection shall, in any case, be kept in any one place, except as provided in this chapter and any quantity in excess of five gallons must be stored outside the walls of any building at a spot designated by the fire chief or city council; provided, motor-driven vehicles may carry inflammable liquids to the capacity of their tanks. Gasoline service station pumping tanks may carry inflammable liquids to the capacity of their tanks, not exceeding ten gallons, and portable or gasoline tanks commonly used in garages, as approved by the Board of Fire Underwriters, may be used. 
(Ord. 110B §1, 1955)  
8.36.020 - Underground storage tanks. 
(a)  On written permission of the city council, it is lawful to keep or store any of the hydrocarbon liquids mentioned in Section 8.36.010, in quantities of more than 110 gallons, in which case they shall be kept or stored in a tank constructed throughout of open-hearth steel or wrought iron, with joints designed to safely carry the hydrostatic pressure to which the tank will be subjected when filled with the liquid which it is designed to contain, riveted and caulked, or welded, coated with tar or other rust-resisting material; such tanks shall be buried outside the walls of any building or under the sidewalk, the top of the tank to be at least four feet below the surface and completely covered with at least four feet of earth; provided, however, that it shall not be necessary for the top of the tank to be more than 18 inches below the ground if the surface above is covered with cement concrete and made impervious to all liquids. The tank shall be filled through a section of hose or pipe suitable for the purpose, directly connected with the tank delivery wagon, and which shall be detached from the feed pipe when not in service. Gravity pressure or siphon process for taking liquids from the tank will not be permitted. 
(b)  No tank, can, drum or other vessel containing any of the hydrocarbon liquids mentioned in this chapter and having a capacity of five gallons or more shall be located nearer than 20 feet from any furnace, stove or fire of any kind. 
(Ord. 110B §2, 1955)  
8.36.030 - Fuel tank permit and specifications. 
No person, firm, company or corporation shall construct, erect or maintain any plant, or use any device or apparatus for burning crude or fuel petroleum, or for generating a gas therefrom, for fuel purposes, in excess of five gallons without the written permit of the city council or fire chief, for which a permit fee of $2.50 shall be charged, and in such manner and location as the city council or fire chief deem safe to life and property, and then only when installed in accordance with the following specifications: 
(1)  When stored above ground, tanks, including tops, shall be constructed throughout of open-hearth steel or wrought iron, with joints designed to safely carry the hydrostatic pressure to which the tank will be subject when filled with the liquid which it is designed to contain, and shall not exceed 275 gallons capacity. 
(2)  Tanks shall be riveted, welded or brazed and shall be caulked or otherwise made tight in a workmanlike manner. All openings shall be airtight, except the breather vent. 
(3)  Tanks shall be set on a solid foundation. Tanks with bottoms more than one foot above the ground shall have a foundation and supports of incombustible materials. Steel as a support for such tanks, unprotected against the elements, shall not be permitted. 
(4)  A substantial shutoff valve shall be placed at the tank in the pipeline from the tank to the point of burning and a shutoff valve at the point of burning that is other than the control valve of the burning equipment. The pipe from the tank to the point of burning shall not exceed one-half inch in diameter except by special permission of the city council. 
(5)  Such protective mechanical devices which will provide for a safety shutoff suitable for the type of fuel used shall be installed under the direction of the fire chief or city council. Such devices are to be those approved by the Board of Fire Underwriters. 
(6)  When deemed necessary by the city council or fire chief on account of proximity to streams, character of topography or nearness to buildings of high value, aboveground tanks shall be diked or the entire yard be provided with a curb or retaining wall or other suitable means taken to prevent the discharge of liquids to other property in case of rupture in the tank or piping. 
(Ord. 110B §3, 1955)  
8.36.040 - Supplying inflammable materials to violator. 
Every person, firm or corporation, or his, her or their agent, servant, representative or employee delivering, selling or supplying inflammable materials to any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 110B §5, 1955)  
8.36.050 - Violation—Misdemeanor. 
Every person, firm or corporation, or his, her or their agent, servant, representative or employee, violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 110B §4, 1955)  
CHAPTER 8.40 - LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES 
 
8.40.010 - Liquefied petroleum gases defined. 
"Liquefied petroleum gases," as used in this chapter, means and includes any material or product which is composed predominately of any of the following hydrocarbons or mixtures thereof: propane, propylene butanes (normal butane or isobutane) and butylenes. 
(Ord. 73B §1, 1948)  
8.40.020 - Permit for storage—Required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall store liquefied petroleum gas and no person shall maintain or install equipment for the storage or use of liquefied petroleum gas without a permit for the storage of such gases or for the installation of such equipment for the storage or use of such gases. 
(Ord. 73B §2, 1948)  
8.40.030 - Permit for storage—Application contents. 
(a)  Any person desiring to store such liquefied petroleum gases or have equipment installed for the storage or use of such gases shall file an application with the city clerk for a permit for the storage of such gases or installation of equipment for the storage or use of such gases. 
(b)  The application must be made upon a form prescribed by the city council and the applicant shall state thereon the location at which such gas is proposed to be stored, the location of the equipment proposed to be installed for the use of such gas, a complete description of the type and method and location of the pipe, valves, tank or tanks and any other equipment proposed to be installed for the storage or use of such gas, and such other information as the council requires. 
(Ord. 73B §3, 1948)  
8.40.040 - Permit for storage—Application—Filing—Hearing on initial rejection. 
The application provided for in Section 8.40.030 shall be delivered to the city council to be passed upon and, in the event the council determines that the storage of liquefied petroleum gas or the installation of such system for the storage and use of such gas is dangerous to the general welfare and health of the residents of the city, the council shall give written notice to the applicant for such permit, requiring such applicant to attend a hearing within ten days from the date of such notice and show cause why a permit should be issued for the storage of such gas or installation of such system. 
(Ord. 73B §4, 1948)  
8.40.050 - Permit for storage—Issuance. 
The city council shall issue a permit to the applicant for storage of liquefied petroleum gas or installation of equipment for the storage or use of such gas in the event the storage of such gas or installation of such equipment for storage or use of such gas is determined to be not dangerous to the general welfare and health of the residents of the city and the city council, in the event the council determines that the storage of liquefied petroleum gas or installation of equipment for the storage or use of liquefied petroleum gas is dangerous to the general welfare and health of the residents of the city, shall not issue a permit to the applicant for storage of liquefied petroleum gas or installation of equipment for the storage or use of such gas. The charge for such permits shall be the same as for natural gas permits. 
(Ord. 73B §5, 1948)  
8.40.060 - Violation—Misdemeanor. 
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 73B §6, 1948)  
CHAPTER 8.44 - TRAILER COACHES 
 
8.44.010 - Trailer coach defined. 
"Trailer coach," as those words are used in this chapter, mean as defined in the Health and Safety Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 142B §1, 1958)  
8.44.020 - Removal of tires or wheels. 
It is unlawful to remove any tire or wheel from any trailer coach except for making repairs or for dead storage. 
(Ord. 142B §2, 1958)  
8.44.030 - Underpinning or foundation installation. 
It is unlawful to install any underpinning or foundation to the ground on any trailer coach. 
(Ord. 142B §3, 1958)  
8.44.050 - Overnight parking without permission. 
It is unlawful for any person using, occupying or maintaining any trailer coach to camp or park it overnight upon any piece of real property in the city without permission of the owner or person legally in charge of such real property. 
(Ord. 142B §5, 1958)  
8.44.060 - Occupancy during building construction. 
(a)  During the construction of a building or buildings, the owner of the lot may, for his own occupancy, apply to the building inspector for a permit to occupy a trailer coach for a period not to exceed six months. The building inspector may issue such a permit provided the sanitary facilities for the occupancy meet with his approval. 
(b)  The permit provided for in subsection (a) of this section may be renewed for not to exceed one six-month period, provided the building or buildings are not ready for occupancy and construction has progressed in a reasonable manner. 
(c)  Any permit issued under the provisions of this section shall terminate and be null and void upon completion of the building or buildings. 
(Ord. 142B §6, 1958)  
8.44.070 - Automobile camps excepted. 
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any automobile camp which meets all of the requirements of Division 13, Part 11 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 142B §7, 1958)  
8.44.080 - Violation—Infraction. 
Any persons who violate any of the provisions of this chapter are guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 730B § 2, 2002: Ord. 142B §8, 1958)  
CHAPTER 8.48 - WATER COOLERS 
 
8.48.010 - Circulating pump required. 
All water coolers within the city limits shall be equipped with a circulating pump. 
(Ord. 137B §1, 1958)  
CHAPTER 8.52 - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 
 
8.52.010 - Findings and purpose. 
The city council finds and declares: 
(1)  Hazardous substances and hazardous wastes present in the community may pose acute and chronic health hazards to individuals who live and work in this city, and who are exposed to such substances as a result of fires, spills, industrial accidents, or other types of releases or emissions. 
(2)  The people who live and work in this city have a right and need to know of the use and potential hazards of hazardous materials in the community in order to plan for and respond to potential exposure to such materials. 
(3)  Basic information on the location, type, and the health risks of hazardous materials used, stored, or disposed of in the city is not now available to firefighters, health officials, planners, elected officials, and residents. 
(4)  It is the intent of the city council that this chapter recognize the community's right and need for basic information on the use and disposal of hazardous materials in the city and that it establish an orderly system for the provision of such information. 
(5)  It is further the intent of the city council that the system of disclosure set forth in this chapter shall provide the information essential to firefighters, health officials, planners, elected officials and residents in meeting their responsibilities for the health and welfare of the community in such a way that the statutory privilege of trade secrecy is not abridged. 
(Ord. 453B §1, 1984)  
8.52.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms listed in this section shall be defined as follows: 
"Carcinogen" means a substance which: 
(1)  The International Agency for Research on Cancer states that there is sufficient evidence of carcinogenicity in animals or that there is a potential of human carcinogenicity, or that the substance is a confirmed human carcinogen; or 
(2)  The National Cancer Institute has found in an animal bioassay that there is positive evidence of carcinogenesis in animals or humans. 
"CAS number" means the unique identification number assigned by the Chemical Abstracts Service to specific chemical substances. 
"Chemical name" means the scientific designation of a substance in accordance with the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry or the system developed by the Chemical Abstracts Service. 
"Common name" means any designation or identification such as code name, code number, trade name, or brand name used to identify a substance other than by its chemical name. 
"Disclosure form" means the written request for information prepared by the fire chief pursuant to Section 8.52.060 of this chapter. 
"EPA Waste Stream Code" means the identification number assigned pursuant to the regulations of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to specific types of hazardous waste. 
"Fire chief" means the fire chief of the city or his or her duly authorized representative. 
"Hazardous material" means any hazardous substance or hazardous waste as defined in subsection (9) or (10) of this section, or any material designated pursuant to Section 8.52.030 of this chapter. 
"Hazardous substance" means any substance or product: 
(1)  For which the manufacturer or producer is required to prepare an MSDS for the substance or product pursuant to the Hazardous Substances Information and Training Act (commencing with Section 6360, Chapter 2.5, Part 1 of Division 5 of the California Labor Code) or pursuant to any applicable federal law or regulation; 
(2)  Which is listed as a radioactive material set forth in Chapter 1, Title 10, Appendix B, maintained and updated by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. 
"Hazardous waste" means hazardous or extremely hazardous waste as defined by Sections 25115 and 25117 of the California Health and Safety Code and set forth in Sections 66680 and 66685 of Title 22 of the California Administrative Code. 
"Handle" means to generate, treat, store, or dispose of a hazardous material in any fashion. 
"MSDS" means a Material Safety Data Sheet prepared pursuant to Section 6390 of the California Labor Code or pursuant to the regulations of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration of the U.S. Department of Labor. For any hazardous substance for which a Material Safety Data Sheet is not required to be prepared pursuant to Section 6390 of the California Labor Code, a Material Safety Data Sheet which contains the information specified in Section 6391 of the California Labor Code shall satisfy the definition of an MSDS under this chapter. 
"Person" means an individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation, partnership, association, city, county, district and the state, or any department thereof. 
"Release" means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing, or any other means of introduction into the environment. 
"Physician" means any person who holds a valid certificate from the state to practice the healing arts. 
"SIC code" means the identification number assigned by the Standard Industrial Classification code to specific types of businesses. 
"Use" includes the handling, processing, or storage of a hazardous substance or waste. 
"User" means any person who uses a hazardous substance or handles a hazardous waste. 
(Ord. 453B §2, 1984)  
8.52.030 - Designation of a hazardous material. 
(a)  A material may be added to the list of hazardous materials set forth in Section 8.52.020 of this chapter upon a finding by the fire chief that it satisfies the following criteria: The material, because of its quantity, concentration or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if released into the community. 
(b)  A material added to the list of hazardous materials pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be designated as either a hazardous substance or hazardous waste by the fire chief. 
(Ord. 453B §3, 1984)  
8.52.040 - Disclosure form—Filing. 
(a)  Any person who uses or handles a hazardous material must annually submit a completed disclosure form to the city clerk at the time of application for or renewal of a city business license. 
(b)  A person not required to obtain a business license who uses or handles a hazardous material within the city shall submit a completed disclosure form by September 1 of each year. 
(c)  Within 15 days of any: 
(1)  New use or significant change in the use or handling of a hazardous material; 
(2)  New use or handling of a previously undisclosed hazardous material; 
(3)  Change of business address; 
(4)  Change of business ownership; or 
(5)  Change of business name; the user shall submit a disclosure form to the city clerk detailing the new use or handling or other appropriate information. 
(Ord. 453B §4, 1984)  
8.52.050 - Disclosure form—Processing. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a disclosure form, the city clerk shall ensure that the name and address on the form are correct and shall forward the disclosure form to the fire department. 
(b)  The fire department shall maintain files of all disclosure forms received. Subject to the provisions of Section 8.52.090 relating to trade secrets, these files shall be open to the public during normal business hours. The disclosure forms shall be filed by street address and parcel number, and cross-referenced by the SIC numbers and the CAS numbers or EPA waste stream codes listed on the disclosure form. 
(c)  The fire department shall keep a record of all persons who request access to the hazardous materials disclosure forms. The record shall include: 
(1)  The person's name, address, and telephone number; 
(2)  Name and address of the person, business, or governmental agency such person represents; and 
(3)  Identity of the specific file(s) examined or requested to be copied. 
(Ord. 453B §5, 1984)  
8.52.060 - Disclosure form—Content. 
(a)  The disclosure form shall be prepared by the fire department with the assistance of the police department, the planning department, and other interested parties. The disclosure form shall include, but not be limited to, requests for the following: 
(1)  A copy of the MSDS for every hazardous substance used by the person completing the disclosure form; provided, however, that no such copy need be provided for any hazardous substance for which the fire department has on file a copy of the MSDS; 
(2)  A listing of the chemical name, any common names, and the CAS number of every hazardous substance used by the person completing the disclosure form; 
(3)  The EPA waste stream code of every hazardous waste handled by the person completing the disclosure form; 
(4)  The maximum amount of each hazardous material disclosed in either subdivision (2) or (3) of this subsection which is handled, used or stored at any one time by the user over the course of the year; 
(5)  Sufficient information on how and where the hazardous materials disclosed in subdivisions (2) and (3) of this subsection are handled or used by the user to allow fire and safety personnel to prepare adequate emergency responses to potential releases of the hazardous materials; 
(6)  Sufficient information on any releases of the hazardous materials disclosed in subdivisions (2) and (3) of this subsection into the air, water, sewers, or land to permit the city to understand the sources and content of hazardous material releases; 
(7)  The SIC code of the business, if applicable; 
(8)  The antidote for each hazardous material and the Chemtrex number or equivalent, if applicable; and 
(9)  The name and phone number of the person representing the business and able to assist emergency personnel in the event of an emergency involving the business during business and nonbusiness hours. 
(b)  Upon request, all users must provide information in addition to that required in the disclosure form filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section as follows: 
(1)  To the fire department any information determined by the fire department to be necessary to protect the public health, safety or the environment; and 
(2)  To any physician where the physician determines that such information is necessary to the medical treatment of his or her patient. 
Any additional information furnished under this subsection shall be subject to the trade secret provisions of Section 8.52.090. 
(Ord. 453B §6, 1984)  
8.52.070 - Disclosure form—Exemptions. 
The following materials, persons or entities shall be exempt from disclosure under this chapter: 
(1)  A material designated as a hazardous material by this chapter solely by its presence on the Nuclear Regulatory Commission list of radioactive materials shall be exempt from the requirement that an MSDS be submitted with the disclosure form. 
(2)  Hazardous substances contained in food, drug, cosmetic, or tobacco products. 
(3)  Any person using or handling less than 500 pounds or 55 gallons a month, whichever is the lesser, of a hazardous material shall be exempted from the requirements of disclosure of that use or handling unless the fire department has provided notice to the city clerk that he or she has lowered the weight or volume limits of this exemption for a specific hazardous material in response to public health concerns. 
The exemption of this subsection shall not apply to the using or handling of carcinogens except to the extent that such carcinogens are handled or used solely for personal purposes by individuals. 
(4)  Hazardous substances contained solely in consumer products packaged for use by and distributed to the general public. 
(5)  Any person while engaged in the transportation of hazardous materials, including storage directly incident thereto, provided that such storage takes place outside the corporate boundaries of the city or such storage place has already disclosed pursuant to the requirements of this chapter and provided that such materials are accompanied by shipping papers prepared in accordance with the provisions of 49 Code of Federal Regulations, subchapter c. 
(6)  No MSDS shall be required for any hazardous substance for which an MSDS is not available at the time disclosure is required under Section 8.52.040, provided, however, that such MSDS shall be submitted to the fire department within 15 days after receipt by the user of the MSDS. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to exempt from disclosure the remaining information contained in Section 8.52.060. 
(Ord. 453B §7, 1984)  
8.52.080 - Fees. 
The city council may, by resolution, establish a schedule of fees to be paid by persons using or handling hazardous materials which is sufficient to cover the costs to the city of administering this chapter. 
(Ord. 453B §8, 1984)  
8.52.090 - Trade secrets. 
(a)  If the user believes that a request for information made by either the disclosure form or otherwise pursuant to this chapter involves the release of a trade secret, the user shall so notify the fire department in writing. As used in this chapter, "trade secret" shall have the meaning given to it by Section 6254.7 of the Government Code and section 1060 of the Evidence Code. 
(b)  Subject to the provisions of this section, the fire department shall protect from disclosure any trade secret coming into its possession when requested to do so in writing by the user. 
(c)  Any information reported to or otherwise obtained by the fire department, or any of its representatives or employees, which is exempt from disclosure pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall not be disclosed to any except: 
(1)  To an officer or employee of the city, the state, or the United States of America, in connection with the official duties of such officer or employee under any law for the protection of health, or to contractors with the city and their employees if, in the opinion of the fire chief, such disclosure is necessary and required for the satisfactory performance of a contract for performance of work; or 
(2)  To any physician where the physician determines that such information is necessary to the medical treatment of his or her patient. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, fire and emergency response personnel and county health personnel operating within the jurisdiction of the city shall be considered employees of the city. 
(e)  Any officer or employee of the city, or former officer or employee, who by virtue of such employment or official position has obtained possession of or has access to information, the disclosure of which is prohibited by this section, and who, knowing that the disclosure of information is prohibited, knowingly and willfully discloses the information in any manner to any person not entitled to receive it, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any contractor with the city and any employee of such contractor who has been furnished information as authorized by this section, shall be considered to be an employee of the city for purposes of this section. Any physician who has been furnished information or who has obtained information pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, and who, knowing that the disclosure of the information is prohibited, knowingly and willfully discloses the information, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(f)  Information certified by appropriate officials for the United States, as necessarily kept secret for national defense purposes, shall be accorded the full protections against disclosure as specified by such official or in accordance with the laws of the United States. 
(g)  Upon receipt of a request for the release of information to the public which includes information which the user has notified the fire department is a trade secret pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the fire department shall notify the user in writing of said request by certified mail. The fire department shall not release or cause the release of the information for a period of 30 days after the day of mailing said notice. Prior to the expiration of said 30-day period, the user may institute an action in an appropriate court seeking a declaratory judgment that said information is subject to protection under subsection (b) of this section and/or seeking an injunction prohibiting disclosure of said information to the general public. 
(h)  The provisions of this section shall not permit a user to refuse to disclose information required pursuant to this chapter to the city fire department. 
(Ord. 453B §9, 1984)  
8.52.100 - Enforcement of provisions. 
(a)  Any business which negligently violates any provision of Section 8.52.040 shall be civilly liable to the city in a sum not to exceed $250.00 per day for each day in which such violation occurs, depending upon the seriousness of the violation; and, if such violation results in or significantly contributes to an emergency, including a fire, to which the city must respond, that business may be assessed the full cost of the city's response, as well as the cost of cleaning up and disposing of such hazardous materials. 
(b)  Any business which intentionally violates any provision of Section 8.52.040 shall be civilly liable to the city in a sum not less than $500.00 or more than $5,000.00 for each day in which such violation occurs, depending upon the seriousness of the violation, shall have its business license revoked, and, if such violation results in or significantly contributes to an emergency, including a fire, that business shall be assessed the full cost of the city's response as well as the cost of cleaning up and disposing of such hazardous materials. 
(c)  The city may petition the Superior Court pursuant to Government Code Section 54740 to impose, assess, and recover such sums. The remedy provided in this section is cumulative and not exclusive, and shall be in addition to any other appropriate penalty provisions of this code and all other remedies available to the city. 
In addition, any such violation shall be deemed a public nuisance, and the city attorney is authorized to institute and maintain an action to enjoin such violation. 
(Ord. 453B §10, 1984)  
CHAPTER 8.56 - SAFETY ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
8.56.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as "the safety alarm systems ordinance." 
(Ord. 622B §1(part), 1994)  
8.56.020 - Necessity and intent of regulations. 
The city council finds and declares that: 
(1)  Inadequately regulated alarm systems present a danger to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of Lincoln; 
(2)  The volume and frequency of false alarms, if not regulated, become hazardous and will adversely impact limited public safety resources; 
(3)  The unnecessary expenditure of tax dollars through responses to false alarms must be controlled; 
(4)  Every residence and business property is entitled to safety and protection afforded by public safety services; 
(5)  The necessity of the provisions and prohibitions contained in this chapter are enacted to promote a sense of security and enhance the quality of life for the residents of Lincoln. 
(Ord. 622B §1(part), 1994)  
8.56.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms, words, phrases, and their derivations defined in this chapter shall have the meanings set forth in this section unless it is apparent from the content that a different meaning is intended: 
"Alarm agent" means a person employed by an alarm business, either directly or indirectly, whose duties include selling, leasing, altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, servicing, responding to, or monitoring an alarm system, or a person who manages or supervises a person employed by an alarm business to perform any of the duties described herein. 
"Alarm business" means any business held by an individual, partnership, corporation or other entity for the purpose of selling, leasing, altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, servicing, responding to, or monitoring any alarm system in a building, structure or facility. 
"Alarm installer" means any person(s) or individual(s) self employed, employed by an alarm business, or do it yourself who installs, causes to install, or connects any alarm system in a building being a business or residence. 
"Alarm system" means any mechanical or electrical device which is designed or used for: 
(1)  Detecting unauthorized entry into any building, structure or facility; or 
(2)  Signaling the occurrence of an unlawful act upon the premises; or 
(3)  Detecting a fire, or detect activation, equipment problems, or the malfunction of a fire protection system; or 
(4)  Detecting a hazardous material leak or system malfunction; or 
(5)  Signaling the need for medical attention. 
For purposes of this chapter, devices operated by the city or devices which are not designed or used to register alarms that are audible, visible, perceptible outside of the protected premise or demand a public safety emergency response are not included within the meaning of "alarm system." 
"Alarm user" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or organization of any kind which owns, leases, rents, uses or makes available for use by its agents, employees, representatives or family, any alarm system. 
"Applicant" means a person who files an application for a new or renewal permit as provided in this chapter. 
"Audible alarm" means an alarm system which generates an audible sound outside the protected premises to alert persons of an unauthorized entry on the premises, the commission of an unlawful act, or the presence of smoke, heat, fire or fire sprinkler flow. 
"City" means the city of Lincoln. 
"Day" means calendar day, unless specified otherwise. 
"Direct dial system" means an alarm system which is connected to a telephone line and, upon activation of an alarm system, automatically transmits a message or signal to the emergency dispatch center, indicating the need for emergency response. 
"Director of public safety" means the senior officer in authority serving the public safety needs of the city. 
"Emergency dispatch center" means any facilities owned or operated by one or more public agencies where police or fire, or both police and fire, communications are received and dispatched. 
"Excessive false alarms" means an activation of an alarm system more than two times through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or maintenance, or negligence of the alarm user when an emergency situation does not exist. A determination as to whether an alarm signal was a false alarm or an actual alarm shall be made by the director of public safety, or designee. "False alarms" shall not include those alarms activated by extraordinary meteorological, atmospheric or other conditions or means, as determined by the director of public safety, or designee. 
"Fire operations" means the fire protection division of the city department of public safety which provides fire services. 
"Notice" means verbal or written notice, given by personal service upon the addressee, or given by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his last known address. Service of such notice shall be effective upon the completion of personal service, or upon the placing of the same in the custody of the United States Postal Service. 
"Permittee" means any person granted a permit as provided herein, and its agents and representatives. 
"Police operations" means the police protection division of the city department of public safety which provides police services. 
"Private alarm dispatch center" means a center maintained by an alarm business which receives emergency signals from alarm systems, and thereafter relays the message to the emergency dispatch center. 
"Siren" means any audible noise similar to that which must be sounded by an authorized emergency vehicle under conditions set forth in Sections 30, 21055, 27002 of the California Vehicle Code. 
Singular or Masculine. Whenever the singular or masculine of a word is used, the same shall be deemed to include the plural, feminine or body corporate as necessary. 
(Ord. 622B §1(part), 1994)  
8.56.040 - Standards and regulations. 
The director of public safety may prescribe minimum standards and regulations for the construction and maintenance of all alarm systems installed within the city. 
(1)  All devices shall meet or exceed such standard regulations before permits may be issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(2)  Inspection and approval of all alarm systems installed within the city may be required. 
(Ord. 622B §1(part), 1994)  
8.56.050 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to audible alarms affixed to automobiles. 
(Ord. 622B §1(part), 1994)  
8.56.060 - Alarm system permit required. 
(a)  Alarm Users. It is unlawful to install, connect, operate or maintain an alarm system upon any property within the city without completing and submitting an alarm system permit to do so. The permit shall be issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Alarm Installers. Alarm systems shall not be installed or connected upon any property within the city limits without first performing one of the following acts: 
(1)  Obtaining a copy of the alarm system permit; or 
(2)  Obtaining a copy of the alarm permit fee receipt. 
(Ord. 622B §1(part), 1994)  
8.56.070 - Issuing authority for alarm permits. 
The issuing authority for permits shall be the city finance department or designee. 
(Ord. No. 831B, § 1, 1-22-2008; Ord. 622B §1(part), 1994)  
8.56.080 - Applications—Forms. 
(a)  Applications for all permits required by this chapter shall be filed with the finance department and shall be accompanied by a fee as set out in Section 18.90.040 of the Lincoln Municipal Code. The fee is established to cover part of the cost of investigating and processing the applications and permits and is not refundable. The finance department shall prescribe the form of the application and request such information as is necessary to evaluate and act upon the permit application. 
(b)  As part of the application, the permittee shall supply the name, address and telephone number of a person who will render services or repairs within 30 minutes of notification, during any hour of the day or night. 
(c)  The United States government, state of California, county municipal corporations, departments thereof and other governmental entities are exempt from application fees. 
(d)  The application for an alarm system permit shall contain an agreement, which the applicant must sign before the permit can be issued, whereby the applicant agrees to reimburse the city for costs incurred by the city resulting from excessive numbers of false alarms or chapter violations. The cost recovery shall be accomplished through payments of fines as set out in Section 8.56.170 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 622B §1(part), 1994)  
8.56.090 - Application—Investigation, denial and appeal. 
The permit application shall be denied by the director of public safety if the alarm system does not comply with standards and regulations adopted pursuant to Section 8.56.040 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 622B §1(part), 1994)  
8.56.100 - System permit expiration. 
Permits shall expire one year after issuance. Applications for renewals of permits shall be processed in the same manner as applications for the initial permit. 
(Ord. No. 831B, § 2, 1-22-2008; Ord. 622B §1(part), 1994)  
8.56.110 - Permit display at premises with system. 
(a)  The permit shall be kept on the premises where the alarm system is located, and shall be displayed to any member of the Lincoln department of public safety or the finance department upon request. 
(b)  The permit sticker, which includes the city permit number, shall be posted in such a position as to be visible and legible from the ground level of the building where the alarm system is located. 
(Ord. 622B §1(part), 1994)  
8.56.120 - Notice of application information change. 
Whenever any change occurs relating to the written information required by Section 8.56.080 of this chapter, the applicant or permittee shall give written notice thereof to the licensing division of the finance department within ten days of such changes. 
(Ord. 622B §1(part), 1994)  
8.56.130 - Transfer of permit prohibited. 
Alarm permits may not be transferred to another party or location. Permits are valid only for the permittee and address listed on the permit. 
(Ord. 622B §1(part), 1994)  
8.56.140 - Alarm user instruction required. 
(a)  Alarm Business or Alarm Agent. It shall be the responsibility of the alarm installer to instruct the permittee in the requirements of this chapter, the proper use and operation of such device or alarm, whether silent or audible, including specifically all necessary instruction in turning off said alarm. The alarm installer shall advise the permittee that intentionally activating an alarm in the absence of an emergency is a criminal offense under Sections 148.3 and 148.4 of the California Penal Code. 
(b)  Permittee. After the initial installation, it shall be the responsibility of the permittee to instruct those individuals authorized by the permittee to use the alarm in the proper use and operation of such device or alarm, whether silent or audible, including specifically all necessary instruction in turning off said alarm, and that intentionally activating an alarm in the absence of an emergency is a criminal offense under Section 148.3 and 148.4 of the California Penal Code; however, the permittee, as well as the operator, shall be the responsible party for purposes of violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 622B §1(part), 1994)  
8.56.150 - Audible alarm requirements. 
(a)  Sirens Prohibited. No alarm system which emits the sound of a siren shall be maintained. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the use of certain electronic horns or howlers that may be approved by the director of public safety, or designee, provided that they do not emit a sound similar to a siren. 
Any alarm system which emits the sound of a siren and which is installed and in operation prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be disconnected within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Use, maintenance or installation of such a system is unlawful. 
(b)  Automatic Reset Required. Any alarm system which is installed or connected on or after the date of the ordinance codified in this chapter becomes effective and which, when activated, generates an audible sound on the exterior of the structure in which the system is maintained, shall have such an automatic reset device, installed and in operation within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the reset shall activate in no less than 15 minutes. 
It is unlawful to use, or cause the installation of, an audible alarm system without the required automatic reset device. 
(Ord. 622B §1(part), 1994)  
8.56.160 - Silent alarm requirements. 
(a)  Direct dial systems are prohibited. 
(b)  All silent alarm systems shall be connected to a private alarm dispatch center. 
(c)  An exemption to these provisions may be given by the public safety director. 
(Ord. 622B §1(part), 1994)  
8.56.170 - False alarm—Prevention payment. 
Any property owner who has an alarm system for the protection of real or personal property or person, or has installed on the property owner's property an alarm system which has caused any signal, message or alarm to be transmitted to the department of public safety either by direct communication from an alarm agent or an alarm business, or by a person responding to an audible alarm, and which is proven to be a false alarm, shall pay a false alarm prevention payment to the city as follows: 
(1)  The first two false alarms in any consecutive 365-day period, the 365-day period beginning on the date of the first false alarm, shall be considered accidental and no penalty fees charged. The property owner shall be notified in writing by the department of public safety after the occurrence of the first false alarm, advising that excessive false alarms may result in penalty assessments. 
(2)  The property owner of the alarm system shall be assessed penalty fees for any false alarms above the initial two false alarms in any consecutive 365-day period, as defined in subsection (1) of this section. The permittee shall pay penalty fees to the city in accordance with Section 18.90.040 of the Lincoln Municipal Code. 
(3)  Failure to promptly pay fines will result in a penalty in the form of late charges. For each 30-day period that a fine is unpaid a $25.00 late charge shall be deemed a civil debt owed to the city. 
(Ord. 622B §1(part), 1994)  
8.56.180 - Testing or maintenance. 
(a)  The permittee shall notify the Lincoln department of public safety dispatch center of any impending service, test or maintenance of the permittee's alarm system which may signal a false alarm. An alarm activated where such prior notice has been given shall not constitute a false alarm. The permittee shall notify the Lincoln department of public safety dispatch center when such testing or maintenance has been completed. 
(b)  Failure to notify the dispatch center of an impending test and activation of the alarm occurs shall result in penalty fees as if it was the third alarm in a 365-day period. 
(Ord. 622B §1(part), 1994)  
8.56.190 - Suspension or revocation—Grounds. 
The following shall constitute grounds for a suspension and/or revocation of the alarm permit: 
(1)  Failure to pay fines and/or late charges imposed as a result of excessive false alarms; or 
(2)  Failure to comply with standards or regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter; or 
(3)  Where the applicant or permittee, his employee or agent has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with any city agency. 
(Ord. 622B §1(part), 1994)  
8.56.200 - Suspension and revocation—Procedure. 
(a)  A suspension shall precede any revocation. The director of public safety, or designee shall serve the permittee with a written order stating the reasons for a suspension. The order shall be effective immediately upon service. It is unlawful to use any alarm system after service of notice of suspension. 
(b)  The director of public safety, or designee may reinstate any suspended permit, provided that within 45 days of the suspension, the permittee shall establish to the satisfaction of the director of public safety, or designee that the alarm system will be operated in compliance with this chapter, by complying with the following: 
(1)  Provide a letter from the alarm business that services the alarm system stating that the alarm system has been completely checked and any mechanical malfunctions have been repaired; 
(2)  Agree that an agent of the permittee, or, if the alarm is residential, a responsible key holding party, shall respond to the alarm site within 30 minutes of notification, each time the alarm is activated; 
(3)  Review correct alarm setting procedures with every employee or other person who may be responsible for user error alarm activations; 
(4)  Pay in full all outstanding excessive alarm fines; and, 
(5)  Other reasonable procedures as may be established by the director of public safety. 
(c)  Any suspended permit which is not reinstated within 45 days, shall automatically be deemed revoked. No revoked permit shall be reissued until six months after the revocation, at which time a new application shall be filed pursuant to Section 8.56.080 of this chapter. 
(d)  The decision of the director of public safety to suspend a permit or the refusal of the director of public safety to reinstate a permit may be appealed in writing to the city manager. The appeal shall be made in writing within 15 calendar days of decision and shall require the payment of a fee as set by Section 18.90.040. The 45-day period for suspended permits shall run during the pendency of any such appeal. 
(Ord. 622B §1(part), 1994)  
8.56.210 - Surrender of permit. 
If any permit is revoked pursuant to this chapter, permittee shall surrender the permit and permit sticker to the licensing division of the finance department. 
(Ord. 622B §1(part), 1994)  
CHAPTER 8.60 - POST-CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER RUNOFF CONTROL  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
8.60.110 - Findings of fact. 
The city council adopts this chapter based upon the following findings: 
(1)  The Federal Clean Water Act provides for the regulation and reduction of pollutants discharged into waters of the United States by extending National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System ("NPDES") requirements to storm water and urban runoff discharges into the city storm water conveyance system. 
(2)  Storm water flows from individual properties to the municipal storm drain system and then ultimately discharges to waters of the United States. 
(3)  The city has obtained permit coverage under the state of California's Waste Discharge Requirements for Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (Order No. 2003-0005-DWQ) and the National Pollutants Discharge Elimination System General Permit No. CAS000004 under the Clean Water Act. Under the provisions of this permit, the city is required to possess the necessary legal authority to implement appropriate procedures to regulate the entry of pollutants and non-storm water discharges into the city's storm water conveyance system. 
(Ord. No. 826B, § 1(8.60.01), 10-23-2007)  
8.60.120 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the health, safety and general welfare of citizens, and to protect and enhance the water quality of watercourses and water bodies in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act by reducing pollutants in storm water discharges to the maximum extent practicable and by prohibiting non-storm water discharges to the storm water conveyance system. 
(Ord. No. 826B, § 1(8.60.02), 10-23-2007)  
8.60.130 - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
"Applicant" means a property owner or agent of a property owner who is developing or redeveloping a site that meets the criteria defined in this chapter. 
"Best management practices" means activities, practices, and procedures that prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to the municipal storm drain system and waters of the United States. Best management practices include, but are not limited to: treatment facilities to remove pollutants from storm water; operating and maintenance procedures; facility management practices to control runoff, spillage or leaks of non-storm water, waste disposal, and drainage from materials storage; erosion and sediment control practices; and the prohibition of specific activities, practices and procedures and other such provisions as the city determines appropriate for the control of pollutants. 
"Building" means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and occupying more than 100 square feet of area. 
"Channel" means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
"City" means the city of Lincoln. 
"Dedication" means the deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general public use. 
"Detention" means the temporary storage of storm runoff in a storm water management practice with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and providing gravity settling of pollutants. 
"Detention facility" means a detention basin or alternative structure designed for the purpose of temporary storage of surface runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
"Developer" shall be defined as a person who develops real estate, especially by preparing a site for residential or commercial use. 
"Drainage easement" means a legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for storm water management purposes. 
"Erosion and sediment control plan" means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during construction activities. 
"Impervious surface" shall be defined as surfaces incapable of being infiltrated by water (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.). 
"Industrial activity" means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14). 
"Industrial storm water permit" means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit issued to a commercial industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial storm water discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
"Infiltration" means the process of percolating storm water into the subsurface. 
"Infiltration facility" shall be defined as any structure or device designed to infiltrate retained water to the subsurface. These facilities may be above grade or below grade. 
"Jurisdictional wetland" means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
"Land disturbance activity" means any activity which removes existing vegetation or otherwise disturbs the surface of the land. This may include the grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of vegetation, or any activity which bares soil or rock. 
"Landowner" shall be defined as the legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the land. 
"Maintenance agreement" means a legally recorded document that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of storm water management practices. 
"Maximum extent practicable (MEP)" means a technology-based standard established by Congress in the Clean Water Act Section 402(p)(3)(iii) for storm water discharge to apply to all small municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) operators regulated under the NPDES program. MEP is generally the result of emphasizing pollution prevention and source control best management practices as the preferred method of preventing water pollution. The MEP approach is an ever-evolving, flexible and advancing concept, which considers technical and economic feasibility. As knowledge about controlling urban runoff continues to evolve, so does MEP. 
"Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)" means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned by a state, county, city, town, or other public body, that is designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water, which is not a combined sewer, and which is not a part of a publicly owned treatment works. 
"Non-storm water discharge" means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of storm water. 
"Off-site facility" means a storm water management measure located outside the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
"On-site facility" means a storm water management measure located within the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
"Pollutant" means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid waste and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that they may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure (including, but not limited to, sediments, slurries, and concrete waste); and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
"Recharge" means the replenishment of underground water reserves. 
"Redevelopment" means the construction, alteration or improvement which result in five acres or more of disturbed soil area and where existing land use is high-density commercial, industrial, institutional or multi-family residential. 
"Retention basin" means an area to hold water from a small surrounding drainage area that would otherwise flow into other areas. 
"Runoff reduction measure" means site design components that reduce the amount of storm water runoff by promoting infiltration or reducing or disconnecting impervious surfaces. 
"Stop work order" means an order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped. 
"Storm water" shall be defined as any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from precipitation events. 
"Storm water management" means the use of structural or non-structural practices that are designed to reduce storm water runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and/or peak flow discharge rates. 
"Source control measure" is a measure that prevents pollutants from entering storm water to begin with. 
"Treatment measure" means measures, either structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means of preventing or reducing point source or non-point source pollution inputs to storm water runoff and water bodies. 
"Watercourse" shall be defined as a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or manmade, which gathers or carries surface water. 
"Waters of the United States" shall be defined as surface watercourses and water bodies as defined at 40 CFR section 122.2, including all natural waterways and definite channels and depressions in the earth that may carry water, event though such waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and may not carry storm water at and during all times and seasons. 
"Waters of the State" shall be defined as all surface watercourses and water bodies, including lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks, marshes, inlets, canals, and all other bodies of surface waters (Porter Cologne Act, Water Code section 13050 (e)). This definition includes, but is broader than, Waters of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 826B, § 1(8.60.03), 10-23-2007)  
8.60.140 - Applicability. 
This chapter shall be applicable to all subdivision or site plan applications, unless eligible for an exemption or granted a waiver by the city of Lincoln. This chapter applies to developments that fall within the following categories: 
(1)  Development on hillsides. 
(2)  Commercial developments that result in of 100,000 square feet or more of impervious surface area. 
(3)  Automotive repair shops. 
(4)  Retail gasoline outlets. 
(5)  Restaurants. 
(6)  Residential subdivisions with ten or more housing units. 
(7)  Parking lots of 5,000 square feet or more with 25 or more parking spaces and potentially exposed to storm water runoff. 
The chapter may also apply to land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development that meets the applicability criteria. This chapter may also apply to redevelopment projects as deemed appropriate by the city of Lincoln. 
(Ord. No. 826B, § 1(8.60.04), 10-23-2007)  
8.60.150 - Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements. 
This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 826B, § 1(8.60.05), 10-23-2007)  
8.60.160 - Development of a storm water design manual. 
The city of Lincoln may furnish additional policy, criteria and information including specifications and standards, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this chapter and may provide such information in the form of a storm water design manual. 
(Ord. No. 826B, § 1(8.60.06), 10-23-2007)  
Article II. - Permit Procedures and Requirements 
 
8.60.200 - Plan approval. 
No land owner or land operator shall receive approval of final improvement plans until the requirements of this article are met unless otherwise approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 826B, § 1(8.60.20), 10-23-2007)  
8.60.210 - Application requirements. 
If this article applies to a specific development, the design standards required by this chapter must be incorporated into the development's improvements plans and those plans subjected to approval by the city. 
The city may also require a post-construction maintenance plan that will ensure the long-term operation of any specific best management practice. The city may also require owners of privately-owned storm water best management practices devices to enter into a maintenance agreement or a deed covenant to ensure the long-term operation and maintenance of any such devices. 
(Ord. No. 826B, § 1(8.60.21), 10-23-2007)  
Article III. - Waivers to Storm Water Management Requirements 
 
8.60.300 - Waivers for providing storm water management. 
The city may develop a waiver program for those projects where incorporation of all of or part of the required design standards specified in this chapter are not technically or economically feasible. If the waiver program is developed, an applicant may submit a written request to waive the requirements of this chapter, including evidence that compliance with the required design standards is not technically or economically feasible. All waivers must be submitted to the city for approval. The waiver program may require a fee-in-lieu of complying with the design standards required by this chapter. The amount required to be paid will be determined by the city by resolution. Any monetary contributions collected as part of a fee-in-lieu of waiver will be used to fund storm water management activities. 
(Ord. No. 826B, § 1(8.60.30), 10-23-2007)  
Article IV. - Design Standards 
 
8.60.400 - Design standards. 
To prevent the adverse impacts of storm water runoff, the city will develop a set of performance standards that must be met at new development sites that fall within one of the applicable categories defined in Section 8.60.040. 
Unless a development is determined by the city to be exempt or is granted a waiver, the following design standards shall be addressed for storm water management at all sites. When a site development plan is submitted that is a redevelopment project as defined in Section 8.60.030 of this chapter, decisions on permitting and on-site storm water requirements shall be determined by the city. This criterion is dependent on the amount of impervious area created by the redevelopment and its impact on water quality. Final authorization of all redevelopment projects will be determined after a review by the city. 
(1)  A storm water management plan must be prepared and submitted for approval by the city that indicates how the design standards identified in this section will be complied with. The plan must illustrate sufficient engineering analysis to show that the proposed storm water management measures are capable of controlling runoff from the site in compliance with a method deemed acceptable by the city. 
(2)  Post-development peak storm water runoff discharge rates shall not exceed the estimated pre-development rate for developments where the increased peak storm water discharge rate will result in increased potential for downstream erosion. 
(3)  All storm water runoff generated from new development which meets the stated criteria in section 8.60.140 may not discharge untreated storm water directly into a jurisdictional wetland or local water body without adequate treatment. 
(4)  All developments that meet the criteria of this chapter must be designed in a manner that minimizes, to the maximum extent practicable, the discharge of pollutants and non-storm water discharges. 
(5)  All developments that meet the criteria of this ordinance must consider both treatment control and source control measures as defined by this chapter. All developments must maximize infiltration and groundwater recharge to the maximum extent practicable. 
(6)  Sites shall be designed in a manner that limits clearing and grading to the minimum amount needed to build lots, allow access, and provide fire protection. 
(7)  Site layouts must be designed in a manner in which maximizes vegetation. 
(8)  Treatment control selection and design must be approved by the city of Lincoln. 
(9)  All treatment control measures must be designed per design criteria deemed acceptable by the city. 
(10)  All storm water treatment facilities based on volume design shall be sized using the urban runoff quality management method (the 85th percentile capture ratio volume based treatment control sizing method) as set forth in the American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Manuals and Report on Engineering Practice No. 87 or by another method approved by the city. 
(11)  All outdoor waste management areas must be designed in a manner that minimizes the potential for pollutants and/or waste to come in contact with storm water runoff and minimizes the potential for polluted storm water discharges. 
(12)  All outdoor material storage areas must be designed in a manner that minimizes the potential for pollutants to come in contact with storm water runoff and in a manner that minimizes the potential for polluted storm water discharges. 
(13)  All new drain inlets must be stenciled with a brief statement that prohibits the discharge of improper materials to the storm drain conveyance system. All stencils must be approved by the city. 
(14)  Commercial developments that will be 100,000 square feet or larger must design the loading and unloading dock areas, any repair and maintenance bays, and/or any vehicle/equipment wash areas in a manner that reduces the potential for pollutants to come into contact with storm water runoff and eliminates prohibited non-storm water discharges. Site layout is subject to approval by the city. 
(15)  All restaurants must be designed to include equipment and accessory wash areas that have a self-contained grease trap that is connected to the sanitary sewer. If wash areas are located outdoors, it must be covered, paved, have secondary containment and be connected to the sanitary sewer. All sanitary sewer connections must be approved by the city. 
(16)  All retail gas outlets, automotive repair shops, repair/maintenance bays and vehicle wash areas must be properly designed to prevent oil and grease, solvents, car battery acid, coolant, gasoline, soap, detergent, waste and any other pollutants from discharging into the storm drain conveyance system. Site design must be approved by the city. 
(17)  Parking lots that will have more than 25 or more parking spaces must be designed in a manner that reduces impervious surface, minimizes the potential for polluted discharges and/non-storm water discharge, and must incorporate both treatment and runoff reduction measures to address pollutants of concern. Site design must be approved by the city. 
(18)  The applicant must prepare an erosion and sediment control plan for all construction activities related to implementing any on-site storm water management practices. 
(19)  All applicants must submit a maintenance plan with the storm water management plan which must identify long-term maintenance and operation strategy that will ensure the continued effectiveness of any specific storm water treatment or source control measure. The maintenance plan is subject to approval by the city. 
(20)  All storm water measures are subject to final inspection prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy. 
(21)  Upon the completion of construction, all storm water treatment facilities must be certified by a professional engineer. 
(22)  The city may require more stringent storm water management measures than those defined in this chapter. 
(23)  The city may develop a runoff reduction credit system that may reduce the amount of storm water treatment required. 
(Ord. No. 826B, § 1(8.60.40), 10-23-2007)  
Article V. - Maintenance and Inspection of Storm Water Controls 
 
8.60.500 - Inspection program. 
The city may establish an inspection program that may include: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of drainage basins; storm water treatment controls and sources controls. Inspections may include: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges of surface water, groundwater, and/or material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other storm water control practices. 
(Ord. No. 826B, § 1(8.60.50), 10-23-2007)  
8.60.510 - Maintenance. 
The city may require any applicants subjected to the requirements of this chapter to enter into a maintenance agreement or deed covenant to ensure the long term adequacy and operation of any storm water control. All storm water controls must be maintained in accordance with the maintenance plan as required under section 8.60.400(19) of this chapter. The maintenance plan is subject to approval by the city. 
(Ord. No. 826B, § 1(8.60.51), 10-23-2007)  
8.60.520 - Right of entry for inspection. 
When any new drainage control facility is installed on private property, or when any new connection is made between private property and a public drainage control system, sanitary sewer or combined sewer, the city shall have the right to make an inspection on the property at all reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for such purpose. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this ordinance is occurring or has occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 826B, § 1(8.60.52), 10-23-2007)  
8.60.530 - Records of installation and maintenance activities. 
Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a storm water management facility shall make records of the installation and of all maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records for at least ten years. These records shall be made available to the city of Lincoln during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request. 
(Ord. No. 826B, § 1(8.60.53), 10-23-2007)  
8.60.540 - Failure to maintain best management practices. 
The failure of a responsible party to comply with the requirements of the maintenance agreement or deed covenant is deemed to be a public nuisance, and subject to abatement pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 8.08 of the Lincoln Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 826B, § 1(8.60.54), 10-23-2007)  
Article VI. - Enforcement and Penalties 
 
8.60.600 - Violations. 
Any development activity that is commenced or is conducted contrary to this chapter shall be deemed to be a public nuisance may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by Chapter 8.08 of the Lincoln Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 826B, § 1(8.60.60), 10-23-2007)  
8.60.610 - Notice of violation. 
When the city determines that an activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the property. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or applicant; 
(2)  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the development activity into compliance with this chapter and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days of service of notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 826B, § 1(8.60.61), 10-23-2007)  
8.60.620 - Stop work orders. 
Persons receiving a notice of violation will be required to halt all construction activities. This "stop work order" will be in effect until the city confirms that the development activity is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a notice of violation in a timely manner can result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 826B, § 1(8.60.62), 10-23-2007)  
8.60.630 - Civil and criminal penalties. 
In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00. Such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day during which the violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 826B, § 1(8.60.63), 10-23-2007)  
8.60.640 - Restoration of lands. 
Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the city may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property until paid. 
(Ord. No. 826B, § 1(8.60.64), 10-23-2007)  
8.60.650 - Holds on issuance of certificates of occupancy. 
Certificates of occupancy will not be granted until corrections to all storm water practices have been made and accepted by the city of Lincoln. 
(Ord. No. 826B, § 1(8.60.65), 10-23-2007)  
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE  
CHAPTER 9.04 - NOISE 
 
9.04.010 - Loudness of electrical or mechanical sound devices. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate or employ any sound system, sound-amplifying device, radio loudspeaker, record player, radio, jukebox or other electrical or mechanical device or apparatus that emits sound waves, at any time during any day in any manner so that any sound emitted therefrom is audible to a person of average hearing faculties or capacity at a distance of more than 25 feet from the source of the sound emitted or in any manner so that the sound emitted therefrom or transferred thereover travels, is carried or projected into any public street, sidewalk, alley or place or onto, across or over any private property other than that owned by the person controlling the loudspeaker or other sound-emitting device. 
(Ord. 97B § 1(part), 1951)  
9.04.020 - Mobile units exempted. 
This chapter does not apply to sound devices attached to mobile units. 
(Ord. 97B § 1(A), 1951)  
9.04.030 - Exceptions by permit. 
The city council may make exceptions to this chapter when it deems such exceptions to be in the interest of and/or a benefit to the city. Such exceptions shall be made in the form of permits issued by the city on an annual basis and shall be subject to cancellation upon violation of the limitations of the permit. 
(Ord. 203B § 1, 1963: Ord. 97B § 1(B), 1951)  
9.04.040 - Violation—Misdemeanor. 
All persons who violate any of the provisions in this chapter are guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 97B § 2, 1951)  
CHAPTER 9.24 - CURFEW FOR MINORS 
 
9.24.010 - Hours of curfew designated. 
It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to loiter, idle or remain in or on any public place, street or alley of the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and daylight of the following day, unless accompanied by his parent or guardian or unless proceeding directly to or from his place of employment, a recreational, social or other specific function, place or activity, or when required by an emergency. 
(Ord. 349B § 1, 1978)  
9.24.020 - Violation—Infraction. 
Violation of this chapter constitutes an infraction punishable in the manner prescribed by law. 
(Ord. 349B § 2, 1978)  
CHAPTER 9.26 - DISPLAY OF HARMFUL MATTER TO MINORS 
 
9.26.010 - Purpose. 
(a)  This chapter enacted pursuant to the authority conferred by paragraph (d) of Section 313.1 of the California Penal Code, and pursuant to the police powers vested in cities by Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution. The city council finds that the exhibition to minors of harmful matter seriously threatens to corrupt the morals and character of the youth of this city. 
(b)  The interior of business establishments to which members of the general public are admitted constitute "public places" within the meaning of and as those terms are used in paragraph (d) of Section 313.1 of the Penal Code. Business establishments to which members of the general public are admitted are not, when entered by minors, "a public place from which minors are excluded" within the meaning of and as those terms are used in paragraph (d) of Section 313.1 of the Penal Code. It is the intent of this chapter to require business establishment frequented by members of the general public to either: 
(1)  Prevent minors from entering; or 
(2)  Shield harmful matter which minors may see with blinder racks in the manner prescribed herein. 
(c)  It is also the purpose of this chapter to require blinder racks shielding from view harmful matter which may be viewed by minors from public property. 
(Ord. 579B §1(part), 1992)  
9.26.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
"Blinder racks" means any opaque item or device which rests on or in front of harmful matter in such a manner that the lower two-thirds of the matter is not exposed to view. 
"Business establishment" means any indoor or outdoor commercial enterprise which distributes or exhibits harmful matter in such a manner that the harmful matter can be viewed by patrons inside the enterprise. 
"Distribute" or "distribution" shall mean to transfer possession of, whether with or without consideration. 
"Exhibit" or "exhibition" shall mean to show. 
"Harmful" shall be ascribed the same meaning as the term "harmful matter" prescribed by paragraph (a) of Section 313 of the California Penal Code, as said section may hereafter be amended. 
"Matter" means any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed or written material, or any picture, drawing or photograph, or any statue or other figure. 
"Minor" means any natural person who is under the age of 18 years. 
"News rack" or "vending device" shall mean a privately owned mechanism which is located on public property or located on private property in such a manner that the contents can be viewed by members of the general public from public property, and which contains harmful matter for purposes of distribution or exhibition which can be seen by the general public from public property. 
"Person" means any corporation, partnership or sole proprietorship which owns a business establishment, news rack or vending device, and any natural person who is responsible for the operation or maintenance of a business establishment, news rack or vending machine, including, but not limited to, clerks who are responsible for on-site operation or maintenance of a business establishment. 
"Public property" means any: 
(1)  Sidewalk, street, alley or pathway which is opened to and traveled or utilized by members of the general public, whether legal title thereto is privately held or vested in a public agency, including, but not limited to, common areas in shopping malls frequented by patrons to gain access to retail enterprises; and 
(2)  Parks, land or buildings operated by and in which a public agency possesses a property interest, which are open to members of the general public. 
(Ord. 579B §1(part), 1992)  
9.26.030 - Display in business establishments. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to own, operate or maintain any business establishment within the city to which members of the general public are admitted, unless at the time any minor is within the establishment blinder racks are placed in front of all harmful matter subject to view by patrons. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to require placement of blinder racks in front of harmful matter displayed within a separate room or partitioned area within the interior of a business establishment frequented by minors when the matter cannot be viewed from other areas of the establishment, unless minors enter the separate room or partitioned area where the matter is displayed. 
(Ord. 579B §1(part), 1992)  
9.26.040 - Display in news racks or vending devices. 
It is unlawful for any person who owns, operates or maintains a business establishment within the city to place harmful matter in a display window or other location within the establishment in such a manner that the harmful matter can be viewed by members of the general public from public property, unless blinder racks are placed in front of the harmful matter. 
(Ord. 579B §1(part), 1992)  
9.26.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
Violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute an infraction and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $100.00. 
(Ord. 579B §1(part), 1992)  
CHAPTER 9.28 - DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 978B , § 5, adopted November 13, 2018, repealed the former Ch. 9.28, §§ 9.28.010—9.28.030, and § 6, enacted a new Ch. 9.28 as set out herein. The former Ch. 9.28 pertained to dangerous missiles and derived from Ord. 214B §§1—3, 1965. 
 
9.28.010 - Firearms defined. 
For the purpose of this chapter, "firearms" includes any shotgun, rifle, pistol, revolver, pellet, BB or air gun, and any other weapon of similar use and design. 
(Ord. No. 978B , § 6, 11-13-2018)  
9.28.020 - Discharge within city unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person to use, fire or discharge any firearm within the city except as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 978B , § 6, 11-13-2018)  
9.28.030 - Exceptions. 
The prohibitions of this chapter do not apply when the use of a firearm is necessary for the protection of life or property, or to a peace officer acting in the performance of his or her duties. 
(Ord. No. 978B , § 6, 11-13-2018)  
9.28.040 - Range permit. 
Within an area zoned as an agricultural overlay, the prohibitions of this chapter do not apply to the establishment or maintenance of any commercial pistol, rifle, or target range if established on or before December 31, 2017, nor to any private pistol, rifle or target range, nor to the discharge at any target thereon, by any person using such range. The chief of police may authorize a range permit provided he/she has ascertained the shooting activities thereunder will not be dangerous to persons or property. All range permits shall be subject to the following conditions, violation of which shall constitute a violation of this chapter: 
(1)  Any range must be installed, constructed, safeguarded, equipped and used so as to adequately prevent any round of ammunition from being projected beyond the confines of such range or shooting gallery. 
(2)  Any other conditions the chief of police may impose for the protection of lives and property. 
(3)  Permit application contents and process. 
a.  Application for a range permit shall be made to the community development department in writing by the owner of the land, or his or her authorized representative, and shall contain a map demarcating the location and area of the proposed range. 
b.  If the chief of police deems the proposed range, including any additional requirements pursuant to subsection 9.28.040.B, to be consistent with this chapter, he or she shall approve the permit. 
c.  Not less than 24 hours prior to engaging in any shooting activities pursuant to a range permit, the permittee shall notify the police department of the fact of said anticipated activities. 
d.  A range permit shall be valid for two years, and may be renewed in additional two year increments if requested in writing to the chief of police not less than 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit. Upon a request for renewal, the chief of police shall review the nature and location of the range to confirm it remains consistent with the provisions of this chapter before issuing a renewal. 
(4)  The chief of police may identify areas on a map in which a range permit is not allowed based upon the criteria in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 978B , § 6, 11-13-2018)  
9.28.050 - Hunting permit. 
Within an area zoned as an agricultural overlay, hunting may be permitted on parcels or portions of a parcel of land for which a hunting permit is authorized by the chief of police (the "approved hunting area"). For purposes of this chapter, an "approved hunting area" is the area is which hunting is permitted or proposed, and may be the entire property or a portion of it. The chief of police may authorize a hunting permit provided he/she has ascertained that hunting within the approved hunting area will not be dangerous to persons or property. All hunting permits shall be subject to the following conditions, violation of which shall constitute a violation of this chapter: 
(1)  Applications for a hunting permit shall be submitted to the community development department, and are deemed to constitute ministerial action by the city. 
(2)  Applications shall be submitted by the owner or his or her authorized representative of the property on which the hunting activity is being requested to occur. 
(3)  Hunting shall be limited to seasons as established by law and in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations. 
(4)  A hunting permit may be issued for purposes of training hunting dogs using firearms, consistent with the law and the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  No firearms other than shotguns may be used in an approved hunting area, except as otherwise authorized under Section 9.28.060 or other section of this chapter. 
(6)  Hunting permits shall not be issued if there are residential dwellings, other than the applicant's dwelling, within 1,000 feet of the proposed approved hunting area, or are anticipated to be constructed within 1,000 feet of the approved hunting area during the term of the permit. 
(7)  Any other conditions the chief of police may impose for the protection of lives and property. 
(8)  Permit application contents and process. 
a.  Application for a hunting permit shall be made to the community development department in writing by the owner of the land, or his or her authorized representative, and shall contain a map demarcating the boundaries of the proposed approved hunting area, identifying the number of acres, the general nature of the hunting activity, and the maximum number of hunters requested to be permitted on the land at any given time for hunting purposes. Multiple parcels may be covered by one permit application. 
b.  The proposed approved hunting area will be reviewed utilizing Geographic Information System Mapping (GIS) and any other relevant analytical system to provide the chief of police with as reasonably accurate a map as possible depicting the proposed approved hunting area for his or her review and consideration. 
c.  If the chief of police deems the proposed approved hunting area, including any additional requirements pursuant to subsection 9.28.050.G, to be consistent with this chapter, he or she shall approve the permit. 
d.  Not less than 24 hours prior to engaging in any hunting activities pursuant to a hunting permit, the permittee shall notify the police department of the fact of said anticipated activities. When there will be consecutive days of hunting, notification may be made for all days within 24 hours prior to the first day of hunting. 
e.  Any person hunting on land for which a hunting permit has been issued pursuant to this chapter shall have the permit available during hunting activities and present the permit to the police department upon request. 
f.  A hunting permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for one year, and may be renewed annually if requested in writing to the chief of police not less than 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit. Upon a request for renewal, the chief of police shall review the approved hunting area to confirm it remains consistent with the provisions of this chapter before issuing a renewal. 
(9)  The chief of police may identify areas on a map in which a hunting permit is not allowed based upon the criteria in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 978B , § 6, 11-13-2018)  
9.28.060 - Special agricultural shooting permit. 
Within an area zoned as an agricultural overlay, the chief of police may issue a special agricultural shooting permit to any property owner or tenant who is a farmer, rancher or orchardist solely for shooting on the owner's/tenant's property for the purposes of shooting predatory animals that pose a danger to farm animals; shooting birds or deer which are an immediate threat to growing crops or fruit; and for humanely euthanizing an injured farm animal. The chief of police may authorize a special agricultural shooting permit provided he/she has ascertained the shooting activities undertaken will not be dangerous to persons or property. All special agricultural shooting permits shall be subject to the following conditions, violation of which shall constitute a violation of this chapter: 
(1)  Any permit authorized under this section shall be upon such conditions and limitations as the chief of police may impose for the protection of lives and property. 
(2)  Shooting activities conducted pursuant to a special agricultural shooting permit shall not occur within 1,000 feet of residential dwellings, excluding the applicant's dwelling. 
(3)  Permit application contents and process. 
a.  Application for a special agricultural shooting permit shall be made to the community development department in writing by the owner of the land, or his or her authorized representative, and shall contain a map demarcating the boundaries of the property within which the special agricultural shooting activities will occur. Multiple parcels may be covered by one application. 
b.  If the chief of police deems the application, including any specially imposed requirements pursuant to subsection 9.28.060.A, to be consistent with this chapter, he or she shall approve the permit. 
c.  To the best of permittee's ability, permittee shall notify the police department of any shooting activities not less than one hour prior to engaging in said activities. 
d.  A special agricultural shooting permit shall be valid for two years, and may be renewed in additional two year increments if requested in writing to the chief of police not less than 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit. Upon a request for renewal, the chief of police shall review the nature and location of the activities to confirm they remain consistent with the provisions of this chapter before issuing a renewal. 
(4)  The chief of police may identify areas on a map in which a special agricultural shooting permit is not allowed based upon the criteria in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 978B , § 6, 11-13-2018)  
9.28.070 - Fees. 
The city council may set reasonable permit fees by resolution for permits under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 978B , § 6, 11-13-2018)  
9.28.080 - Appeal. 
Any permit applicant dissatisfied with the decision of the chief of police relative to an application for a permit under this chapter may appeal the decision to the city manager by submitting a written administrative appeal within ten days of the date of the decision. The decision of the city manager may be appealed to the city council by submitting a written administrative appeal within ten days of the date of the decision. The decision of the city council is final. 
(Ord. No. 978B , § 6, 11-13-2018)  
9.28.090 - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who violates provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and this chapter may be enforced as an administrative penalty pursuant to the provisions of chapter 1.20. 
(Ord. No. 978B , § 6, 11-13-2018)  
CHAPTER 9.30. - CIVIL REMEDIES TO BE TAKEN AGAINST THE PERSON CONTROLLING THE PROPERTY WHERE ALCOHOL AND/OR ILLEGAL DRUGS ARE BEING CONSUMED BY MINORS 
 
9.30.010 - Purpose and intent. 
Instances of large parties and disturbances both at rental facilities and private homes may disturb the public peace, safety, and welfare of members of the community. These incidents can also jeopardize the welfare and safety of those in attendance due to assaultive and/or destructive behavior. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of people and premises in the city, including the quiet enjoyment of property, by enhancing the ability of law enforcement to deter the consumption of alcohol, smoking or consumption of marijuana, or use of other controlled substances by minors and to hold adult hosts accountable. 
( Ord. No. 956B, § 2, 11-14-2017 )  
9.30.020 - Definitions. 
The words and phrases used in this chapter have the meanings set forth in this section. 
"Alcoholic beverage" means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and any liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit or used for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances. 
"Controlled substance" means those controlled substances set forth in Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, and 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code, identified as Schedules I through V, inclusive, as said sections now exist or may hereafter be amended. 
"Gathering" means a party, or event, where a group of three or more persons have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social activity. 
"Guardian" means: a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the juvenile, or a person who looks after and is legally responsible for someone who is a juvenile. 
"Juvenile(s)" means any person under 18 years of age. 
"Marijuana" means any item described in Section 11018 of the California Health and Safety Code, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended whether smoked or otherwise ingested. 
"Minor(s)" means any person under 21 years of age. 
"Parent" means a person who is the legal natural parent, adoptive parent or step- parent of a juvenile. 
"Premises" means any parcel(s) of property owned, leased, occupied, or under the control of a person. 
"Social host" means any person having ownership or control of a premises, or is responsible for organizing a gathering, who knowingly permits or allows, tacitly or otherwise, a gathering or unruly gathering, as those terms are defined in this chapter, to occur on private property. 
"Unruly gathering" shall mean a party, event or gathering where three or more persons are present at a residence or other private property in which alcoholic beverages, marijuana, and/or controlled substances are being consumed or possessed and upon which unruly conduct occurs. Illustrative of such unruly conduct is excessive noise, excessive traffic, obstruction of public streets by crowds or vehicles, public drunkenness, or unlawful public consumption of alcohol, marijuana, or controlled substances, assaults, batteries, fights, domestic violence or other disturbances of peace, vandalism, litter, and any other conduct which constitutes a threat to public health, safety, quiet enjoyment of property or general welfare. 
( Ord. No. 956B, § 2, 11-14-2017 )  
9.30.030 - Hosting, permitting, allowing a gathering where minors consume alcoholic beverages, marijuana, or other controlled substances prohibited. 
(a)  Except as permitted by law, it is unlawful for any person having ownership or control of any premises, or who is responsible for a gathering or unruly gathering, to host, knowingly permit, or allow, tacitly or otherwise, a gathering to take place at said premises, where at least one minor possesses or consumes an alcoholic beverage, marijuana, or other controlled substance 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (g), whenever a person having ownership or control of a premises is on the premises and allows a minor to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage marijuana, or controlled substance thereon, it shall be prima facie evidence that such person had the requisite knowledge specified in Section 9.30.030(A). 
(c)  A social host shall be deemed to have constructive knowledge that a minor has consumed or possessed alcoholic beverages, marijuana, or controlled substances if the social host did not take reasonable steps to prevent the consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages, marijuana, and controlled substances by the minor, or if with reasonable efforts he/she could have determined that consumption or possession of alcohol, marijuana and other controlled substances were being used or possessed. 
(d)  A social host shall not be in violation of this chapter if he or she seeks immediate assistance from any law enforcement agency to immediately remove any person who refuses to abide by the social hosts' performance of the duties imposed by this chapter, or to terminate the gathering because the social host has been unable to prevent minors from consuming or possessing alcoholic beverages, marijuana, or other controlled substances despite having taken reasonable steps to do so. A social host shall not be in violation of this chapter if he or she seeks medical assistance from an emergency medical responder to provide care for a person in immediate danger due to the accidental or intentional overdose of alcohol, marijuana, or a controlled substance. 
(e)  When law enforcement or other emergency medical providers respond, without a call from the social host as provided in Section 9.30.030(D), to a gathering at which a minor(s) has/have consumed or is consuming alcoholic beverages, marijuana, or a controlled substance, all social hosts shall be jointly and severally liable. 
(f)  This section shall not apply to any location or place regulated by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
(g)  This section shall not apply to: a parent or legal guardian who provides marijuana to a juvenile who is legally qualified to use marijuana, as required by the California Department of Public Health's "Medical Marijuana Program," as amended from time to time. 
( Ord. No. 956B, § 2, 11-14-2017 )  
9.30.040 - Penalties. 
It is unlawful and a public nuisance to intentionally violate any of the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, hosting, permitting, or allowing, tacitly or otherwise, a gathering on any private property in violation of this chapter. The civil penalty for any violation of this chapter shall be a fine of one thousand dollars per occurrence. For purposes of this section an "occurrence" means each response by law enforcement or emergency medical providers on a single incident. For example, multiple responders to one call shall constitute a single occurrence and if called back or respond again, such further response is another occurrence. 
Violation of this chapter may be charged as either an infraction or a misdemeanor in the discretion of the district attorney. 
( Ord. No. 956B, § 2, 11-14-2017 )  
9.30.050 - Civil injunction 
The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be contrary to the public interest and shall, at the discretion of city, create a cause of action for injunctive relief. 
( Ord. No. 956B, § 2, 11-14-2017 )  
9.30.060 - Administrative remedies. 
In addition to the civil remedies and criminal penalties set forth herein, any person that violates the provisions of this chapter may be subject to administrative remedies. 
( Ord. No. 956B, § 2, 11-14-2017 )  
9.30.070 - Cumulative remedies, procedures and penalties. 
Unless otherwise expressly provided, the remedies, procedures and penalties provided by this chapter are cumulative to each other and to any others available under state law or other city ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 956B, § 2, 11-14-2017 )  
9.30.080 - Juvenile social hosts. 
If the social host is a juvenile, the parents or legal guardians of the juvenile shall be responsible for any penalty imposed pursuant to this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 956B, § 2, 11-14-2017 )  
9.30.090 - Effect on criminal prosecution. 
Nothing in the adoption or administration of this chapter shall be construed as affecting the ability to initiate or continue concurrent or subsequent criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this Code or any state law arising out of the same circumstances necessitating the application of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 956B, § 2, 11-14-2017 )  
CHAPTER 9.32 - RESPONSE TO UNRULY GATHERINGS 
 
9.32.010 - Purpose. 
The purposes of this chapter are to assist the department of public safety in controlling unruly gatherings, to defray the cost of providing any emergency response during a second call to such unruly gatherings, and to deter noisy, dangerous gatherings which disturb the public peace and threaten to general welfare. 
(Ord. 595B §1(part), 1993)  
9.32.020 - Liability—Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
"Second call to an unruly gathering" is a second on-site visit to a premises by department of public safety - police operations personnel which occurs within 12 hours after an initial response has been made to advise the person apparently in charge, or person as provided in Section 9.32.060, that the gathering is unruly and informing the person of his or her liability under this chapter. Additional visits to the premises regarding the same unruly gathering shall be deemed second calls for the purposes of this chapter. 
"Unruly gathering" means a party or other gathering which occurs on or adjacent to private property in the city (hereinafter "premises") and which a peace officer at the scene determines is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare. 
(Ord. 595B §1(part), 1993)  
9.32.030 - Emergency response charges. 
Whenever the department of public safety personnel makes a second call to an unruly gathering, the police personnel utilized during the second call shall be deemed to be providing special emergency security services over and above police services normally provided. The actual costs of providing such special emergency services shall be charged to the person or persons responsible for the unruly gathering as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 595B §1(part), 1993)  
9.32.040 - Calculation of charges. 
The charge for providing special emergency security services during a second call to an unruly gathering shall be calculated by the department of public safety utilizing the cost per minute computation of the public safety personnel, and shall be adjusted from time to time to reflect changes in such rates. Said charge may include the cost of providing equipment to the scene of the unruly gathering and the cost of repairing or replacing equipment damaged at the scene. The total charges payable under this section shall be the actual cost of providing the services, plus the cost of actual damages to town property, if any, for a single response. Additional visits to the same gathering shall be separately charged. 
(Ord. 595B §1(part), 1993)  
9.32.050 - Collection of charges. 
Collection of associated charges will be as follows: 
(1)  The person or persons in charge of the premises and the person or persons in charge of the unruly gathering, or if any such person is a minor, then the parent or guardians of such persons, shall be jointly and severally liable for the cost of providing the special emergency security services as provided in this chapter. 
(2)  Within ten days of the second call to an unruly gathering, the director of public safety or his designate shall calculate the charges payable under this chapter and shall cause a bill to be produced and sent to the persons responsible for such charges. 
(3)  The charges constitute a debt of that person to the city, and is collectable by the city in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, express or implied. 
(Ord. 595B §1(part), 1993)  
9.32.060 - Release of obligation to pay costs. 
No charges may be made pursuant to this chapter unless the person apparently in charge of the unruly gathering has been provided a written notice of his or her potential liability under this chapter by a peace officer at the premises during the first visit. If, after a good faith effort, no such responsible party can be found, the warning may be given to any person in attendance at the unruly gathering. 
(Ord. 595B §1(part), 1993)  
9.32.070 - Nonexclusive remedy. 
The charges established by this chapter are cumulative in nature and shall not be construed to limit or replace any other remedies or penalties, civil or criminal, which may be available. 
(Ord. 595B §1(part), 1993)  
CHAPTER 9.36 - POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
 
9.36.010 - Consumption of alcoholic beverages in public—Prohibited. 
Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage, as that term is defined in California Business and Professions Code Section 23004, or any successor provision thereto, on any public street, public sidewalk or public alley, or within or on any public parking lot, private parking lot open to the public, public park, recreation area, recreation facility or other property owned, controlled and/or operated by the city, county or any public agency. A violation of this section constitutes an infraction punishable in the manner prescribed by law. 
(Ord. 707B §1 (part), 2001)  
9.36.020 - Possession of open containers of alcohol in public—Prohibited. 
Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful for any person to possess an open container of alcohol within any public street, public sidewalk or public alley, or within or on any public parking lot, private parking lot open to the public, public park, recreation area, recreation facility or other property owned, controlled and/or operated by the city, county or any public agency. A violation of this section is punishable as an infraction pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 25620. 
(Ord. 707B §1 (part), 2001)  
9.36.030 - Exceptions—Licensed public premises or city permit. 
Sections 9.36.010 and 9.36.020 of this code shall not apply where such consumption or possession occurs within or on premises for which a license authorizing such consumption and/or possession has been issued pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Sections 23000 through 25762, or for which a permit has been obtained from the appropriate city department. 
(Ord. 707B §1 (part), 2001)  
9.36.040 - Possession of open containers of alcohol on posted private premises open to the public—Prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person having in his or her possession any open container of alcohol to enter, be present in or upon or to remain upon the posted premises of, including a posted parking lot immediately adjacent to, any retail business selling packaged alcoholic beverages as an off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee licensed pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Sections 23000 through 25752. For purposes of this section, the term "posted premises" means those premises which are subject to licensure under any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage license, the parking lot immediately adjacent to the licensed premises and any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensed premises on which one or more clearly visible signs indicate to patrons of the licensee and to persons in such parking lot and/or on such public sidewalks, that the provisions of this section are applicable. The provisions of this section shall not apply unless such posting has occurred. A violation of this section is punishable as an infraction pursuant to California Penal Code Section 647e. 
(Ord. 707B § 1 (part), 2001)  
9.36.050 - Open container of alcohol—Defined. 
For purposes of this chapter, the term "open container of alcohol" shall mean any can, bottle or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or a seal thereon broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed. 
(Ord. 707B § 1 (part), 2001)  
9.36.060 - Activities permitted or prohibited under state law not regulated. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to prohibit or permit any act which is expressly prohibited or permitted by any law of the State of California including, but not limited to, any law regulating possession of an open container of alcohol within a motor vehicle. 
(Ord. 707B § 1 (part), 2001)  
CHAPTER 9.40 - CAMPING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY 
 
9.40.010 - Purpose and intent. 
Streets and public areas should be readily accessible and available to residents and the public at large. The use of these areas for camping purposes or storage of personal property interferes with the rights of others to use the areas. Such activity can constitute a public health and safety hazard which adversely impacts neighborhoods and commercial areas. Camping on private property without the consent of the owner adversely affects private property rights as well as public health, safety, and welfare of the city. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain streets, parks and other public and private areas within the city in a clean, sanitary and accessible condition and to adequately protect the health, safety and public welfare of the community, while recognizing that, subject to reasonable conditions, camping and camping facilities associated with special events can be beneficial to the cultural and educational climate in the city. Nothing in this chapter is intended to interfere with otherwise lawful and ordinary uses of public or private property. 
(Ord. 805B § 1(part), 2006)  
9.40.020 - Camping definitions. 
The definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in this chapter. 
"Camping" means residing in or using public property or property open to the public for one or more nights for living accommodation purposes, such as sleeping activities, or making preparation to sleep (including the laying down of bedding for the purpose of sleeping) or storing personal belongings, (including but not limited to clothing, sleeping bags, bedrolls, blankets, sheets, luggage, backpacks, kitchen utensils, cookware, and similar material), or making any fire or using any tents, regularly cooking meals, or living in a parked vehicle. These activities constitute camping when it reasonably appears, in light of all the circumstances, that a person(s) is using a park or private property, as a living accommodation for one or more nights regardless of his or her intent or the nature of any other activities in which he or she might also be engaging. 
"Camp facilities" means and includes, but are not limited to, tents, huts, vehicles, camping outfits or temporary shelter. 
"Camp paraphernalia" means and includes, but is not limited to, bedrolls, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks or cooking facilities and similar equipment. 
"City manager" means the city manager or designee. 
"Establish" means setting up or moving equipment, supplies or materials on to public or private property to "camp" or operate camp facilities. 
"Maintain" means keeping or permitting equipment, supplies or materials to remain on public or private property in order to camp or operate camp facilities. 
"Operate" means participating or assisting in establishing or maintaining a camp or camp facility. 
"Private property" means all private property including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, alleys, and improved and unimproved property. 
"Public property" means all public property including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, alleys, improved or unimproved land and parks. 
"Store" means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location. 
(Ord. 805B § 1(part), 2006)  
9.40.030 - Camping on public property. 
(a)  It is unlawful to camp upon any public property owned by the city, including, without limitation, streets, easements, parks, creek beds, electric utility substations, parking lots, or corporation yards. No person shall set up tents, shacks, house trailers, motor homes, campers or any other temporary or permanent shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in any such place any movable structure or special vehicle to be used or that could be used for such a purpose, such as a house trailer, tent, shopping cart, automobile, or the like. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to sleep in any vehicle parked on a public street, alley way, or parking area, between sunset and sunrise. A vehicle, for the purpose of this section, shall be defined by Section 670 of the Vehicle Code of the State of California as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. 805B § 1(part), 2006)  
9.40.040 - Camping on private property open to the public. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, it is unlawful to camp upon private property accessible to the public within the city. No person shall set up tents, shacks, campers or any other temporary or permanent shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave upon any private property accessible to the public any movable structures or special vehicle to be used or that could be used for such a purpose, such as a tent or automobile or the like. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to sleep in any vehicle parked on privately owned property accessible to the public, including any parking area used for the parking of customers of any business enterprise, between sunset and sunrise. A vehicle, for the purpose of this section, shall be defined by Section 670 of the Vehicle Code of the State of California as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. 805B § 1(part), 2006)  
9.40.050 - Campfires. 
(a)  No person shall kindle or maintain an open campfire or bonfire except within metal barbecues or hibachis or the like where allowed. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit fires otherwise prohibited by law or to negate the requirement for burning permits otherwise required by law. 
(Ord. 805B § 1(part), 2006)  
9.40.060 - Permit for special event uses. 
The city manager may, in his or her discretion, issue a permit to establish, maintain and operate a camp or a camp facility in connection with a special event. A special event is intended to include, but not be limited to, programs operated by the departments of the city, youth or school events, marathons or other sporting events and scout activities. The city manager may consult with various city departments, the health officer and the public prior to issuing any temporary permit. Each department of person consulted may provide comments regarding any health, safety or public welfare concerns and provide recommendations pertaining to the issuance, denial or conditioning of the permit. A reasonable fee may be established by the city council and shall be paid, in advance, by the applicant. The fee shall be returned if the application is denied. In exercising his or her discretion to issue a temporary permit, the city manager may consider any facts or evidence bearing on the sanitary, health, safety and welfare conditions on or surrounding the area or tract of land upon which the proposed temporary camp or camp facility is to be located. 
(Ord. 805B § 1(part), 2006)  
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC*  
DIVISION I. - LINCOLN TRAFFIC ORDINANCE  
CHAPTER 10.04 - DEFINITIONS 
 
10.04.010 - Generally. 
The words and phrases set out in this chapter, when used in this division, shall, for the purposes of this division, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter. Whenever any words or phrases used in this division are not defined in this chapter but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California, such definitions shall apply. 
(Ord. 344B § 1, 1978)  
10.04.020 - Holidays. 
"Holidays" means all Sundays, Thanksgiving Day and such other holidays as are established by ordinance or resolution of the city. 
(Ord. 344B § 1.3, 1978)  
10.04.030 - Loading zone. 
"Loading zone" means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
(Ord. 344B § 1.4, 1978)  
10.04.040 - Official traffic control devices. 
"Official traffic control devices" means all signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this division which are placed or erected under lawful authority for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
(Ord. 344B § 1.11, 1978)  
10.04.050 - Official traffic signals. 
"Official traffic signals" means all devices, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and proceed and which are erected under lawful authority. 
(Ord. 344B §1.12, 1978)  
10.04.060 - Parking meter. 
"Parking meter" means a mechanical device installed within or upon the curb or sidewalk area, immediately adjacent to a parking space, for the purpose of controlling the period of time occupancy of such parking meter space by any vehicle. 
(Ord. 344B §1.7, 1978)  
10.04.070 - Parkway. 
"Parkway" means that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk. 
(Ord. 344B §1.6, 1978)  
10.04.080 - Pedestrian. 
"Pedestrian" means any person afoot. 
(Ord. 344B §1.8, 1978)  
10.04.090 - Police officer. 
"Police officer" means every officer of the police department of this city or any officer authorized to direct traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
(Ord. 344B §1.9, 1978)  
10.04.100 - Stop. 
"Stop" means complete cessation of movement. 
(Ord. 344B §1.10, 1978)  
CHAPTER 10.08 - ADMINISTRATION 
 
10.08.010 - Police duties. 
It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the street traffic regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate traffic accidents and to cooperate with the city traffic engineer in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the department in this division. 
(Ord. 344B §2, 1978)  
10.08.020 - Traffic and safety engineer—Office established. 
The office of city traffic and safety engineer is established. The chief of police shall serve as the city traffic and safety engineer in addition to his other duties and he shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this division. Whenever the city traffic and safety engineer is required or authorized to place or maintain official traffic control devices or signals, he may cause such devices or signals to be placed or maintained. 
(Ord. 344B §2.1, 1978)  
10.08.030 - Traffic and safety engineer—Powers and duties. 
(a)  It shall be the general duty of the city traffic and safety engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices and signals, to conduct engineering and traffic investigations of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by the ordinances of this city. 
(b)  Whenever, by the provisions of this division, a power is granted to the city traffic and safety engineer or a duty is imposed upon him, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by his deputy or by a person authorized by him in writing. 
(c)  Unless the limitations of this subsection are specifically excepted, the city traffic and safety engineer, before erecting, establishing, installing or removing any official traffic control device or sign, must recommend such action to, and obtain the approval of, the city council. 
(Ord. 344B §2.2, 1978)  
10.08.040 - Traffic accident studies. 
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the police department shall cooperate with the city traffic and safety engineer in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures. 
(Ord. 344B §2.3, 1978)  
10.08.050 - Traffic accident reports. 
The police department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed by month, year and accident report number. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the city. 
(Ord. 344B §2.4, 1978)  
10.08.060 - Annual traffic safety report. 
The police department shall annually prepare a traffic report, which shall be filed with the city council. Such a report shall contain information on traffic matters in this city, as follows: 
(1)  The number and location of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured and other pertinent traffic accident data; 
(2)  The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police; 
(3)  The plans and recommendations of the department for future traffic-safety activities. 
(Ord. 344B §2.5, 1978)  
CHAPTER 10.12 - ENFORCEMENT—COMPLIANCE 
 
10.12.010 - Fire and police personnel may direct traffic. 
Officers of the police department and such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws; except, that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or pedestrians, officers of the police department or members of the fire department may direct traffic as conditions require, notwithstanding provisions to the contrary contained in this division or the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 344B §3, 1978)  
10.12.020 - Unauthorized traffic direction. 
No persons other than an officer of the police department or a person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as provided in this chapter, any mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the city traffic engineer. 
(Ord. 344B §3.1, 1978)  
10.12.030 - Obedience to authorized traffic directors. 
No person shall fail or refuse to comply with, or perform any act forbidden by any lawful order, signal or direction of a traffic or police officer, a member of the fire department, or a person authorized by the chief of police or other lawful authority. 
(Ord. 344B §3.2, 1978)  
10.12.040 - Interference or obstruction of enforcement. 
No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of this city in their enforcement of the provisions of this division. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee of this city in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this division shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this division, constitute such interference or obstruction. 
(Ord. 344B §3.3, 1978)  
10.12.050 - Applicability to public vehicles and servants. 
The provisions of this division shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, this state, any county or city, and it is unlawful for any such operator to violate any of the provisions of this division or the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 344B §3.4, 1978)  
10.12.060 - Emergency and other exempted vehicles. 
(a)  The provisions of this ordinance regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the police or fire department, any public utility vehicle, or any private or public ambulance, which public utility vehicle or ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this subsection is operated in the manner specified by the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call. 
(b)  The exemptions set out in subsection (a) of this section shall not, however, relieve the operator of any such vehicle from the obligation to exercise due care for the safety of others or the consequences of his willful disregard for the safety of others. 
(c)  The provisions of this division regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work, or any vehicle owned or operated by the United States Postal Service while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of the United States Mail. 
(Ord. 344B §3.5, 1978)  
10.12.070 - Removal of standing vehicles authorized. 
Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the police department may remove or cause to be removed: 
(1)  Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway for 72 or more consecutive hours; 
(2)  Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or for the installation of underground utilities, or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic, or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement, provided that signs giving notice of such restrictions are erected or placed at least 24 hours prior to the removal. 
(Ord. 344B §3.6, 1978)  
CHAPTER 10.14 - LIMITATION ON THE IDLING OF ON- AND OFF-ROAD ENGINES 
 
10.14.010 - Definition. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Commercial motor vehicle" means any on-road motor vehicle with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating greater than 26,000 pounds or as defined in Motor Vehicle Code Section 15210(b). 
"Driver" means any person who drives, operates, or is in actual physical control of vehicle. 
"Emergency" means a sudden, urgent, usually unforeseen occurrence. 
"Equipment operator" means any person who is in actual physical control of a piece of off-road equipment. 
"Gross vehicle weight rating" means the weight specified by the manufacturer as the loaded weight of a single vehicle. 
"Idling" means the engine is running while the vehicle is stationary or the piece of off-road equipment is not performing work. 
"Medium-duty vehicle" means any on-road motor vehicle with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of 6,001 up to 14,000 pounds. 
"Official traffic control device" means any sign, signal, marking or device, consistent with Section 21400 of the Vehicle Code, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic, but does not include islands, curbs, traffic barriers, speed humps, speed bumps, or other roadway design features. 
"Official traffic control signal" means any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and proceed and which is erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction. 
"Off-road diesel equipment" means all nonroad equipment with a horsepower rating of 70 or greater. 
"Transport refrigeration unit" or "TRU" means a refrigeration system powered by an engine designed to control the environment of temperature sensitive cargo. A TRU is a piece of off-road equipment regardless of its horsepower rating. 
"Vehicle" means any on-road, self-propelled vehicle that is required to be registered and have a license plate at the department of motor vehicles and which comes within Section 10.14.020 of this chapter. 
"Vehicle/equipment owner" means the registered owner, lessee, licensee, of any heavy- or medium-duty vehicle or equipment on either a for-hire or not-for-hire basis. 
(Ord. 789B §1(part), 2005)  
10.14.020 - Applicability. 
There is established an ordinance to be known as the "Limitation on Diesel Engine Idling" that applies to the operation of all diesel fueled commercial vehicles over 26,000 pounds gross weight rating, and all off-road diesel-powered equipment over 70 horsepower rating, except as provided in Section 10.14.050 of this chapter. Additionally, this ordinance applies to TRU engines as specified in Section 10.14.010 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 789B §1(part), 2005)  
10.14.030 - Idling. 
(a)  A driver of a vehicle: 
(1)  Must turn off the engine upon stopping at a destination; and 
(2)  Must not cause or allow an engine to idle at any location for more than five consecutive minutes. 
(b)  An equipment operator of an off-road piece of equipment not identified in subsection (a) of this section must not cause or allow an off-road piece of equipment to idle at any location for more than five consecutive minutes. 
(c)  An equipment operator of a TRU must not cause or allow a TRU to operate within 1,000 feet of a residential area or school unless the cargo will be loaded or has been unloaded within 30 minutes. 
(d)  An owner of a vehicle, an off-road piece of equipment, or a TRU must ensure that: 
(1)  The vehicle driver or equipment operator, upon employment and at least once per year thereafter, is informed of the requirements in subsections 10.14.040(A), (B) and (C) of this chapter, and of the consequences under this section and the fleet owners' terms of employment, of not complying with those requirements; 
(2)  Upon rental or lease of a vehicle or piece of equipment, notification is provided of the requirements in Sections 10.14.040(A), (B) and (C) of this chapter; and 
(3)  All complaints of noncompliance with, and enforcement actions related to, the requirements of Sections 10.14.040(A), (B) and (C) of this chapter are reviewed and remedial action is taken as necessary. 
(e)  A private property owner shall not allow a vehicle, an off-road piece of equipment or a TRU located on the owner's property to violate Sections 10.14.040(1), (2) and (3) of this chapter respectively. A private property owner shall notify owners and operators of vehicles, off-road pieces of equipment, and TRUs entering the owner's private property of the requirements of subsections 10.14.040(1), (2) and (3) of this chapter. 
(Ord. 789B §1(part), 2005)  
10.14.040 - Exemptions. 
This chapter does not apply to a vehicle or piece of equipment for the period or periods during which: 
(1)  Idling is necessary while stopped: 
a.  For an official traffic control device; 
b.  For an official traffic control signal; 
c.  For traffic conditions over which the driver has no control, including, but not limited to, stopped in a line of traffic, stopped at a railroad crossing, or stopped at a construction zone; or 
d.  At the direction of a peace officer. 
(2)  Idling is necessary to ascertain that the vehicle and/or the off-road equipment is in safe operating condition and equipped as required by all provisions of law, and all equipment is in good working order, either as part of the daily vehicle inspection, or as otherwise needed; 
(3)  Idling is necessary for testing, servicing, repairing, or diagnostic purposes; 
(4)  Idling is necessary, for a period not to exceed three to five minutes (as per the recommendation of the manufacturer), to cool down a turbo-charged heavy-duty vehicle before turning the engine off; 
(5)  Idling is necessary to accomplish work which the vehicle/equipment was designed, other than transporting goods, for example: operating a lift, crane, pump, drill, hoist, mixer or other auxiliary equipment other than a heater or air conditioner; 
(6)  Idling is necessary to operate a lift or other piece of equipment designed to ensure safe loading and unloading of good and people; 
(7)  Idling is necessary to operate defrosters, heaters, air conditioners, or other equipment to prevent a safety or health emergency, but not solely for the comfort of the driver or passengers; 
a.  The only exception for driver comfort would be a vehicle driver that is required to have rest time by law. In this case, the driver may only idle at a designated rest area or truck stop and will not idle within 1,000 feet of a residential area or school. 
b.  The only specific exception for passenger comfort would be a paratransit vehicle with a passenger on board with a disability or health condition that would be critically aggravated if the vehicle were not maintained at an adequate temperature. 
(8)  Idling is necessary solely to recharge a battery or other energy storage unit of a hybrid electric vehicle/equipment; or 
(9)  Idling is necessary to operate equipment that runs intermittently. 
(Ord. 789B §1(part), 2005)  
10.14.050 - Relationship to other laws. 
Nothing in this chapter allows idling in excess of other applicable laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. 789B §1(part), 2005)  
10.14.060 - Penalties. 
(a)  For each violation of subsections 10.14.040(1), (2) and (3) of this chapter, a driver of a vehicle, or an operator of off-road piece of equipment or TRU is subject to minimum civil penalty of $50.00 and to criminal penalties to the maximum extent provided by law. 
(b)  For each violation of subsection 10.14.040(4) of this chapter, an owner of a vehicle, off-road piece of equipment or TRU is subject to a warning on the first offense, followed by a $100.00 minimum civil penalty for a second offense, with a minimum civil penalty of $200.00 for all future offenses and to criminal penalties to the maximum extent provided by law. 
(Ord. 789B §1(part), 2005)  
10.14.070 - Enforcement. 
This chapter may be enforced by the local air pollution control or air quality management district, and/or any peace officer as defined by California Penal Code. 
(Ord. 789B §1(part), 2005)  
CHAPTER 10.16 - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 
 
10.16.010 - Installation and removal authority. 
(a)  The traffic and safety engineer shall have the power and duty to place, maintain or cause to be placed, maintained and removed official traffic control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Whenever the Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law, the traffic and safety engineer is authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in this division or other law applicable thereto. 
(c)  The traffic and safety engineer may also place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as may be set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 513B §1, 1987: Ord. 344B §4, 1978)  
10.16.020 - Signs required for enforcement. 
No provisions of the Vehicle Code or this ordinance for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Ord. 344B §4.1, 1978)  
10.16.030 - Obedience by vehicle operators. 
The operator of any vehicle, train, bicycle or other person in control of any animal or animal-drawn conveyance shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device placed in accordance with this division unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized person subject to the exceptions granted the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls. 
(Ord. 344B §4.2, 1978)  
10.16.040 - Traffic signal installation. 
(a)  The traffic and safety engineer is directed to install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternatively interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard. 
(b)  The traffic and safety engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by field investigation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent and his determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the Traffic Manual issued by the State Department of Transportation. 
(c)  Whenever the traffic and safety engineer installs and maintains an official traffic signal at any intersection, he shall likewise erect and maintain at such intersection street-name signs clearly visible to traffic approaching from all directions unless such street-name signs have previously been placed and are maintained at any such intersection. 
(Ord. 344B §4.3, 1978)  
10.16.050 - Lane markings. 
The traffic and safety engineer is authorized to mark centerlines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the highway. 
(Ord. 344B §4.4, 1978)  
10.16.060 - Centerline markings. 
The traffic and safety engineer is authorized to place and maintains distinctive roadway markings as described on those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such marking or sign and markings. Such markings or signs and markings shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the state department of public works pursuant to provisions of the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 344B §4.5, 1978)  
10.16.070 - Removal, relocation and discontinuance. 
The traffic and safety engineer is authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or this division whenever he determines in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the traffic control device have ceased to exist or obtain. 
(Ord. 344B §4.6, 1978)  
10.16.080 - Hours and days of operation. 
The traffic and safety engineer shall determine which hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this division. 
(Ord. 344B §4.7, 1978)  
10.16.090 - Unauthorized curb painting. 
No person, unless authorized by this city, shall paint any street or curb surface; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or ordinance of this city pertaining thereto. 
(Ord. 344B §4.8, 1978)  
CHAPTER 10.20 - TURNING MOVEMENTS 
 
10.20.010 - Turn markers and lanes authorized. 
The traffic and safety engineer is authorized to place official traffic control devices within or adjacent to intersections and indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the traffic and safety engineer is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right-hand and left-hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. 
(Ord. 344B §5, 1978)  
10.20.020 - Restricted-turn signs authorized. 
The traffic and safety engineer is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such terms may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed where such turns are permitted. 
(Ord. 344B §5.1, 1978)  
10.20.030 - Right turn against signal restrictions. 
(a)  No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn against a red or stop signal at any intersection which is signposted giving notice of such restriction as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The traffic and safety engineer shall post appropriate signs giving effect to this section where he determines that the making of right turns against traffic signal "stop" indications would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic. 
(Ord. 344B §5.2, 1978)  
CHAPTER 10.24 - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS 
 
10.24.010 - Posting by traffic and safety engineer. 
Whenever the traffic and safety engineer designates any one-way street or alley, the traffic and safety engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Ord. 513B §2(part), 1987: Ord. 344B §6, 1978)  
10.24.020 - Designation by traffic and safety engineer. 
The traffic and safety engineer may at any time when traffic conditions warrant, close any public street or portion thereof to traffic in one direction and direct that any vehicle shall travel only in one direction on or over such street. 
(Ord. 513B §2(part), 1987: Ord. 344B §6.1, 1978)  
CHAPTER 10.28 - SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED 
 
10.28.010 - Stop sign erection authorized. 
Whenever the traffic and safety engineer designates any street or portion thereof as a through street, any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the traffic and safety engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows: 
(1)  A stop sign shall be placed on each and every street intersecting a designated through street or portion thereof, at designated entrances to other intersections where a stop sign is required, and at any designated railroad crossing; provided, however, that stop signs shall not be erected or maintained at any entrance to an intersection when such is controlled by an official traffic-control signal. Every sign shall conform with, and shall be placed as provided in, the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 513B §3, 1987: Ord. 344B §7, 1978)  
10.28.020 - Stop upon emerging from alley, driveway or building. 
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway. 
(Ord. 344B §7.1, 1978)  
10.28.030 - Yield right-of-way signs. 
When deemed necessary for the orderly and safe movement of traffic by the traffic and safety engineer, he may erect a yield right-of-way sign on any one of the approaches to an intersection of streets or highways which are not through highways. 
(Ord. 344B §7.2, 1978)  
CHAPTER 10.32 - MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES 
 
10.32.010 - Driving through funeral procession or parade. 
No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or a parade, provided that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. All vehicles and traffic on any street over which a funeral procession or parade passes shall be subject to the orders of the police department or other authorized traffic control authority. 
(Ord. 344B §8, 1978)  
10.32.020 - Clinging to moving vehicle. 
No person shall attach himself with his hands, or catch on or hold onto with his hands or by other means, to any moving vehicle or train for the purpose of receiving motive power therefrom. 
(Ord. 344B §8.1, 1978)  
10.32.030 - Commercial vehicles on driveways or sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on or across any sidewalk, or on or across any private driveway without the consent of the owner or occupant thereof if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, "commercial vehicle" means a vehicle having a gross vehicular weight in excess of 6,300 pounds. 
(Ord. 344B §8.2, 1978)  
10.32.040 - New pavement or markings. 
No person shall ride or drive any vehicle or animal over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier sign, cone marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive across such pavement or marking, or when any such device is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. 
(Ord. 344B §8.4, 1978)  
10.32.050 - Barrier or sign erection, obedience, interference. 
No person shall erect or place any barrier or traffic sign on any street unless of a type approved by the traffic and safety engineer. No person shall disobey, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street. 
(Ord. 344B §8.5, 1978)  
10.32.060 - Obstructing intersection or crosswalk. 
No operator of any vehicle shall enter any intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Ord. 344B §8.6, 1978)  
10.32.070 - Limited-access roadway compliance. 
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited-access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established. 
(Ord. 344B §8.7, 1978)  
CHAPTER 10.36 - PEDESTRIAN REGULATIONS 
 
10.36.010 - Crosswalks—Establishment. 
(a)  The traffic and safety engineer shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, as follows: 
Crosswalks shall be established at all intersections within the central traffic district and at such intersections outside such district, and at other places within or outside the district where the traffic and safety engineer determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway, subject to the limitation contained in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than 400 feet in length and any such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable to mid-block. 
(Ord. 344B §9, 1978)  
10.36.020 - Crosswalks—Use—Crossing where no crosswalk exists. 
(a)  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk, when such crosswalk is provided. 
(b)  If crosswalks are not provided, no pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a route at right angles to the curb. 
(Ord. 344B §9.1, 1978)  
10.36.030 - Standing or walking in roadway. 
No person shall stand or walk in any roadway other than a safety zone, in a crosswalk, upon a sidewalk or walkway if such action interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. This section shall not apply to any public officer or employee or employee of a public utility when necessarily upon a street in the line of duty. 
(Ord. 344B §9.2, 1978)  
CHAPTER 10.40 - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING GENERALLY 
 
10.40.010 - Applicability of regulations—More restrictive provisions. 
(a)  The provisions of this division prohibiting or regulating the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified in this division or by resolution, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
(b)  The provisions of this division or any resolution adopted pursuant to this division imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or ordinances of the city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Ord. 344B §10, 1978)  
10.40.020 - Signposting or curb marking authority. 
The traffic and safety engineer is authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no-stopping zones, no-parking areas and restricted-parking areas, as defined and described in this division or established by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 344B §10.1, 1978)  
10.40.030 - No-parking areas. 
No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park or leave standing such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or other authorized officer, or traffic sign or signal: 
(1)  Within any parkway, median or divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings; 
(2)  In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property; 
(3)  On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities, or where the use of the street or highway or any other portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of this street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice of such no-parking restriction are erected or placed at least 24 hours prior to the effective time of such no parking; 
(4)  At any place within 20 feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the midblock end of a safety zone, when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
(5)  At any place within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection (in the central traffic district) or in any business district when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface, provided that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop; 
(6)  Within 20 feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign or official electric flashing device. 
(Ord. 344B §10.3, 1978)  
10.40.040 - Parking beyond 72 hours. 
No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of 72 hours. 
(Ord. 412B §1(13)(part), 1982; Ord. 344B §10.4, 1978)  
10.40.045 - Parking in city-owned parking facilities. 
No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon a city-owned parking lot for more than a consecutive period of 24 hours. 
(Ord. 610B §1, 1994)  
10.40.050 - Human habitation prohibited. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on any street for purposes of human habitation. 
(Ord. 344B §10.5, 1978)  
10.40.060 - Parking for sale or repair. 
No person shall park any vehicle upon any street for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Advertising or displaying it for sale; 
(2)  Greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Ord. 344B §10.6, 1978)  
10.40.070 - Washing or polishing on street for pay. 
No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polished or caused to be polished any vehicle or part thereof upon any public street in this city, when a charge is made for such service. 
(Ord. 344B §10.7, 1978)  
10.40.080 - Parking adjacent to schools. 
(a)  The traffic and safety engineer is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)  When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Ord. 344B §10.8, 1978)  
10.40.090 - Parking on narrow streets. 
(a)  The traffic and safety engineer is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of the street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(b)  When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized in subsection (a) of this section, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such signs or markings. 
(Ord. 344B §10.9, 1978)  
10.40.100 - Parking on grades. 
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway when upon any grade exceeding three percent (within any business or residential district) without blocking the wheels of the vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. 
(Ord. 344B §10.10, 1978)  
10.40.110 - Peddler, vendor, cartage vehicles. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall stand or park any vehicle, wagon or pushcart from which goods, wares, merchandise, fruits or vegetables are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for sale or bartered or exchanged, or any lunch wagon or eating car, or vehicle, on any portion of any street in this city except that such vehicles, wagons or pushcarts may stand or park only at the request of a bona fide purchaser for a period of time not to exceed ten minutes at any one place. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons delivering such articles upon order of, or by agreement with, a customer from a store or other fixed place of business or distribution. 
(b)  No person shall park or stand on any street any vehicle, lunch wagon or pushcart from which food, goods, wares or any merchandise is sold or offered for sale without first obtaining written permission to do so from the city, which shall designate the specific location or locations where such vehicle may stand. 
(c)  No person shall park or stand any vehicle or wagon used or intended to be used in the transportation of property for hire on any street while awaiting patronage for such vehicle or wagon without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the city which shall designate the specific location where such vehicle may stand. 
(d)  Whenever any permit is granted under the provisions of this section and a particular location to park or stand is specified in the permit, no person shall park or stand any vehicle, wagon or pushcart on any location other than as designated in such permit. In the event that the holder of any such permit is convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the provisions of this section, such permit shall be forthwith revoked by the city upon the date of such conviction and no permit shall thereafter be issued to such person until six months have elapsed from the date of such revocation. 
(Ord. 344B §10.11, 1978)  
10.40.120 - Anticongestion restrictions. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the limitations of Section 10.40.020, whenever the traffic and safety engineer determines that traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for other reasons, he has the power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the traffic and safety engineer directs during such time temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the traffic and safety engineer shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter. 
(b)  When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. 
(Ord. 344B §10.12, 1978)  
10.40.130 - Parking or standing on city property. 
(a)  Whenever the traffic and safety engineer determines that the orderly and efficient conduct of the city's business requires parking or standing of vehicles on city property to be prohibited, limited or restricted, the traffic and safety engineer has the power and authority to order signs to be erected or posted indicating the parking of vehicles is thus prohibited, limited or restricted. 
(b)  When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the divisions or provisions of such signs. 
(Ord. 513B §4, 1987: Ord. 344B §10.13, 1978)  
10.40.140 - Parking on private property. 
No person shall park a vehicle in a private driveway or on private property without the direct or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such driveway or property. 
(Ord. 344B §10.14, 1978)  
10.40.150 - One-way street parking. 
(a)  A vehicle may be stopped or parked within 18 inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing. 
(b)  In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking. 
(c)  The traffic and safety engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways and shall erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(d)  The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this section shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case such vehicle may be backed upon to the curb, provided that such vehicle does not extend beyond the centerline of the street and does not block traffic thereby. 
(Ord. 344B §10.15, 1978)  
10.40.160 - Angle parking. 
(a)  The traffic and safety engineer shall place signs or pavement markings indicating angle-parking on all streets or portions of streets the traffic and safety engineer establishes as angle-parking zones. It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park a vehicle in angle-parking zones except: 
(1)  At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of the allotted space; 
(2)  With the front wheel nearest the curb within six inches of the curb. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply when such vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight or goods, in which event the provisions applicable in Section 10.52.020 apply. 
(Ord. 513B §5, 1987: Ord. 344B §10.16, 1978)  
10.40.170 - Parking space markings. 
(a)  The traffic and safety engineer is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where authorized parking is permitted. 
(b)  When such parking space markings as are contemplated in subsection (a) of this section are placed on the highway, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space. 
(Ord. 344B §10.17, 1978)  
10.40.180 - No-stopping zones. 
(a)  The traffic and safety engineer shall designate no-stopping zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that stopping of vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and days when stopping is prohibited. 
(b)  During the hours and on the days designated on the signs contemplated by subsection (a) of this section, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop the vehicle on any of the streets or parts of streets established by the safety engineer as no-stopping zones. 
(Ord. 513B §6, 1987: Ord. 344B §11.3, 1978)  
10.40.190 - Alleys. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any alley for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or material. 
(Ord. 344B §12.3, 1978)  
10.40.200 - Parking for physically handicapped persons—On-street parking. 
(a)  No person shall park or stop in an on-street parking space designated for the exclusive use of vehicles which display a distinguishing license plate or placard for disabled persons or disabled veteran issued pursuant to Section 22511.5 of the Vehicle Code, when such parking space is designated by blue paint on the curb or edge of the paved portion of the street adjacent to the space unless such person displays the distinguishing license plate or placard. Such blue curb parking spaces shall be for the exclusive use of such physically handicapped persons 24 hours a day, including Sundays and holidays. 
(b)  The traffic and safety engineer is authorized to designate such blue curb parking spaces at locations which he may choose in his discretion, according to his determination that the public interest warrants the designation of such spaces because of the need of physically handicapped and disabled persons to be able to find parking spaces in proximity to places of public and private business. 
(c)  The traffic and safety engineer shall designate such blue curb parking spaces by causing the curb to be painted. In addition, the engineer shall have erected the standard handicapped parking only sign, consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant, in white on a blue background. 
(Ord. 611B §1, 1994)  
10.40.210 - Parking for physically handicapped persons—Off-street parking. 
(a)  No person shall park or stand a vehicle in an off-street parking facility, whether public or private which contains parking stalls or spaces for the exclusive use of vehicles which display a distinguishing license plate or a placard issued pursuant to Section 22511.5 of the Vehicle Code, or of disabled veterans as specified in Section 9105 of the Vehicle Code, unless the vehicle either displays such a distinguishing license plate or a placard issued for disabled person or disabled veteran pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 22511.5. For off-street parking facilities owned or controlled by the city, the engineer may designate such spaces by: (1) posting immediately adjacent thereto, and visible from each stall or space, a standard sign consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with the occupant in white against a blue background, and (2) outlining or painting the stall or space in blue and outlining on the ground in the stall or space in white, or suitable contrasting color, a profile view depicting a wheelchair with occupant. Any person in lawful possession of an off-street parking facility that is privately owned may designate such stalls or spaces by posting the same type of sign and outlining or painting the stall or space in the same manner. 
(b)  The owner or person in lawful possession of an off-street parking facility, after notifying the police department, and any police officer in the case of an off-street parking facility or owned or controlled by the city, may cause the removal from such stall or space of any vehicle not displaying one of the distinguishing placards or license plates specified in this section, if there is posted immediately adjacent to and visible from such stall or space, or if there is posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance to the off-street parking facility, a sign not less than 17 inches by 22 inches in size, with lettering not less than one inch in height, which clearly and conspicuously states the following: 
Unauthorized vehicles not displaying distinguishing placards or license plates issued for physically handicapped persons will be towed away at owner's expense. Towed vehicle may be reclaimed by telephoning (916) 645-4040. 
(Ord. 611B §2, 1994)  
CHAPTER 10.44 - PARKING—TIME LIMITS OR RESTRICTIONS—CURB MARKINGS 
 
10.44.010 - Compliance generally. 
When authorized signs or curb markings are in place giving notice of the limitations imposed by this chapter or Section 10.40.180, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in violation thereof. 
(Ord. 344B §11, 1978)  
10.44.020 - Twenty-minute parking. 
Green curb marking means no standing or parking for a period of time longer than 20 minutes at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays. 
(Ord. 344B §11.1, 1978)  
10.44.030 - Limited-time parking. 
When authorized signs or curb markings are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park any vehicle for a period of time longer than the time so indicated. 
(Ord. 570B §1, 1992: Ord. 344B §11.2, 1978)  
10.44.040 - Curb marking color code. 
The traffic and safety engineer is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this division, to place and, when required in this division, shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and the curb markings shall have the meanings set forth in this section: 
(1)  Red means no stopping, standing or parking any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone. 
(2)  Yellow means no stopping, standing or parking at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials, providing that the loading or unloading of passengers does not consume more than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than 20 minutes. 
(3)  White means no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox, for a period not to exceed three minutes, between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays, except as follows: 
a.  When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox, the restrictions shall apply at all times. 
b.  When such zone is in front of a theater, the restrictions shall apply at all times except when the theater is closed. 
(4)  Green means no standing or parking for a period of time longer than 20 minutes at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays. 
(5)  Blue means disabled person or disabled veteran parking only. 
(Ord. 611B §3, 1994; Ord. 513B §7, 1987: Ord. 344B §12.1, 1978)  
CHAPTER 10.46 - IMPROPER STORAGE ON CITY STREETS 
 
10.46.010 - Improper storage on city streets. 
No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vacant or occupied vehicle, trailer coach, recreational vehicle, trailer, camper, mobile home or boat shall store such upon any city right-of-way or alley. "Store" for the purpose of this section shall be any of the following: 
(1)  When a motorized or non-motorized vehicle is parked or left standing for 72 or more consecutive hours. 
(2)  When the motorized vehicle is parked at or about the same location, but has not moved an appreciable distance and used for purposes other than to avoid a violation of this section during a 72-hour period. If during that 72-hour period the odometer, if any, has not changed more than one mile, it shall be presumed the vehicle has not been moved an appreciable distance and was used only to avoid violating this section. This presumption may be overcome by proof of the vehicle owner or operator that said vehicle has been used for purposes other than to violate this section. 
(3)  When a non-motorized vehicle, trailer or camper is unhooked or unattached to a motorized vehicle for any period of time unless: 
a.  Emergency repairs are being made; or 
b.  The unhooked or unattached non-motorized vehicle, trailer or camper is otherwise lawfully parked between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. and is being used in connection with a delivery to, a requested pick-up from, or work performed at the adjacent property, and said trailer or camper is braked or blocked and does not exceed the manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more. 
(Ord. 730B §3, 2003)  
CHAPTER 10.48 - PARKING METERS 
 
10.48.010 - Parking meter zones. 
The city council may by resolution establish parking meter zones upon those streets or parts of streets or upon those municipal parking lots where it is determined that the installation of parking meters is required to regulate parking. Within such zones, the parking of vehicles shall be regulated by parking meters between the hours specified by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 344B §14, 1978)  
CHAPTER 10.52 - LOADING AND BUS ZONES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— For provisions describing curb markings, see Ch. 10.44 of this code. 
 
10.52.010 - Loading zone establishment. 
(a)  The traffic and safety engineer is authorized to determine and to mark loading zones and passenger-loading zones as follows: 
(1)  At any place in the central traffic district or any business district; 
(2)  Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly. 
(b)  In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes. 
(c)  Material-loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon all curbs within such zones. 
(d)  Passenger-loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon all curbs in such zones. 
(e)  When authorized signs or curb markings are in place giving notice of the limitations or restrictions imposed by this chapter and Chapters 10.40 and 10.44, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in violation thereof. 
(Ord. 513B §8, 1987: Ord. 344B §12, 1978)  
10.52.020 - Effect of permission to load or unload. 
(a)  Permission granted in this chapter to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than 20 minutes. 
(b)  The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pick-up of express and parcel post packages and United States Mail. 
(c)  Permission granted in this chapter to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than three minutes. 
(Ord. 344B §12.2, 1978)  
10.52.030 - Bus zones. 
The traffic and safety engineer is authorized to establish bus zones opposite the curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof. 
(Ord. 344B §12.4. 1978)  
CHAPTER 10.56 - SPEED REGULATION 
 
10.56.010 - Speed limit establishment. 
As described by Sections 22357 and 22358 of the California Vehicle Code, the city council hereby determines that based upon engineering and traffic surveys, the prima facie speed limits set forth in this section facilitate the orderly movement of traffic, and are reasonable, safe, except when passing a school building or school grounds, or senior center. The city council hereby declares the following prima facie speed limits: 
Street 	Segment 	Posted Speed Limit 
(MPH) 
9th Street 	O Street 	H Street 	35 
Aviation Boulevard 	Nicolaus Road 	Venture Drive 	45 
Brentford Circle 	Caledon Circle/Chesley Lane 	Caledon Circle 	35 
Caledon Circle 	Ferrari Ranch Road 	Ferrari Ranch Road 	35 
Del Web Boulevard 	E. Joiner Parkway 	E. Joiner Parkway 	35 
East Avenue 	McBean Park Drive 	E. 12 th Street 	30 
Eastridge Drive 	Twelve Bridges Drive 	Bradborne Drive 	30 
Eastridge Drive 	Bradborne Drive 	Omega Drive 	35 
Ferrari Ranch Road 	State Route 65 	Lincoln Boulevard 	35 
Ferrari Ranch Road 	Lincoln Boulevard 	McBean Park Drive 	35 
Harrison Avenue 	E. 9 th Street 	City Limits 	25 
Ingram Parkway 	Ferrari Ranch Road 	Del Web Boulevard 	35 
Industrial/Lincoln Blvd. 	Twelve Bridges Drive 	Sterling Parkway 	45 
Joiner Parkway 	Lakeside Drive 	Nicolaus Road 	35 
Joiner Parkway 	Nicolaus Road 	Moore Road 	40 
Joiner Parkway 	Moore Road 	Sterling Parkway 	45 
Lakeside Drive 	Nicolaus Road 	Joiner Parkway 	35 
Lakeside Drive 	Venture Drive 	Dulles Way 	35 
Lincoln Boulevard 	Sterling Parkway 	Ferrari Ranch Road 	50 
Lincoln Boulevard 	Ferrari Ranch Road 	1 st Street 	40 
Lincoln Boulevard 	1 st Street 	7 th Street 	25 
Lincoln Boulevard 	7 th Street 	City Limits 	55 
McBean Park Drive 	Lincoln Boulevard 	Ferrari Ranch Road 	35 
McCourtney Road 	Virginiatown Road 	City Limits 	40 
Nicolaus Road 	City Limits 	Joiner Parkway 	45 
Nicolaus Road 	Joiner Parkway 	O Street 	40 
Spring Valley Parkway 	Del Web Boulevard 	Stoneridge Boulevard 	35 
Sorrento Parkway 	Moore Road 	Portello Way 	35 
Sorrento Parkway 	Portello Way 	Ferrari Ranch Road 	35 
Sterling Parkway 	Joiner Parkway 	Lincoln Boulevard 	35 
Stoneridge Boulevard 	Twelve Bridges Drive 	Del Web Boulevard 	35 
Sun City Boulevard 	Ferrari Ranch Road 	Del Web Boulevard 	35 
Twelve Bridges Drive 	Industrial Avenue 	Eastridge Drive 	45 
Twelve Bridges Drive 	Eastridge Drive 	Stoneridge Boulevard 	50 
Twelve Bridges Drive 	Stoneridge Boulevard 	Sierra College Blvd. 	50 
Virginiatown Road 	McCourtney Road 	Hungry Hollow Road 	45 
 
(Ord. No. 906B , § 1, 8-25-2015; Ord. No. 845B, § 1, 2-23-2010; Ord. No. 842B, § 1, 11-10-2009; Ord. 513B §9, 1987: Ord. 344B §16, 1978; Ord. No. 924B , § 1, 10-25-2016; Ord. No. 965B, § 1, 6-12-2018 )  
10.56.020 - Posting speed limits. 
The traffic and safety engineer is directed to have signs erected upon the street at appropriate locations giving notice of the limits established pursuant to Section 10.56.010. 
(Ord. 344B §16.1, 1978)  
10.56.030 - Regulation by traffic signals. 
The traffic and safety engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the districts or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. 344B § 16.2, 1978)  
CHAPTER 10.60 - COMMERCIAL VEHICLES 
 
10.60.010 - Advertising vehicles with sound equipment. 
No person shall operate or drive any vehicle used principally for advertising purposes or any advertising vehicle equipped with a sound-amplifying or loud-speaking device upon any street or alley at any time without written permission from the city. 
(Ord. 344B § 13.1, 1978)  
10.60.020 - Truck routes, weight and length. 
(a)  Weight. It is unlawful for the operator of any moving van, dump truck, tank truck used or designed for the purpose of transporting petroleum products, or any vehicle or combination of vehicles designed or used for the transportation of commodities or materials, which vehicle exceeds a maximum gross weight rating of ten thousand pounds, to operate the vehicle upon any street other than upon and over a truck route for any purpose other than to make a pickup or delivery, or to service or secure repairs to the vehicle. In traveling to or from the point of delivery, pickup, service to or repair of the vehicle, the operator of the vehicle shall drive as far as possible upon and over a truck route. 
(b)  Length. It is unlawful for the operator of any combination of vehicles coupled together, to operate the combination of vehicles upon any CITY street other than upon and over a terminal access route, when the combination of vehicles including attachments, exceeds a total length of sixty-five feet, or a combination of vehicles coupled together, including attachments, which consists of a truck trailer, semitrailer, and a semitrailer or trailer, exceeds a total length of seventy-five feet, if the length of neither the semitrailers nor the trailer in the combination of vehicles exceeds twenty-eight feet six inches. 
The load upon any combination of vehicles shall be measured from the front of the vehicle or load to the rear extremity of the last vehicle or load. 
(c)  Exemptions. Nothing herein shall be construed to conflict with the exceptions listed in the California Vehicle Code Sections 35400—35414 nor prevent the driving and operating of fire apparatus upon any streets of the city nor shall this chapter, by its terms, prevent equipment owned by the city from being operated upon any of the streets of the city. Neither shall this chapter by its terms be construed to apply to the moving of houses, buildings or structures upon and over the streets of the city. The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission; or 
(2)  Any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility. 
(d)  Designation by Council. The council is authorized to determine and designate truck routes by resolution, which designation shall become effective when appropriate signs are in place giving notice of the designations to the public. 
(Ord. No. 896B , §§ 2, 3(10.60.025), 3-24-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 896B , § 2, adopted March 24, 2015, repealed § 10.60.020 in its entirety. Section 3 of same ordinance enacted a new § 10.60.025, which was redesignated as § 10.60.020 at the discretion of the editor, to read as set out herein. Former § 10.60.020 pertained to truck routes and derived from Ord. 513B § 10(part), adopted in 1987 and Ord. 344B § 13.2, adopted in 1978. Section of Ord. No. 896B.  
10.60.030 - Extralegal load permits and fees. 
(a)  Any vehicle with an "extralegal load," as the term is defined by California Vehicle Code Section 320.5, which cannot be reasonably reduced in size or weight so that it can be legally transported without a permit as provided by California Vehicle Code Section 35780, must obtain a transportation permit from the City of Lincoln. The permit may be issued to each vehicle either on an annual or single-trip basis. Permit holders shall obey any and all reporting requirements and restrictions adopted by the city. Annual transportation permits are limited to qualified companies whose business is to move commercial loads that would routinely exceed the maximum weight, height, width, or length restrictions in the California Vehicle Code. 
(b)  Fees for the transportation permit shall be set by resolution by the city council. Additional fees, for special city services necessitated by the permitted transport, shall be paid by the permit holder. Examples of special services include, but are not limited to, police inspection, police transport, tree trimming, overhead wire and fixture removal, and engineering services. Department heads shall determine the actual cost for each service provided. The fees shall be collected from the permit holder at the time the permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 896B , §§ 2, 3, 3-24-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 896B , §§ 2, 3, adopted March 24, 2015, repealed § 10.60.030 in its entirety and enacted a new § 10.60.030 to read as set out herein. Former § 10.60.030 pertained to prohibited on certain streets and derived from Ord. 513B § 10(part), adopted in 1987; and Ord. 344B § 13.3, adopted in 1978.  
10.60.040 - Parking restriction. 
(a)  All commercial vehicles or combination of commercial vehicles, as defined in Section 260 of the California Vehicle Code, with a gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand pounds or more, are prohibited from parking or standing on designated truck routes between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(b)  All commercial vehicles, or combination of commercial vehicles, as defined in Section 260 of the California Vehicle Code, with a gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand pounds or more, are hereby prohibited from parking or standing on any street in a residential zone, and are further prohibited from parking off-street in a residential zone. This section also applies to detached trailers. The parking restrictions in this section shall not apply to any commercial vehicle making pick ups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on the restricted streets or highways or while delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure upon the restricted streets or highways for which a building permit has previously been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 896B , §§ 2, 3, 3-24-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 896B , §§ 2, 3, adopted March 24, 2015, repealed § 10.60.040 in its entirety and enacted a new § 10.60.040 to read as set out herein. Former § 10.60.040 pertained to truck parking and derived from Ord. 344B § 13.4, adopted in 1978.  
10.60.050 - Regulatory signs. 
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instruction of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the traffic laws of the city unless otherwise directed by a person authorized to direct traffic, subject to the exceptions granted by the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls. 
(Ord. No. 896B , § 3, 3-24-2015)  
10.60.090 - Violation—Penalties. 
It is unlawful to violate any section of this chapter. Unless state law specifies a different and greater penalty, violations of this chapter shall be punishable as infractions and subject to the following fine schedule. All fines will be paid to the City of Lincoln, through the police department or other office as designated by the city council. 
  
Section 10.60.030 	First violation - $100.00 
	Second violation within one year - 200.00 
	Third violation within one year - 500.00 
	Plus: weight table fine as specified in Section 42030 of the CA Vehicle Code. 
All other provisions 	First violation - 100.00 of this chapter 
	Second violation within one year - 200.00 
	Third violation within one year - 500.00 
 
(Ord. No. 896B , § 3, 3-24-2015)  
CHAPTER 10.64 - TRAINS 
 
10.64.010 - Crossing gates or barriers. 
No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Ord. 344B § 15, 1978)  
10.64.020 - Trains not to block crossings. 
No person shall cause or permit any railway train or railway car or similar vehicle on rails to stop or stand or to be operated in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for the purposes of travel for a period of time longer than ten minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to railway trains, cars or similar vehicles on rails while blocking or obstructing a crossing because of an accident which requires the operator of the train, car or similar vehicle on rails to stop at or near the scene of the accident. 
(Ord. 344B § 15.1, 1978)  
CHAPTER 10.66 - TAXICABS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 865B, § 2, adopted May 22, 2012, amended Ch. 10.66 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 10.66, §§ 10.66.010—10.66.180, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 818B, § 2(part), adopted in 2007; Ord. No. 860-B, § 1, adopted Feb. 28, 2012. 
 
10.66.010 - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
"Chief of police" means the chief of police of the city of Lincoln Police Department or his/her designee. 
"Driver" means every individual who operates any taxicab. A driver can include an employee of an employer, who independently owns the taxicab and operates under the auspices of an employer, or has independently contracted with an employer to operate the taxicab pursuant to a lease, license or any other form of agreement. 
"Employee" shall include self-employment as an independent driver. 
"Taxicab" means every motor propelled vehicle operated solely or mainly for the transportation of passengers for hire within the boundaries of the city, irrespective of whether the operation extends beyond the boundaries of the city. In considering whether a taxicab operates within the city boundaries, the operator's advertising in and for service within the city, the fare's point of origin in the city, and attempts to actively seek business in the city will be considered presumptive of operating a taxicab within the city of Lincoln. Taxicabs shall not include shuttles operated by a hotel or motel which are offered exclusively to guests of that hotel for no additional compensation. 
"Taxicab stand" means a public place which has been designated by the public services director or his/her designee as reserved exclusively for the use of taxicabs. 
"Taximeter" means a meter instrument or device attached to a taxicab which mechanically measures, calculates and registers, by means of figures, the fare, the distance traveled and the waiting time upon which the fare is based, in dollars and cents. 
(Ord. No. 865B, § 2, 5-22-2012)  
10.66.020 - Taxicab license required, exclusions, violations, conditions. 
(a)  License Required. No person, business, firm, partnership, association or corporation shall operate any taxicab on the public streets of the city of Lincoln without first obtaining a taxicab license from the chief of police. Each taxicab license shall be valid for one year, unless suspended or revoked, and must thereafter be renewed annually 
(b)  Exclusions for Taxicabs Licensed in Other Jurisdictions. This chapter shall not apply to any taxicabs for hire duly licensed by any city, county, or other public entity which may enter the city of Lincoln for the purpose of delivering passengers who have hired said taxicab within a jurisdiction in which said taxicab is licensed to operate, provided, however, that no such taxicab shall accept or be hired by any passenger while in the city of Lincoln. 
(c)  Exclusions for Hotel/Motel Shuttles. This chapter shall not apply to shuttles operated by a hotel or motel which offers transportation exclusively to guests of said establishment for no additional compensation. 
(d)  Violations. Any person, business, firm, partnership, association or corporation operating a taxicab without a taxicab license may be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of $250.00 for an initial violation. Each violation thereafter within the same year may be subject to a fine of $500.00. Such fines are not exclusive of any other actions the city may take to prevent further violations of any of the sections of this chapter. 
(e)  Conditions. 
(1)  Employment, or an offer of employment, as a taxicab driver within the city of Lincoln shall be a condition of issuance of the taxicab license. 
(2)  The most recent proof of certification of testing for controlled substances and alcohol occurring within the previous six months shall be a condition of issuance and renewal of the taxicab license. 
(3)  The taxicab license shall become void upon termination of employment. 
(4)  The taxicab license shall state the name of the employer. 
(5)  The employer shall, within five business days, notify the police chief upon termination of employment of a taxicab driver. 
(6)  The driver shall, within 15 calendar days, return the taxicab license to the police chief upon termination of employment. 
(Ord. No. 865B, § 2, 5-22-2012)  
10.66.030 - No transferability. 
No taxicab license issued under this chapter shall be assigned to, or used by, any person or vehicle other than the person or vehicle named in such license. 
(Ord. No. 865B, § 2, 5-22-2012)  
10.66.040 - Testing for controlled substances and alcohol. 
A driver shall test negative for controlled substances and alcohol as required by applicable state statutes as a condition of issuance and renewal of the taxicab license. 
(Ord. No. 865B, § 2, 5-22-2012)  
10.66.050 - Qualifications for a license. 
Each applicant for a license to operate a taxicab shall possess the following qualifications: 
(1)  Be 21 years of age or older; 
(2)  Have good eyesight and be free from any debilitating illness or disease which would affect his or her ability to safely operate a taxicab, including freedom from addiction to the use of intoxicating liquors or narcotics; 
(3)  Be able to speak the English language; and 
(4)  Possess a valid California driver's license. 
(Ord. No. 865B, § 2, 5-22-2012)  
10.66.060 - Application—Information required. 
Each applicant for a license to operate a taxicab shall provide the following information on a form supplied by the chief of police: 
(1)  A copy of the proposed driver's California driver's license which reflects the driver's current information; 
(2)  Places of previous employment for the five years preceding the date of application; 
(3)  Whether or not applicant has been convicted of any felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(4)  A copy of the proposed Driver's fingerprints which may be taken at the city's police department; and 
(5)  Photographs of the proposed driver, as set forth in Section 10.66.080. 
The application shall be signed by the proposed driver under penalty of perjury and filed with the chief of police. The most recent proof of certification of testing for controlled substances and alcohol occurring within the previous six months shall also be submitted with the application. 
(Ord. No. 865B, § 2, 5-22-2012)  
10.66.070 - Applicant—Misrepresentation of facts prohibited. 
Any person knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of the city any material fact in applying for a taxicab license may be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 865B, § 2, 5-22-2012)  
10.66.080 - Applicant—Photographs required. 
Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall file two recent photographs of the proposed driver, of a size that may be easily attached to the taxicab license. One of such photographs shall be attached to the license when issued, and shall be carried at all times when driving a taxicab within the city. Such photograph shall be attached to the license so that it cannot be removed and another photograph substituted without detection. The other photograph shall be filed with the application. 
(Ord. No. 865B, § 2, 5-22-2012)  
10.66.090 - Display of license and photograph. 
The taxicab license and driver's photograph shall be posted in full view of the passenger at all times while said driver is operating the taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 865B, § 2, 5-22-2012)  
10.66.100 - License fee. 
The applicant shall submit a non-refundable fee of $50.00 per year for a taxicab driver's license, which sum shall be paid to the city's police department, and used for covering the costs of processing the application. Such fee may be increased as necessary, by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 865B, § 2, 5-22-2012)  
10.66.110 - Grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation of license. 
(a)  The chief of police may refuse to issue a taxicab driver's license, or may suspend or revoke any such license, for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Information contained in the application, or supplemental information requested from the applicant, is found to be false in any material or detail; 
(2)  The applicant fails to complete the application form after having been notified of the additional information or documents required; 
(3)  The required application fee has not been paid; 
(4)  Upon the Driver being convicted of a violation of Sections 20001, 20002a, 20002b, 23103, 23152, 23153, 23220, or 23222 of the Vehicle Code of the state of California; 
(5)  Upon any two or more convictions within one year for any moving violation of the Vehicle Code of the state of California while driving such taxicab; 
(6)  Upon the driver being convicted of any crime involving physical violence or moral turpitude; 
(7)  If the driver is operating without the required insurance or vehicle registration; 
(8)  If the driver tests positive for controlled substances or alcohol; 
(9)  If the driver violates or fails to comply with the terms and conditions of the taxicab license; 
(10)  Upon violation of any other provision of this chapter or any local or state law, statute, rule, or regulation relating to his or her licensed activity. 
(b)  The chief of police shall render a decision to issue or deny a request for a license within 30 days of the filing of the completed application and payment of the application fee. 
(c)  Prior to suspending or revoking a taxicab license for violation of any provision of this chapter, the chief of police shall conduct a hearing, if the driver so requests in writing and pays the appropriate filing fee as set forth by resolution of the city council. If the chief of police suspends or revokes a taxicab license after a hearing, the driver may, by written notice to the city clerk and payment of the filing fee, within ten calendar days of the date of mailing the chief of police's suspension or revocation order, appeal the suspension or revocation to the city council. The decision of the city council shall be final. A driver whose taxicab license has been revoked shall not be qualified or permitted to apply for a new license until one year after the date of the revocation. 
(Ord. No. 865B, § 2, 5-22-2012)  
10.66.120 - Trade name to be marked on taxicab; top lights. 
There shall be displayed on both exterior sides of a taxicab, in full view of prospective customers, the following: 
(1)  The business name and telephone number of the holder of the taxicab license, in letters not less than two inches in height and width; and 
(2)  A rate schedule in the following format: 
First Mile: 	(fee) * 
Add'l Miles: 	(fee/mi.) * 
*Subject to taximeter 	
 
Each letter and number in the first two lines of the above format shall be not less than one and one-half inches in height and width. The third line of the above format shall be in letters not less than three-quarters of an inch in height and width. In letters not less than one and one-half inches in height and width and adjacent to the schedule required above, any additional types of fees to be charged and the amount of such fees, may be stated. 
(Ord. No. 865B, § 2, 5-22-2012)  
10.66.130 - Permission required to pick up additional passengers. 
It is unlawful for a taxicab driver who has been hired by a passenger or group of passengers to pick up additional passengers without the express permission of the passenger or group of passengers who first hired the same. 
(Ord. No. 865B, § 2, 5-22-2012)  
10.66.140 - Public liability insurance. 
(a)  In order to insure the safety of the public, it is unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be operated any taxicab upon any street in the city unless there is in full force and effect a public liability insurance policy meeting the requirements of this section. A certificate of insurance evidencing such policy shall be on file with risk management. Failure to have such evidence of insurance on file shall render any license granted pursuant to this chapter void. 
(b)  The policy required by this section shall insure such person and property against loss or damage in the amount of $1,000,000.00, in a combined single limit policy from an insurer authorized to do business in the state of California. 
(c)  Such policy shall contain an endorsement that the insurance company issuing such policy will not allow it to be canceled for any purpose without first serving written notice within 30 days of such cancellation or modification upon the city. The service of such notice shall be by registered mail, addressed to risk management. 
(d)  A certificate on file with risk management evidencing such policy must be kept current and valid. Certificates of renewals or new policies issued after such license is granted shall be filed with risk management. No other documents shall be accepted as proof of insurance. It is unlawful to operate a taxicab without having current valid proof of public liability insurance on file with risk management. 
(e)  Proof of automotive insurance must be kept in the cab during operation of the vehicle. Proof of automotive insurance must be made available upon request by an officer or in the event of a traffic accident, be made available to the other parties involved in the accident. 
(Ord. No. 865B, § 2, 5-22-2012)  
10.66.150 - Taxicab stands—Authority to designate. 
The chief of police, under the advise of the public services director or his/her designee, is authorized to designate taxicab stands for the sole use and occupancy of such individuals or companies operating taxicabs in the city. The chief of police, in designating spaces for use as taxicab stands, shall be guided by the parking requirements of all vehicle operators, and shall not unduly restrict the parking facilities in the city in designating such stands. 
The public services director shall place signs at such stands reading "Taxi Stand, No Parking" when such parking spaces are so signed, it is unlawful to park any vehicle except a taxicab at such stands. 
(Ord. No. 865B, § 2, 5-22-2012)  
10.66.160 - Taximeters. 
No owner or driver of any taxicab operated in the city shall operate a taxicab without an equipped taximeter. The taximeter shall be kept and maintained to be accurate at all times. The charge for any service to any patron of a taxicab shall be calculated and indicated by such taximeter, which shall be placed in each taxicab so that the reading dial showing the amount to be charged shall be readily discernible by the passenger. The chief of police is authorized to investigate such taximeter and upon discovery of any inaccuracy, to remove from service any vehicle equipped with such taximeter until such taximeter is accurately adjusted and resealed in conformance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 865B, § 2, 5-22-2012)  
10.66.170 - Schedule of fares. 
The owner of every taxicab operating in the city shall file with his or her application for a license a schedule of fares to be charged for the transportation of passengers in vehicles operated by such owner. Such owner shall not change the fare without first filing such changed fares with the city clerk, at least 30 days prior to the effective date of such change. No person shall charge any other compensation for the use of such taxicab than that specified in the schedule of fares on file with the city clerk and at the time in effect. 
(Ord. No. 865B, § 2, 5-22-2012)  
10.66.180 - Vehicle inspection. 
(a)  Before a license is issued to a driver, the chief of police may require a vehicle safety inspection to ensure any vehicle used as a taxicab is in safe operating condition. At the discretion of the chief of police, the inspection may be completed by designated city staff or a licensed repair facility. Any cost for the safety inspection and demonstration of a certification that the taxicab was inspected shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(b)  Vehicle safety inspections will take place on an annual basis and are required for renewal of a license. 
(Ord. No. 865B, § 2, 5-22-2012)  
10.66.190 - Violations. 
Except as otherwise specified in this chapter, violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 865B, § 2, 5-22-2012)  
CHAPTER 10.68 - VIOLATIONS 
 
10.68.010 - Infractions—Misdemeanors. 
Any person violating any provision of this division is guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor as set forth in Division 17, Chapter 1, Article 1 (commencing with section 40000.1) of the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 344B § 17, 1978)  
10.68.020 - Penalty. 
Upon conviction of a violation of this division, a penalty shall be imposed as set forth in Division 18, Chapter 1, Article 1 (commencing with section 42000) of the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 344B § 17, 1978)  
DIVISION II. - ABANDONED AND NONMOTORIZED VEHICLES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— For provisions on pedestrians, see Ch. 10.36 of this code; for provisions governing trains, see Ch. 10.64. 
 
CHAPTER 10.72 - ABANDONED VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Prior ordinance history: Ords. 250B and 412B §§3, 4, health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof, on private or public property, except as expressly hereinafter permitted is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
 
10.72.010 - Finding—Nuisance declared. 
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city council makes the following findings and declarations: 
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private property is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the public. 
(Ord. 571B §1(part), 1992; Ord. No. 911B , § 10(Exh. C), 4-26-2016)  
10.72.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Department head" means the city official designated by resolution or ordinance to conduct hearings pursuant to this chapter. 
"Driveway" means a poured-in-place asphalt or concrete slab which covers less than 50 percent of the required front yard area and is connected to a public right-of-way by a curb cut or similar method. 
"Hearing officer" means the officer designated by the city manager pursuant to Section 1.20.070 to conduct hearings pursuant to this chapter. 
"Highway" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. "Highway" includes street or alley. 
"Inoperative vehicle" means any vehicle which cannot be legally operated on the street because of lack of current registration, missing parts, or which cannot be operated under its own power. 
"Owner of land" means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
"Owner of vehicle" means the last registered owner and legal owner of record. 
"Public street" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic. "Public street" includes alleys. 
"Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. 571B §1(part), 1992; Ord. No. 911B , § 10(Exh. C), 4-26-2016)  
10.72.030 - Exemptions. 
(a)  This chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or a licensed junk dealer or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise permitted by the city; or 
(2)  A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of a law other than Chapter 10, commencing with Section 22650, of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this chapter. 
(Ord. 571B §1(part), 1992)  
10.72.040 - Chapter not exclusive regulation. 
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state or any legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 571B §1(part), 1992)  
10.72.050 - Enforcement—Right of entry. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the director of community development. In the enforcement of this chapter the director and his or her agents and employees may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 571B §1(part), 1992)  
10.72.060 - Persons granted franchise or contract—Right of entry. 
When the city has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 571B §1(part), 1992)  
10.72.070 - Assessment of administrative costs. 
The city council shall from time to time determine and fix by resolution an amount to be assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual costs of removal of any vehicle or parts thereof) under this chapter. 
(Ord. 571B §1(part), 1992)  
10.72.080 - Abatement and removal authority. 
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, of private property or public property within the city, the department head shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. 571B §1(part), 1992)  
10.72.090 - Notice of intention to abate and remove. 
A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. 
The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms: 
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
(NAME AND ADDRESS OF OWNER OF LAND) 
As the owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned, pursuant to Lincoln Municipal Code Section 10.72.010 and following, has determined that the vehicle (or parts of the vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Section 10.72.010 and following: 
You are hereby notified to abate the nuisance by removing the vehicle or parts of the vehicle within ten days from the date of mailing of this notice. 
As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of the vehicle (or parts of the vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within ten days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a hearing before a hearing officer. If such a request is not received by the department head within the ten-day period, the department head shall have authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts of the vehicle without a hearing. If the city abates and removes the vehicle, the city may assess the city's costs of abatement and removal against the property owner, or, in the case of an abandoned vehicle, against the last registered owner of record. 
Notice mailed _____ 	_____
(Department Head) 
 
(Ord. 571B §1(part), 1992; Ord. No. 911B , § 10(Exh. C), 4-26-2016)  
10.72.100 - Appeals. 
Within ten days of the date of the notice of intention prescribed by Section 10.72.090 is mailed, the property owner and/or the vehicle owner may appeal the determination that a vehicle or part be abated. Such appeals shall be heard and determined as set forth in Chapter 1.20. 
If no request for hearing is received by the department head within the time prescribed by this section, the director shall cause the vehicle or part to be removed and disposed of in the manner authorized by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 911B , § 10(Exh. C), 4-26-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 911B , § 10(Exh. C), adopted April 26, 2016, amended § 10.72.100 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former § 10.72.100 pertained to hearing—general and derived from Ord. 571B §1(part), adopted in 1992.  
10.72.110—10.72.150 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 911B , § 10, adopted April 26, 2016, repealed §§ 10.72.110—10.72.150 in their entirety. Former §§ 10.72.110—10.72.150 pertained to: hearing—presence of owner not required when—abatement without hearing when; hearing—held before the hearing board—facts and testimony; hearing—imposing conditions—order; hearing—nonassessment of costs; hearing—notification of decision, respectively, and derived from Ord. 571B §1(part), adopted in 1992.  
10.72.160 - Removal—When. 
If no request for hearing is received by the department head within ten days after the mailing of the issuance of the notice of intention to abate and remove pursuant to Section 10.72.090, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable, unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle plates, pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 5004, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable. 
(Ord. 571B §1(part), 1992; Ord. No. 911B , § 10(Exh. C), 4-26-2016)  
10.72.170 - Removal—Notice to department of motor vehicles. 
Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the department of motor vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the department of motor vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. 
(Ord. 571B §1(part), 1992)  
10.72.180 - Removal—Costs—Assessment—Collection. 
If the city abates and removes the vehicle, the city may assess the administrative costs, including attorneys' fees, as a special assessment against the property owner by the method specified in Section 8.08.100. 
(Ord. 571B § 1(part), 1992; Ord. No. 911B , § 10(Exh. C), 4-26-2016)  
CHAPTER 10.76 - BICYCLES 
 
10.76.010 - Authority. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority conferred by section 21206 of the Vehicle Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 302B § 1, 1976)  
10.76.020 - Definitions. 
The definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter unless otherwise specified in this chapter: 
"Bicycle" means any device upon which a person may ride, which is propelled by human power through a system of belts, chains, or gears, and which has wheels at least 20 inches in diameter and a frame size of at least 14 inches. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city of Lincoln or any employee designated by him or her to administer this chapter. 
"Police department" and "police chief" mean, respectively, the Lincoln police department and the chief of police of the city of Lincoln. 
(Ord. 819B § 2, 2007: Ord. 302B § 2, 1976)  
10.76.030 - Riding or leaving on sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall ride a bicycle on any sidewalk within the city except where a sidewalk is designated as part of the city bikeway. This restriction does not prohibit a rider from dismounting and walking a bicycle on sidewalks with due consideration for the safety of pedestrians. 
(b)  No person shall leave a bicycle unattended on any portion of a sidewalk except in an approved bicycle rack. 
(Ord. 302B § 3, 1976)  
10.76.040 - Licensed. 
All residents are encouraged to take advantage of the city's bicycle registration program. This is a voluntary and not mandatory program whereby residents are strongly encouraged and not required to register their bicycles or any device upon which a person may ride, as defined in Section 10.76.020. The program includes no registration fees. 
(Ord. 819B § 3, 2007: Ord. 302B § 4, 1976)  
10.76.060 - License—Application. 
Application for a bicycle license shall be made upon a registration form provided by the city. The registration form shall contain the name and address of the owner of the bicycle; a description of the bicycle, including its serial number; the make, type and model of the bicycle; and such other information as may be required by the police chief to properly register and identify the bicycle to be licensed. 
(Ord. 819B § 4, 2007: Ord. 302B § 5, 1976)  
10.76.110 - License period. 
The license period shall be as specified for as long as the registered applicant owns the bicycle or other device upon which a person may ride, as defined in Section 10.76.020. 
(Ord. 819B § 5, 2007: Ord. 302B § 9, 1976)  
10.76.120 - License—Issuance by sellers. 
The city manager may, at his discretion, authorize the issuance of licenses by sellers of bicycles in conformity with the requirements of this chapter, and may adopt administrative regulations to implement this section. The police chief will provide to sellers copies of the license registration application to be distributed at time of sale. 
(Ord. 819B § 6, 2007: Ord. 302B § 10, 1976)  
10.76.130 - License—Issuance by city—Registration certificate. 
(a)  Upon satisfactory completion of the registration form, the city shall issue to the applicant a license (registration tag), which shall have corresponding numbers. The license shall be affixed to the frame of the bicycle beneath and to the rear of the seat. The police chief shall keep a record of the date of issuance of each license, to whom issued and the number of the license. The license shall bear a unique license number and shall be permanently assigned to the bicycle, so long as the owner remains the same. 
(b)  Renewal tags shall not be provided for any reason or under any circumstance. If a license is damaged or destroyed, a new registration tag shall be obtained from the police chief upon presentation of a new registration form having been completed at which time a new registration tag with new corresponding numbers will be assigned. 
(Ord. 819B § 7, 2007: Ord. 302B § 11, 1976)  
10.76.140 - License—Transfer. 
Any person who purchases or otherwise acquires possession of a bicycle which is licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may apply for the transfer of the license to his name. Such person shall present the current registration tag numbers for the bicycle and other proof of ownership as may be required by the police chief at the time application is made for transfer of the license. 
(Ord. 819B § 8, 2007: Ord. 302B § 16, 1976)  
10.76.150 - License—Change of address. 
Whenever the owner of a bicycle which is licensed pursuant to provisions of this chapter sells or otherwise disposes of the bicycle, he shall, within ten days, notify the police chief of such disposition. Whenever the owner of a bicycle which is licensed pursuant to provisions of this chapter changes his address, he shall, within ten days, notify the police chief of the old and new address. 
(Ord. 819B § 9, 2007: Ord. 302B § 15, 1976)  
10.76.160 - Disfigurement of license or frame numbers. 
No person shall willfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the number of any bicycle registration tag licensed under this chapter. 
(Ord. 819B § 10, 2007: Ord. 302B § 12, 1976)  
10.76.190 - Rental agencies. 
A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent in the city unless the bicycle is registered and a registration tag is attached to the bicycle, and the bicycle complies with the equipment requirements of the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 819B § 11, 2007: Ord. 302B § 17, 1976)  
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES  
CHAPTER 12.02 - EXCAVATIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS 
 
12.02.010 - Permit—Required. 
It is unlawful for any person to make or to cause or permit to be made any encroachment and/or excavation in or under the surface of any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public place for the installation, repair or removal of any tank, pipe, conduit, duct, or tunnel or for any other purposes without first obtaining from the superintendent of streets a written permit to make such encroachments and/or excavations and making a deposit or executing bond as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 469B §1(part), 1985)  
12.02.020 - Permit—Application. 
Application for encroachment permits shall be made on a form provided by the city. The application shall state the name and address of the applicant and shall state the location, type and purpose of the proposed excavation or encroachment. If requested by the superintendent of streets, the applicant shall provide a drawing and other information showing the location and extent of excavation. 
(Ord. 469B §1(part), 1985)  
12.02.030 - Permit—Fee. 
A fee in an amount set by resolution of the council shall be paid by the applicant at the time the application is filed with the city. The fee shall not be refundable. 
(Ord. 469B §1(part), 1985)  
12.02.040 - Permit—Deposit or bond. 
The applicant shall post with the superintendent of streets a cash deposit or a good and sufficient approved corporate surety bond in the amount of $1,000.00 to guarantee the faithful and proper performance of the work before any encroachment permit shall be issued; however, if the applicant can show evidence of financial ability satisfying the superintendent of streets, it will not be necessary for the applicant to post a bond. 
(Ord. 469B §1(part), 1985)  
12.02.050 - Permit—Major project surety and fee. 
If the proposed work is of a major project, then the fees and bond shall be in an amount determined by the superintendent of streets. A "major project" means the installation or replacement of any underground facility other than a service from an existing main to a single user. The superintendent of streets shall set the fee to cover the reasonable costs of the city incurred in processing the application and inspecting the work. The bond shall be in an amount to adequately guarantee the faithful and proper performance of the work. However, if the applicant can show evidence of financial ability satisfactory to the superintendent of streets, it will not be necessary for the applicant to post a bond. 
(Ord. 469B §1(part), 1985)  
12.02.060 - Permit—Insurance certificate. 
The applicant shall file with the city a certificate of insurance showing that the applicant has in effect public liability insurance for bodily injury in the amount of $100,000.00 for each person and $300,000.00 for each accident, and $20,000.00 for property damage before being issued a permit, except those persons, corporations, or companies that are permissively self-insured under the laws of the state. 
(Ord. 469B §1(part), 1985)  
12.02.070 - Permit—When secured. 
All required permits shall be secured at least two working days prior to the time the work under the permit is proposed to be commenced. 
(Ord. 469B §1(part), 1985)  
12.02.080 - Emergency excavations. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any person maintaining any pipe, conduit or duct in or under any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place by virtue of any law, ordinance or permit, from making such excavation and/or repair as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property when the necessity arises, provided that the person making such excavation and/or repair shall notify the superintendent of streets and shall make application for such work on the next working day following the excavation and/or repair. 
(Ord. 469B §1(part), 1985)  
12.02.090 - Permit—Transferability—Work start and completion. 
No permit shall be transferable. Every permit shall be void unless the proposed work is commenced within ten working days from the date of issuance of the permit and the work is completed within a reasonable time after commencement unless prior arrangements are made with the city. 
(Ord. 469B §1(part), 1985)  
12.02.100 - Permit—Issuance. 
Upon receiving a written application for an excavation permit or encroachment, the superintendent shall set forth all requirements, and shall approve or disapprove the application. The superintendent of streets may disapprove any application if the applicant has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter in connection with the permit being applied for or any permit previously issued, or if he finds that the excavation and/or encroachment will conflict with the city's use of the public street, alley, sidewalk or other public place or other encroachments already approved by the city. 
(Ord. 469B §1(part), 1985)  
12.02.110 - Permit—Revocation. 
The city may revoke any permit issued for noncompliance with any of the provisions of this chapter. Any permit revocation shall be issued by the superintendent of streets, shall be in writing, and shall set forth the reasons for the revocation. 
(Ord. 469B §1(part), 1985)  
12.02.120 - Permit—Appeal. 
Any person whose permit is refused or revoked pursuant to the provisions of Section 12.02.100 or 12.02.110 shall be entitled to appeal the determination of the superintendent of streets. The appeal shall be made within ten days of the date of the notice of refusal or revocation on a form provided by the city. The appeal shall be heard and determined by the city council within 45 days of the city's receipt of the appeal. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. 469B §1(part), 1985)  
12.02.130 - Scope of excavation—Notice and inspection—Hours. 
(a)  Excavations and encroachments shall be confined to the work described in the permits issued therefor. 
(b)  Each permittee shall notify the superintendent of streets and/or building inspector when excavation under the permit will be commenced, and such notice shall be given at least 24 hours prior to such commencement. All work under any permit shall be done and completed and inspected under the inspection of the superintendent of streets and/or building inspector and/or city engineer. 
(c)  Except in cases of emergency, no work shall be done at any other time than between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. from Monday through Friday unless prior arrangements have been made at the time the permit is issued or in the case of an emergency. 
(Ord. 469B §1(part), 1985)  
12.02.140 - Excavation restrictions—Restoration standards. 
All excavations and backfilling shall be done in the following manner: 
(1)  No excavation shall be made on any street in any way to constitute a traffic hazard, except as provided in Sections 12.02.150 and 12.02.160. 
(2)  All excavated material shall be removed from the public right-of-way and disposed of off the public right-of-way or as directed by the superintendent of streets. 
(3)  All excavation shall be filled with clean sand to within eight inches of the existing or established street surface elevation and shall be thoroughly flooded. 
(4)  After flooded sand has become firm and sufficiently dry, the ditch shall be filled with six inches of aggregate base rock plus three inches of asphaltic plan mix surfacing. 
(5)  All trenches shall be backfilled to meet city standards for compaction and all pavement and asphalt shall be restored. 
(6)  A minimum of 30 inches of cover shall be provided over all pipes and conduits unless prior approval has been given by the superintendent of streets. 
(7)  All material used as provided in this section shall conform to the applicable sections of the most recent issue of the State Division of Highways and Standard Specifications. 
(Ord. 469B §1(part), 1985)  
12.02.150 - Passage—Emergency facilities access. 
(a)  Permittee shall at all times maintain at least one safe crossing and unobstructed passage for vehicle traffic and pedestrians around any excavations. 
(b)  Free access must be provided to all fire hydrants and other public service structures and property that may be required for emergency purposes. 
(Ord. 469B §1(part), 1985)  
12.02.160 - Safety—Devices. 
Permittee shall provide and maintain during the performance of the work such barricades, warning directional signals, flares and other safety devices which are required by law or are deemed necessary for the safety and protection of the public. 
(Ord. 469B §1(part), 1985)  
12.02.170 - Safety—Legal compliance. 
Permittee shall obey and enforce all safety orders, rules, and recommendations of the Division of Industrial Safety of the State applicable to the work, and the permittee shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations, and ordinances. 
(Ord. 469B §1(part), 1985)  
12.02.180 - Blanket permits. 
The superintendent of streets may issue blanket permits for any utility to make excavations and/or encroachments for service connections, for the location of trouble in conduits or pipes, for making repairs thereto, or for emergency purposes. Blanket permits shall be issued on a yearly basis only, and will authorize excavation and/or encroachments only as stated in this section. Blanket permits shall not be issued for new installations or facilities. 
(Ord. 469B §1(part), 1985)  
12.02.190 - Liability of city. 
Neither the city nor any officer or employee of the city shall be held responsible for any damages caused by any excavations or encroachments made in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place by any person under the authority of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. The person acting pursuant to such permit shall be solely liable for any damage or loss occasioned by any act of neglect in respect to such excavation and/or encroachment. 
(Ord. 469B §1(part), 1985)  
12.02.200 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished according to the punishment prescribed for a misdemeanor in the general laws of this state. 
(Ord. 469B §1(part), 1985)  
12.02.210 - Nuisance. 
In addition to the violations and penalties set forth in Section 12.02.200, any violation of this chapter is a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 469B §1(part), 1985)  
CHAPTER 12.04 - STREET, SIDEWALK AND CURB CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— For provisions on driving over sidewalks, see Ch. 12.08 of this code. 
 
12.04.010 - Permit—Required. 
No person or other entity shall construct, install, repair or cause to be constructed, installed or repaired any street surfacing, sidewalk, curb, gutter or driveway without first obtaining a permit from the superintendent of public works. 
(Ord. 343B §2, 1978)  
12.04.020 - Permit—Application. 
An application for a permit shall be submitted to the superintendent of public works on a form prescribed by the city. The application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the location of the work proposed, the owner of the property in front of which the work is to be performed, and the purpose of the work. The application shall set forth the date of commencement and estimated completion date of the work, together with such other data as may reasonably be required by the superintendent of public works. 
(Ord. 343B §3, 1978)  
12.04.030 - Emergency work without permit. 
The superintendent of public works may authorize repairs to any existing sidewalk, curb, gutter, driveway or street in the event of an emergency or to correct a hazardous situation. 
(Ord. 343B §4, 1978)  
12.04.040 - Warning signs and barriers. 
(a)  Whenever the construction, installation or repair of streets, sidewalks, driveways, curbs or gutters requires the temporary occupancy of any portion of a public street, roadway or sidewalk, the permittee shall provide and maintain suitable warning signs, fences, barriers and lights as may be necessary to reasonably warn the public of any hazard and to prevent accidents. 
(b)  Whenever warning devices have not been provided as required in subsection (a) of this section or are inoperative and immediate action is necessary, the city administrator or his authorized representative may provide such warning devices as may be deemed reasonably necessary, and the cost thereof shall be paid by the permittee. 
(Ord. 343B §5, 1978)  
12.04.050 - Removal of material, debris and equipment. 
The superintendent of public works may order any materials, equipment or debris to be removed from any public right-of-way whenever it constitutes a dangerous condition, or within three days after completion and inspection of the work. In the event the materials, debris or equipment is not removed within the time prescribed, the superintendent of public works may cause it to be removed and charge the costs against the person, firm or corporation responsible for placing the materials, debris or equipment upon the street or roadway. 
(Ord. 343B §6, 1978)  
12.04.060 - Time for completion—Cleanup. 
All work must be completed within 30 days from the date of issuance of the permit unless an extension of time is granted or a longer period of time is expressly provided by the permit. All materials, equipment and debris shall be removed within three days after completion and inspection of the work and the public right-of-way shall be left in a clean and safe condition. 
(Ord. 343B §7, 1978)  
12.04.070 - Specifications. 
All work shall be done in accordance with improvement standards adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 343B §8, 1978)  
12.04.080 - City work excepted. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to work performed by or under the direction and supervision of city employees. 
(Ord. 343B §9, 1978)  
CHAPTER 12.08 - DRIVING OVER SIDEWALKS 
 
12.08.010 - Prohibited elsewhere than driveway without permit. 
No person shall operate a vehicle across or upon a sidewalk for the purpose of ingress and egress to property at other than a permanent driveway unless he has obtained a temporary driveway permit from the city engineer. 
(Ord. 410B §1, 1982)  
12.08.020 - Temporary driveway permit—Issuance standard. 
The city engineer shall issue a temporary driveway permit if he finds that the affected sidewalk area will be protected by wooden planks a minimum of two inches thick. 
(Ord. 410B §2, 1982)  
12.08.030 - Planking removal at night. 
The planking required by Section 12.08.020 shall not remain on the sidewalk between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. daily. 
(Ord. 410B §3, 1982)  
CHAPTER 12.12 - STREET FRONTAGE IMPROVEMENTS 
 
12.12.010 - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply in this chapter: 
(1)  "Block" and "driveway" have the meanings ascribed to them by section 5870 of the Streets and Highways Code. 
(2)  "Development" means: 
a.  The erection, construction, modification or reconstruction of any structure upon any parcel of land abutting a public street; 
b.  The subdivision of any land; provided, that the installation of frontage improvements shall be governed by the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and Title 17 of this code. 
(3)  "Frontage improvements" means sidewalks, curbs, gutters, driveways, storm and sanitary drainage facilities, parkway trees and pavement to the centerline of the street, except as otherwise set forth in this chapter. 
(4)  "Public street" means a public right-of-way for street purposes, which is open to the public for pedestrian and vehicular traffic, or which will become open to the public for street purposes upon development of the parcel or parcels of land abutting the right-of-way. 
(Ord. 341B §2, 1978)  
12.12.020 - Installation or agreement required. 
No permit or approval for the development of any parcel of land abutting a public street shall be issued or granted unless: 
(1)  Frontage improvements have been installed and approved in accordance with improvement standards adopted by resolution of the city council; or 
(2)  The owner of the parcel enters into a written agreement with the city for installation of such improvements and furnishes improvement security in an amount and in a form approved by the city engineer, to guarantee performance of the agreement. 
(Ord. 341B §3, 1978)  
12.12.030 - Parcels abutting more than one street. 
If a parcel abuts more than one public street, frontage improvements shall be required for each such public street. 
(Ord. 341B §4, 1978)  
12.12.040 - Pavement width and length minimums. 
Street pavement of an unpaved street shall not be constructed for less than the full width of the street, and shall not be constructed for less than a block unless such pavement constitutes an extension of an existing paved portion of the street. 
(Ord. 341B §5, 1978)  
12.12.050 - Delay by approval—Fee in lieu of installation. 
(a)  The city council may, if it finds that practical difficulties or extenuating circumstances exist, or that the requirements of Section 12.12.020 would impose an unreasonable burden on the property owner or permittee, delay the installation of such frontage improvements until such time as more than 50 percent of the total frontage of the block within which the parcel is located has been improved, or until such time as the owners of more than 60 percent of the frontage of the block within which the parcel is located have either agreed in writing to install the frontage improvements or have filed a petition with the city clerk requesting such improvements. 
(b)  As an alternative, the city council may require the permittee to pay, in lieu of installation of frontage improvements, a fee equivalent to the estimated costs of such improvements at the projected time of their installation, to be deposited in a special account for the construction of such improvements; provided, that such improvements must be constructed within a reasonable time thereafter. If the actual costs of the installation of the improvements is less than the amount of the fees paid, the balance shall be refunded to the permittees. 
(Ord. 341B §6, 1978)  
12.12.060 - Variances. 
The property owner or applicant for a permit to develop any parcel of land may apply to the city council for a variance from the provisions of this chapter. The city council may grant a variance only if it finds that practical difficulties or extenuating circumstances exist, that strict application of the ordinance would impose an unreasonable burden on the property owner or permittee, and that granting of the variance will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with limitations upon other properties in the vicinity. 
(Ord. 341B §7, 1978)  
CHAPTER 12.14 - CURB AND GUTTER INSTALLATION 
 
12.14.010 - Purpose of provisions. 
The city council finds and determines that: 
(1)  There are currently existing within the city residential, commercial, and industrial lots the frontages of which do not have curbs and gutters constructed thereon. 
(2)  The addition of curbs and gutters to residential, commercial and industrial lots will substantially aid the proper channelization of storm runoff, thus aiding in the removal of puddles and standing water which are breeding grounds for mosquitoes, improve road conditions on city streets, and enhance the appearance of said areas within the city. 
(3)  There is presently no mechanism for the uniform installation of curbs and gutters along the frontage of residential, commercial, and industrial lots within the city. 
(Ord. 523B §2(part), 1989)  
12.14.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following definitions: 
(1)  "Buyer" means any person who receives a present ownership interest in real property including any sale, exchange, lease with an option to purchase, or other transfer of an ownership interest in which a reassessment in property value occurs. 
(2)  "Certificate of compliance" means a form used to indicate compliance with this chapter. 
(3)  "City" means the city of Lincoln, California. 
(4)  "Commercial property" means any real property within the city which is zoned C (commercial district) or H-C (highway commercial district) as those districts are defined in Chapters 18.22 and 18.24, respectively, of Division III of Title 18 of the Lincoln Municipal Code. 
(5)  "Dwelling unit" means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
(6)  "Industrial property" means any real property within the city which is zoned L-I (light industrial district) or I (industrial district) as those districts are defined in Chapters 18.26 and 18.28, respectively, of Division III of Title 18 of this code. 
(7)  "Residential" means any property within the city which is zoned R-1 (single-family residential district), R-2 (duplex residential district), R-3 (multiple-residential district), or R-E (residential estate district), as those districts are defined in Chapters 18.12, 18.14, 18.16 and 18.18, respectively, of Division III of Title 18 of this code. 
(8)  "Superintendent" means the superintendent of public works of the city or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. 523B §2(part), 1989)  
12.14.030 - Exemption—Sale or exchange of residential dwelling units. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the sale, transfer, or exchange of any residential lot consummated prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; provided, however, that any residential dwelling unit sold, exchanged, or transferred subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be subject to the provisions herein. 
(Ord. 523B §2(part), 1989)  
12.14.040 - Exemption—Sale or exchange of commercial or industrial properties. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the sale, transfer, or exchange of commercial or industrial property consummated prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; provided, however, that any commercial or industrial property sold, transferred, or exchanged subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be subject to the provisions herein. Should the property not readily accommodate the installation of curbs and gutters without extraordinary cost to the owner due to unique drainage conditions, the city engineer is authorized to modify the curb and gutter type normally required per city standards. 
(Ord. 523B §2(part), 1989)  
12.14.050 - Exemption—Lack of existing asphalted surface. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any property frontage where the adjoining street does not possess an asphalt surface. 
(Ord. 523B §2(part), 1989)  
12.14.060 - General requirements. 
(a)  Any buyer of any lot the frontage of which does not have curb and gutter constructed thereon which is zoned or used for residential, commercial, or industrial purposes as defined in Section 12.14.020 above, shall within 180 days of consummation of the purchase, exchange, lease with an option to purchase, or other transfer of ownership interest, install or construct or cause to be installed or constructed curb and gutter along the entire frontage of the lot in accordance with the requirements and standards set forth in Chapter 12.04 of this code. Buyer's obligation shall be limited to the site preparation and construction of new curbs and gutters and shall not be obligated for the construction or relocation of drop inlets, sewer, water, gas, electric, or other utilities, or the reconstruction of existing curbs and gutters. 
(b)  As an alternative to the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, the following options are available to the buyer: 
(1)  The superintendent may require the buyer to pay, in lieu of the installation or construction of curb and gutter, a fee equivalent to the estimated cost of such installation or construction at the time of purchase, to be deposited in a special account for the installation or construction of the curb and gutter by the city, provided that the curb and gutter must be installed or constructed within a reasonable time thereafter. If the actual cost of the installation or construction of the curb and gutter is less than the amount of the fees paid, the balance shall be refunded to the buyer; or 
(2)  Provided that funds are budgeted and available, the buyer may elect to enter into a written loan agreement with the city for the purpose of financing the cost of the installation or construction of the curb and gutter. The principal amount of the loan shall be limited to the cost of installation or construction, as evidenced by actual invoices. The term of the loan shall not exceed 60 months and shall carry an annual interest rate which shall be the prevailing rate at the time the moneys are issued. The city shall bill the buyer monthly through its utility billing system. Payment shall be due and payable upon receipt of each billing. 
(3)  Any such loan obligation shall be a personal obligation of the buyer and shall be recorded as a lien against the subject property. Upon entering into such an agreement, the buyer shall remain responsible for the obligation until either fully paid or a future buyer of the subject property agrees to assume the responsibility and enters into a separate written agreement with the city to pay the remaining loan balance at the same monthly payment rate as the original agreement. 
(Ord. 523B §2(part), 1989)  
12.14.070 - Notice to the buyer or prospective buyer. 
(a)  Any real estate agent, real estate broker, real estate salesman, or title company, where representing a seller or buyer involved in the sale of residential, commercial, or industrial property as defined in Section 12.12.020 above, shall give written notice to the buyer or prospective buyer of the requirements of this chapter prior to consummation of the sale of the property. 
(b)  The superintendent shall give written notice to the buyer of the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  The failure of any person specified in subsections (a) and (b) of this section to give notice as required hereinabove shall not excuse or exempt the buyer of a residential, commercial or industrial property, subject to the provisions of this chapter, from complying with the requirements set forth herein. 
(Ord. 523B §2(part), 1989)  
12.14.080 - Certificate of compliance. 
Upon completion of the installation or construction of curb and gutter, the work shall be inspected by the superintendent and if it is found to be in compliance with the applicable construction standards, a certificate of compliance shall be issued by the superintendent. 
(Ord. 523B §2(part), 1989)  
12.14.090 - Responsibility of city. 
The city shall be responsible for providing and installing paving materials from the outer edge of the curb and gutter to three feet into the street section. 
(Ord. 523B §2(part), 1989)  
12.14.100 - Failure to construct—Nuisance. 
Any failure by a buyer to construct or cause the construction of curbs and gutters as required by this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement as provided in Chapter 8.08 of this code. 
(Ord. 523B §2(part), 1989)  
12.14.110 - Implementation. 
The city administrator may, from time to time, establish practices and procedures to implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 523B §2 (part), 1989)  
12.14.120 - Violations—Penalty. 
Any failure by a buyer to comply with the requirements of this chapter shall constitute an infraction subject to the provisions of Government Code Section 36900(b). 
(Ord. 523B §2(part), 1989)  
12.14.130 - No limitation on other permit requirements. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be read to limit the right of the city to impose curb and gutter requirements on discretionary permits and building permits issued by the city. 
(Ord. 523B §2(part), 1989)  
Chapter 12.16 - STREET TREES 
(RESERVED)  
CHAPTER 12.17 - SKATEBOARDS 
 
12.17.010 - Ramps or encroachments. 
It is unlawful for any person to make, or to cause or permit to be made, any ramp or other encroachment upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place without first obtaining from the superintendent of streets a written permit as provided in Sections 12.02.020 and 12.02.030. 
(Ord. 486B §1(part), 1987)  
12.17.020 - Public property. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to propel a skateboard on any public property. 
(Ord. 486B §1(part), 1987)  
12.17.030 - Ramps for the handicapped. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to propel a skateboard on any ramp whose purpose is for the use of handicapped persons. 
(Ord. 486B §1(part), 1987)  
12.17.040 - Safety equipment when riding skateboards at McBean Park. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a skateboard, or permit a minor for whom he or she is responsible, to ride a skateboard in the McBean Skate Park unless the person, while riding the skateboard, is wearing a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads. 
(Ord. 713B §1, 2002)  
CHAPTER 12.20 - PARKS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Prior ordinance history: Ords. 330B, 334B, 335B and 369B-1. 
 
Article I. - Definitions 
 
12.20.010 - Necessity and intent of regulations. 
(a)  The city council finds that the city park system exists for the benefit of all the citizens of the city as well as the inhabitants in the surrounding unincorporated areas of Placer County. 
(b)  The council further finds that to preserve the public health, safety and general welfare of users of the park system, specific regulations are necessary to assure equal access and equal enjoyment of public facilities. 
(c)  The intent of regulations is to maintain the orderly use of park facilities as well as provide a safe and secure environment for all users to enjoy and appreciate the facilities. The intent is also to protect city property lawfully dedicated to the park system. There is no intent to encourage arbitrary and capricious enforcement or curtail free and lawful movement. 
(Ord. 576B §1(part), 1992)  
12.20.020 - Definitions in general. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms, words, phrases and their derivations defined in this section shall have the meanings set forth herein: 
"Activity review panel" is comprised of the supervisor, public works director and director of public safety. 
"Alcoholic beverage" includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and any liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit or used for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances. 
"Community park" means any formally designated park either traditionally or historically utilized by the community for community celebrations as well as servicing usual functions of parks. The following parks are community parks: Gladding McBean Park, Beerman Plaza and Gladding Sports Complex. 
"Designated areas" are park areas reviewed and approved by the city manager or designee. Designated areas include certain picnic areas (typically improved with tables, shelters and/or concrete slabs) that are available for reservation by individuals or groups. 
"Green belt" means a city-owned property utilized as open space that is maintained in its natural or semi-natural state and is open to public access enjoyment. 
"Neighborhood park" means a formally designated park which services a local area, residential neighborhood or housing tract providing recreational enjoyment to residential areas for neighborhood families and residents on a smaller scale than that of a larger community park or plaza. The following park is a neighborhood park: Joiner Park. 
"Park" means any park, vehicle parking area, streambed area, bicycle trail, open space, plaza or other facility owned, leased or operated by the city for park or recreation purposes. 
"Supervisor" means the parks and leisure services supervisor of the city. 
(Ord. 576B §1(part), 1992)  
Article II. - Regulations Generally 
 
12.20.030 - Operation of vehicles in parks. 
It is unlawful for any person, other than a person engaged in the performance of his duties as a municipal employee, to drive or park any motor vehicle in or upon any city park excepting the portions thereof set off and used for vehicular traffic, or for any person to drive or operate any motor vehicle within the confines of any park of the city at a speed in excess of ten miles an hour. 
(Ord. 576B §1(part), 1992)  
12.20.040 - Lawn use. 
Only pedestrian traffic will be permitted on lawn areas. Only those vehicles used by the disabled, such as wheelchairs or personal motorized carts are excepted. 
(Ord. 576B §1(part), 1992)  
12.20.050 - Damaging or defacing park property. 
It is unlawful for any person to destroy, damage or deface any property owned or used by the city as a park. 
(Ord. 576B §1(part), 1992)  
12.20.060 - Noise—Prohibited. 
Any noise as described and defined in Section 9.04.010 is prohibited in any city park except as provided for in Section 9.04.030 and Section 12.20.150. 
(Ord. 576B §1(part), 1992)  
12.20.070 - Mechanical miniature recreational/hobby devices. 
Any radio, rope, wire or string-controlled car, aircraft or boat which is powered by an electrical, compressed air or internal combustion engine is prohibited in any city park except as provided for in Section 12.20.150. 
(Ord. 576B §1(part), 1992)  
12.20.080 - Animals in city parks. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to bring, have, allow, suffer or free any animal within the perimeter of any city park, including but not limited to, any cat, horse, fowl, bovine or other domestic animal, or any reptile or other wild animal. This section does not apply to city greenbelts unless otherwise posted as prohibited, or to programs authorized or conducted by the city. 
(b)  Dogs are allowed in parks if restrained on a maximum ten-foot leash under immediate control of the custodian of the dog; however, a dog is never allowed within 100 feet of a city constructed playground area intended for children. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person owning or having control or custody of any dog to permit the animal to defecate upon the public property of this city or upon the private property of another unless the person immediately removes the feces and properly disposes of it. A suitable container or other suitable instrument for the removal and disposal of the dog feces must be carried at all times. Handicapped persons who use seeing-eye dogs are exempt from this section. 
(Ord. No. 843B, § 1, 1-12-2010; Ord. 576B § 1(part), 1992)  
12.20.090 - Littering—Prohibited. 
Throwing, scattering or disposing of trash and waste matter in other than designated containers is prohibited. 
(Ord. 576B § 1(part), 1992)  
12.20.100 - Parks—Closing time. 
(a)  All parks in the city will be closed for public use between 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. throughout the year except the months of April through October when the parks will be closed for public use between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to enter upon, loiter or be in any of such parks within the hours fixed in subsection A of this section after the closing of such parks for public use unless such persons are: 
(1)  Engaged in city business; 
(2)  Engaged in an authorized city program or activity; or 
(3)  Engaged in an activity for which they have obtained an authorized use permit which amends the hours of closure to accommodate specific recreational events or activities. 
(Ord. No. 835B, § 1, 9-23-2008; Ord. 820B § 1, 2007; Ord. 576B § 1(part), 1992)  
12.20.105 - McBean Stadium—No trespassing. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the property of McBean Stadium outside the posted hours of operation without the express written authority of the city manager or his or her designee. 
(b)  Violation of this section is unlawful and is subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapters 1.16, 1.18 and 1.20 of this Code. Violations may be charged as an infraction or misdemeanor in the discretion of the city attorney. 
( Ord. No. 945B, § 2, 10-24-2017 )  
12.20.110 - Golfing in parks. 
It is unlawful for any person to play, practice or otherwise engage in the game of golf within the confines of any park of the city, except those parks specifically designated by the city for golf activity. 
(Ord. 576B § 1(part), 1992)  
12.20.120 - Alcohol in city parks. 
(a)  Unless authorized by a permit pursuant to Section 12.20.130 or subsection 12.20.140(b), no person shall bring into any community park, or possess or consume in any community park, any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  At no time will any alcoholic beverage be permitted in a neighborhood park, including parking lots, buildings or adjacent sidewalks. 
(Ord. 576B § 1(part), 1992)  
12.20.130 - Sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by this section, it is unlawful to sell any alcoholic beverage in any city park. 
(b)  Any person wishing to sell alcohol at a special event in a community park must first obtain a permit from the activity review panel pursuant to the following procedures: 
(1)  Complete an application on forms provided for that purpose by the city; 
(2)  Obtain a permit from the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Board in a form approved by the city director of public safety; 
(3)  Submit a certificate of insurance, in a form approved by the city, evidencing host liability coverage. Such insurance shall name the city as an additional insured and provide primary coverage to the city; 
(4)  Agree to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees from any liability as a result of the sale or consumption of alcohol; 
(5)  Provide payment for public safety services as required by the city; 
(6)  Agree to conform to any and all special conditions or requirements for approval by the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Board and the activity review panel. 
(Ord. 576B § 1(part), 1992)  
12.20.140 - No glass beverage containers in parks. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, no person shall bring into, possess, deposit or cause to be deposited, or throw or break any glass beverage container or beverage bottle upon a city park ground. 
(b)  The supervisor may issue permits to allow glass wine bottle beverage containers to be utilized at a community park. 
(Ord. 576B § 1(part), 1992)  
12.20.150 - Permission to use designated park areas. 
(a)  Use of Special Use Areas. The city may designate certain areas of any park as special use areas and may restrict the use thereof to persons or groups who apply for in advance and who receive a special use permit. Such approval shall be upon a first-come, first-served basis, except in cases of regular periodic usage by certain groups. In such cases, the supervisor may restrict the usage of such groups without regard to who first applied, providing a suitable alternative area is available for the use of the first applicant. 
(b)  Any person or group desiring to use a special use area or conduct an activity therein shall first submit an application for a special use permit in writing. The application shall be in such form and contain such information as the supervisor may prescribe. The application shall be made 15 days before the use or activity is to commence. In any case of emergency or where the supervisor is otherwise informed of the nature of the use or activity, the supervisor, in his or her discretion, may waive the filing of a written application or the time limit. 
(c)  The activity review panel, in its discretion, shall determine whether a special use permit should be granted. In making its determination, the activity review panel shall determine whether: 
(1)  Public safety problems may arise from the proposed activity or the use of the requested area of the park, and consider the age of the participants, the hour of the conducting of the activity, the type of the activity proposed, the extent and type of advertising thereof, the condition of the premises, including access thereto, the current status of the level of delinquency in the community at large and the location of the activity in particular and other similar and pertinent factors; 
(2)  The proposed activity or the use of the requested area of the park will create unusual wear and tear of park property or accumulation of trash; 
(3)  The proposed activity will promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of the participants in the activity and the spectators who may be drawn thereto and the community at large. 
(d)  The activity review panel shall have the authority to impose conditions on any special use permit including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Designating the minimum number and type of persons who shall be required to be present to enforce laws and regulations and maintain decorum and pedestrian and vehicular traffic control at or about the premises of the activity; 
(2)  Limiting the hours of use of any facility or area. 
(e)  The decision of the activity review panel to grant, grant with conditions or deny the special use permit shall be issued in writing and if denied shall state the reasons for denial. 
(f)  The applicant may appeal any decision of the activity review panel relating to an application for a special use permit for the use of a designated area to the city manager who shall immediately hear and consider the matter and who may grant, grant with conditions or deny the approval of the application. 
(Ord. 576B §1(part), 1992)  
12.20.160 - Animal life protected. 
It is unlawful to hunt, molest, chase, tease, capture, take, harm or shoot, or to attempt to hunt, molest, chase, tease, capture, take, harm or shoot any vertebrate animal or wildlife in any park; provided, that sport fishing permitted by state law is permitted unless posted to the contrary. 
(Ord. 576B §1(part), 1992)  
12.20.170 - Park and park facility exclusions. 
(a)  Any parks and recreation employee or police officer may exclude any person who, while present in a park or park facility, violates any provision of Chapter 12.20 of the Lincoln Municipal Code, or any posted rule, regulation, or city policy after being put on notice of same, or any provision of Penal Code §§ 370, 647, 667.5(c), and 1192.7(c). Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the exclusion of any person lawfully exercising free speech rights or other rights protected by the state or federal constitutions unless that person is also committing acts that are not protected that violate a specific provision of the law that would allow for exclusion. 
(b)  An exclusion from a park or park facilities under the provisions of this section shall be for the specified time periods following occurrence of the following violations in a park or park facility: 
(1)  Twenty-four hours' exclusion for violation of Chapter 12.20 of the Lincoln Municipal Code, or any posted rule, regulation, or city policy after being put on notice of same, or any provision of Penal Code §§ 370 or 647, when such violation is punishable as an infraction; 
(2)  Thirty days' exclusion for violation of Chapter 12.20 of the Lincoln Municipal Code, or any posted rule, regulation, or city policy after being put on notice of same, or violation of any provision of Penal Code sections 370 or 647, when such violation is punishable as a misdemeanor; or for two (2) or more violations, as described in Section 12.20.170(b)(1), within a 12-month period; 
(3)  One years' exclusion for two (2) or more violations described in Section 12.20.170(b)(1) or 12.20.170(b)(2) within a 12 month period, or the commission of any of the crimes referenced in Penal Code §§ 667.5(c) or 1192.7(c). Exclusion under this paragraph shall cover all parks and park facilities, regardless of the location of the incident causing the exclusion notice to be issued. 
(c)  Written notice shall be given to any person excluded from any park or park facility under this section. The notice shall specify the date the exclusion begins and duration of the exclusion, shall identify the offending conduct leading to the exclusion, and shall inform the excluded person of the right to appeal the exclusion. The exclusion notice shall be signed by the issuing employee or officer and shall also state any penalties for failure to comply. 
(d)  Except as specified in Section 12.20.170(b)(1), any exclusion shall begin immediately upon the issuance of the exclusion notice and end at noon on the day following the end of the exclusion. 
(e)  At any time within the period of exclusion, a person receiving a notice of exclusion may appeal the exclusion in writing to the city manager or designee, as applicable, for a waiver or modification of the exclusion for good cause. Upon review by the city manager or designee, the exclusion shall be upheld if the exclusion notice includes information indicating that more likely than not, the person committed the violation and if the exclusion is otherwise in accordance with the law. The city manager or designee, shall have authority to modify the terms of the exclusion for good cause. The decision of the city manager or designee shall be final. 
(f)  The city will maintain an accurate database of those persons excluded from the parks and other park facilities by their respective employees. 
(g)  No person subject to the exclusion notice shall enter or remain in any park or park facility at any time during the period indicated by the exclusion notice. Violation of this section is unlawful and is subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapters 1.16, 1.18 and 1.20 of this code. Violations may be charged as an infraction or misdemeanor in the discretion of the city attorney. 
(Ord. 576B §1(part), 1992; Ord. No. 945B, § 2, 10-24-2017 )  
12.20.180 - Tennis and basketball courts—Prohibited activity. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person upon any tennis or basketball court owned or controlled by the city to engage in any activity other than playing or practicing the sport relating to the specific court, including, but not limited to, roller-skating or riding upon a skateboard, unicycle or bicycle, without a permit from the supervisor. 
(b)  The supervisor may authorize by sign or by permit the use of a tennis or basketball court owned or controlled by the city for an activity other than playing or practicing the sport relating to the specific court if, in the opinion of the supervisor, such activity will not interfere with organized city recreation programs, risk damage to the tennis or basketball courts or cause annoyance or disturbance to the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. 576B §1(part), 1992)  
12.20.190 - Smoking in city parks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke within the perimeter of any city park (except as specifically allowed by special event permit). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke on any equestrian, hiking, bike and similar trails as defined in Section 17.28.170. 
(c)  To the extent permitted by state law, smoking shall be allowed on any street, alley, sidewalk, or parking adjacent to the borders of city parks. 
(d)  "Smoking" or "Smoke" means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, hookah pipe, plant or other combustible substance in any manner or in any form and use of electronic devices with electrical ignition or vaporization (e-cigarettes/cigars or similar devices). 
( Ord. No. 946B, § 2, 10-24-2017 )  
12.20.200 - Violations—Infraction. 
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter may be an infraction and punishable by a fine not exceeding $100.00 and subject to exclusion from the park. 
(Ord. 576B §1(part), 1992)  
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES  
CHAPTER 13.04 - WATER  
Article I. - Service Regulations Generally 
 
13.04.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The city council, in the interest of protecting the health, safety and general welfare of the people of the city, adopts the ordinance codified in this chapter to carry out the following purposes: 
(1)  To supply treated water purchased from the Placer County Water Agency and Nevada Irrigation District to users; 
(2)  To establish procedures for provision of water to residential, industrial and commercial users within the city; 
(3)  To establish procedures for provision of water to certain limited users outside the city; 
(4)  To provide for the ongoing implementation of a metered rate system. 
(Ord. 364B §1.1, 1979) 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.015 - Definitions. 
The meanings of terms used in this chapter are as follows: 
"Director" means the city employee who is responsible for the management of the department or division to which specific actions or approvals are required. The director may authorize designated city employees under his/her direction to act on his/her behalf. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.020 - Service area. 
(a)  The area in which service is or will be furnished by the city is that area lying within the city limits, as such limits now prevail or may from time to time exist. 
(b)  The city may provide water service to users outside the city. The city shall determine if written consent is required from the Placer County Water Agency or Nevada Irrigation District. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.030 - Supply source, quality, continuity. 
The city will exercise reasonable care to deliver a continuous and sufficient supply of water at the proper pressure to avoid any shortage or interruption in delivery. All customers shall be required to accept such conditions of pressure and service as are provided by the distribution system at their point of connection and the city shall not be liable for any damage arising from high or low pressures. The water will meet all federal, state and county minimum water-quality requirements for water for domestic use. 
(Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018; Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013)  
13.04.040 - Classes of service. 
Water service provided by the city will be classified as follows: 
(1)  Residential and non-residential use: 
a.  Flat-rate, 
b.  Metered. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.050 - Service connection—Location. 
To be eligible for water service, the property to which the service is to be extended must abut on a dedicated public easement in which a city water main is constructed at a point immediately adjacent to the property; provided, however, that if the preceding requirement is not met, the city engineer may authorize the extension of service if the applicant for water service cannot dedicate a public easement in which an existing water main is constructed. However, in the case of improvements installed pursuant to the subdivision regulations, all improvements shall be the sole responsibility of the developer. The size of the service connections and pipes shall be determined by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.060 - Service connection—Relocation. 
A service connection may be relocated by the city at a customer's request, providing the relocation, in the judgment of the city engineer, is not detrimental to the city's water system. The cost of the relocation shall be paid by the customer. The cost shall be estimated by the city engineer and shall be paid in full prior to the performance of the work. Where a service connection is relocated for the convenience or protection of the city, the relocation will be at the expense of the city. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.065 - Ground wire attachments. 
The city is not responsible for providing an electrical ground through the water service equipment. Customers shall not attach any ground wiring to plumbing which is or may be connected to city service equipment. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.070 - Application for service. 
A property owner desiring water service for any purpose from the city shall apply at the office of the building department, and no person shall use any city water without first making such an application. The application, which shall be on a form prescribed by the city, shall set forth: 
(1)  The address and, if necessary, the definite boundaries of the premises to be serviced; 
(2)  The purpose and use of the water; and 
(3)  Such other information considered proper by the city. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.075 - Reapplication. 
If a new water service connection is not established within 180 days of filing an application with the office of the building department pursuant to Section 13.04.070, the property owner desiring water service must reapply at the office of the building department in order to use any city water. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.076 - Establishment of water service connection. 
New water service connection is deemed established when all structures to be constructed on the property for which water service is being requested have been supplied with cold running water. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.080 - Application for water agency annexation. 
Water service to property in the city's current and future boundaries may require annexation to one or both of the water agencies serving the city. The city shall determine if the property requires annexation to a service zone of Placer County Water Agency or Nevada Irrigation District, or both. All costs associated with such annexation shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.090 - Interruption of service. 
In case of fire, or alarm of fire, or in making repairs, or in constructing new work, or when required by the necessities of the service of the city, the city may shut off water from any customer or number of customers without notice for as long as is necessary, and the city shall not be liable for damage resulting from such discontinuance. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.100 - Right of entry for inspection. 
Any authorized agent or employee of the city, with the consent of the owner, occupant or consumer, or pursuant to court order, shall be allowed free access at any reasonable hour to any premises where water is served for the purpose of inspecting the condition of the water pipes or service or for the purpose of establishing the rate to be charged. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.110 - Shutoff at customer request. 
Any property owner who desires to discontinue water service shall submit a request in writing or in person at the office of the utility billing department not less than two working days before the date on which discontinuance is desired. The request shall contain the date upon which water service is to be discontinued and a forwarding address for the customer. Water service may be discontinued only on ordinary working days. No service may be discontinued for a period of less than 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.120 - Reconnection after shutoff. 
Water shall not be restored to any premises after service has been discontinued until payment of all fees, charges and service charges have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.130 - Temporary connection. 
Whenever possible, all water furnished through a temporary service connection shall be metered. A permit for a temporary service connection is valid for a period not more than 60 days after installation. The city may extend the permit upon request. The temporary service shall be discontinued and dismantled or removed upon termination of the permit period or completion of use. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.140 - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  Use. Fire hydrants are for use by the organized fire protection agencies and by the water department. Other parties, including contractors, desiring to use fire hydrants for any purpose must first obtain a temporary permit in accord with this article prior to use and shall operate the hydrant in accordance with instructions issued by the water department and pay all required fees and charges. 
(b)  Obstructions. It is unlawful for any person to blockade or obstruct any fire hydrants of the city in such a manner that it would be difficult or impossible to attach a fire engine hose thereto. 
(c)  Permits. An applicant for a permit to use a public fire hydrant shall pay a permit fee at the time of application. In addition, a monthly use fee (for each month a hydrant is used, or portion thereof) shall be paid by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.150 - Meter installation required. 
(a)  No tentative map shall be approved after September 30, 1979 unless, as a condition of approval, water meters are installed and dedicated to the city as part of the subdivision's improvements. 
(b)  Building permits and construction permits for any construction started after September 30, 1979 will be conditioned upon the installation of a water meter. 
(c)  All new commercial and industrial applicants for water service shall provide appropriately sized water meters as determined by the director. The city reserves the right to review the anticipated water demands based upon type of service, number of fixtures, irrigation, and all other factors affecting water use, and the right to require larger service connection or meter if anticipated demands exceed the capacity of the meter size requested. 
(d)  The director may place meters upon any service connection and thereafter charge the general service metered rate when the director determines, in their discretion, that the high consumption of water for the particular service requires metering. The expense of such installation shall be charged to the consumer. Upon application, any consumer may request the installation of a meter at the consumer's expense, and after such installation, the consumer shall be charged the appropriate metered water rate. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.152 - Meter size change. 
Any customer desiring to change the size of any meter that has been installed shall make application to the city for such change. 
(1)  Increase in Meter Size. The applicant shall pay the applicable fee for the new larger meter and if the change necessitates, in the city's judgment, a larger service connection, the applicant shall pay all costs associated with the installation of the new service connection. 
(2)  Reduction in Meter Size. The applicant shall provide the city with documentation as deemed necessary by the city to recognize the permanent relinquishment of water capacity to the city. The city shall not be obligated to reimburse the applicant for any water connection fees related to the relinquishment of the water capacity. The relinquishment shall permanently transfer the water capacity to the city and the city shall be allowed to sell such capacity to other water customers. The proceeds of such sale of water capacity in the form of water connection fees shall be used by the city at its sole discretion. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.155 - Meter accessibility. 
It is the customer's responsibility to ensure accessibility to the meter at all times. When a meter cannot be read because of an obstruction, the customer will be notified and shall correct the condition(s). Failure to remove the obstruction within 30 days after notification shall result in the disconnection of service. All fees applicable to the disconnection shall be applied to the customer's account. This is the customer's responsibility. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.158 - Tampering charge. 
Facility tampering includes, but is not limited to, interference with a meter, meter box, or locking mechanism; or unauthorized reconnection of a meter, or unauthorized use of water or damage to a fire hydrant. Additionally, any city facilities that have been damaged or altered will be billed for time and materials. The tampering charge shall be $250.00 per occurrence, and upon the third occurrence the city may remove the meter and lock the service. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.160 - Water connection charge. 
The basic city storage, transmission and distribution connection unit charge for residential and non-residential connections shall be $5,558.00 for every 1,150 gallons per day, but shall not be less than 1,150 gallons per day. 
(1)  Reserved for "Residential Facilities - Except Hotel and Motel." 
(2)  Reserved for "Hotel and Motel" 
(3)  Non-Residential Facilities. Customers requesting service must submit the following information to the city for evaluation and calculation of the required water connection: 
a.  Type of Use. 
b.  The anticipated routine patterns of use, including: 
1.  Estimated maximum day demand in gallons. 
2.  Estimated peak consumption rate in gallons per minute. 
3.  The meter size requested. 
c.  Type of fire facilities required, including: 
1.  Size of the fire connection. 
2.  Estimated rate of use. 
3.  Storage capacity requirements. 
4.  Description of the on-site fire protection facilities. 
d.  Type of cross-connection prevention facilities required by the city. 
(4)  Connection charges shall be based on the gallons of water volume required, but in no case shall the connection charge be less than 1,150 gallons per day. Applicant shall be responsible for paying the cost of the meter equipment. Capacities for water meters one and one-half inch and greater are as follows, shown in gallons per day: 
a.  1½-inch meter ..... 5,750 
b.  2-inch meter ..... 9,200 
c.  3-inch meter ..... 18,400 
d.  4-inch meter ..... 28,750 
e.  6-inch meter ..... 46,000 
(5)  General regulations. 
a.  Not less than one connection per building. 
b.  Classification of shell buildings having no use when connecting to the water system shall be determined based on the judgment of the city based on building permit data, applicable zoning, and plans of the developer. Subsequent modifications to such buildings may result in reclassification and the assessment of additional incremental charges. No refunding of previously paid connection charges will be made where modifications are made to any structure which place it in a classification with a lower connection charge rate. 
c.  When the use of a building changes, the city retains the right to review the previously paid connection charges and require the payment of additional connection charges based upon the new use. No refunding of previously paid connection charges will be made where the change in use is within a classification with lower connection charge rates. 
d.  If the average day consumption during the months of July or August exceeds the amount of the capacity purchased, the city reserves the right to require the property owner to pay the difference in additional capacity charges of the difference between what was originally purchased and that amount used on the average day during the months of July and August. 
The water connection charge set forth herein shall be subject to an annual adjustment up to the change in the San Francisco Construction Cost Index (CCI) as reported by the Engineering News Record (ENR) for the 12-month period beginning January 1 as determined by resolution of the city council. The annual adjustments shall be effective each May 1. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 919B , § 2(Att. 2), 10-11-2016; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018; Ord. No. 981B , § 1, 1-8-2019)  
Article II. - Out-of-Town Service 
 
13.04.170 - Approvals required—Standard for approval. 
Any application for use of water outside the city after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not be granted without written approval by the city council. The city council shall approve the furnishing of city water to users outside the city only if it finds that the provision of such service will not interfere with proper service to water users within the city, that the provision of such service is economically feasible, that all plumbing and service connections are adequate to prevent backflow. The city shall determine if consent is required from the Placer County Water Agency or Nevada Irrigation District. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013)  
13.04.180 - Use. 
No water shall be furnished outside the city boundaries for other than domestic and ordinary commercial uses. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.190 - Continuity not guaranteed. 
The city does not guarantee continuity of service or adequate pressure to users of water located outside the city. The city may discontinue service to any user outside the city if the city council determines that the discontinuance of such service is necessary to assure adequate water service to users within the city or that the continuation of the service is no longer economically feasible. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
Article III. - Rates and Billing 
 
13.04.200 - Rate classifications. 
(a)  The city will operate and maintain its water systems in an efficient and economical manner to distribute and supply water as fairly and equitably as possible. The charges to be made for service will be set at rates no higher than necessary to enable the city to recover all costs of distributing and supplying water and shall include any costs for: 
(1)  Purchasing, pumping, transmitting, and distributing water; 
(2)  Customer service; 
(3)  Administration; 
(4)  Overhead; 
(5)  Debt service; and 
(6)  Renewal and replacements of facilities. 
(b)  Water user rates shall be of two types, flat rate and metered rate, and shall be set by the city council, as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.202 - Flat water use rates. 
The monthly charge for flat rate water use shall be $44.74 per month. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.205 - Metered water use rates. 
The monthly charges for metered water use shall include two components; monthly service charges and volumetric charges. 
Monthly service charges: 
Meter Size 	Monthly Service Charge 
¾" 	$ 32.89 
1" 	54.81 
1.5" 	131.54 
2" 	208.27 
3" 	476.82 
4" 	822.09 
6" 	1,753.79 
8" 	3,069.14 
 
Volumetric charges: 
The volumetric rate per 1,000 gallons shall be $2.37. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 938B , § 2, 2-28-2017; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.207 - Water use rates for construction water. 
It is recognized that the costs of administering construction water meters, for taking readings on construction water consumption and for billing is higher for construction water services. The charge for each 1,000 gallons of construction water use shall be $4.74. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.209 - Water use rates—Outside the city. 
The monthly charge for water use outside the city shall be the same rates for customers by meter size within the city. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.210 - Billing—Meter reading. 
(a)  Flat-rate accounts for each month are due and payable the first of the month and are payable at the office of the water department. 
(b)  Metered accounts shall be billed monthly and meters shall be read as nearly as possible at regular intervals, and service bills are due and payable for the preceding period for which the meter has been read. Meters will be read as required for closing bills. Each meter on a customer's premises will be billed separately and the readings of two or more meters will not be combined unless for water system operating convenience or necessity two or more meters are installed in place of one. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.220 - Payment responsibility—Property owner defined. 
(a)  The customer shall be responsible for prompt payment of all fees and charges. However, the property owner shall bear the final responsibility for payment in the event the customer fails to make prompt payment. 
(b)  As used in this article and Article IV, "property owner" means the person to which the property was assessed on the last equalized assessment roll of the county. 
(c)  The owner of the property as identified by the Placer County Clerk-Recorder's Office, or their designated property manager, shall be the customer named on all service accounts established after September 30, 2018. Tenants will not be added as customers after September 30, 2018. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.225 - Due date. 
Charges for service shall be due and payable on the first day following the month or other established billing period such services were used unless otherwise provided. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.230 - Delinquency. 
All fees or charges which are not paid on or before the 30th day following the date such charges were due and payable are delinquent and a penalty of ten percent of the charge shall be imposed on the 30th day following the date such charge was due and payable. In addition, a penalty of one-half of one percent per month of the basic charge plus the ten percent penalty shall be imposed on the 60th day following the date such charge was due and payable and on each 30th day thereafter until there is payment in full of the charge plus all penalties. Penalties imposed pursuant to this section shall be billed and collected in the same manner as other fees and charges imposed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.232 - Delinquent fees or charges. 
Delinquent fees or charges which remain unpaid for a period of 60 or more days after the date upon which they were billed shall become a lien upon the property and may be subject to collection pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article IV of this chapter. In addition, water service and other city utility services at the service location may be terminated for nonpayment pursuant to Section 13.04.240 and Section 13.14.020. If a customer receives service at more than one service location and the bill for any one of that customer's accounts becomes delinquent, charges for services at all other locations may also be collected pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article IV. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.235 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 974B , § 2, adopted August 28, 2018, repealed § 13.04.235, which pertained to billings adjustment and derived from Ord. No. 917B , § 1(Exh. A), Sept. 13, 2016.  
13.04.240 - Shutoff for nonpayment. 
(a)  In addition to all other remedies which the city may have for the collection of delinquent water service charges, the city may terminate water service for nonpayment of a delinquent account. 
(b)  At least 15 calendar days prior to the proposed termination, the city shall give notice of the delinquency and the impending termination by first-class mail to the customer to whom the water service is billed and the property owner. Notice to the property owner shall be sent to the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the county. 
(c)  Any customer who has initiated a complaint or requested a hearing within five days of receiving the notice of termination shall be given an opportunity for review of such complaint by the city manager or his designated representative. 
(d)  The city shall not terminate water service during the pendency of an investigation or review of a customer dispute or complaint or prior to any hearing initiated pursuant to this section. 
(e)  The city manager is authorized to resolve complaints or disputes initiated pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.250 - Reestablishing service after shutoff. 
(a)  Water services discontinued because of delinquency in payment or upon the customer's request shall not be reestablished until all fees and charges, together with a service charge, have been paid. In case of delinquent payment, a cash deposit may be required by the city as a condition to reestablishment of service. 
(b)  In the event service is discontinued for delinquency in payment and service is resumed without authorization, the city may discontinue the water service and may charge and collect a penalty for each occurrence in addition to such other amount which may be due from the customer. Such charges shall be paid before service is reestablished. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.255 - Billing with other utilities. 
The city council may provide that fees and charges for water service pursuant to this chapter shall be collected with the rates and charges for any other utility services furnished by the city and that any or all such charges may be itemized and billed with the same bill and collected as one item. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
Article IV. - Delinquency Collection 
 
13.04.260 - General taxes collection authorized. 
All delinquent water-service charges which have accrued, together with interest or penalties thereon, and service charges at other locations as provided in Section 13.04.230 may be collected on a secured tax roll, in the same manner and at the same time as general property taxes, provided that this section shall not be construed to prohibit the city from collecting any and all of the charges in any other manner provided by ordinance or law. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.270 - Report to city clerk. 
A written report containing a description of each parcel of real property receiving services and facilities and the amount of the delinquent water service charges for each parcel computed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter shall be prepared and filed with the city clerk. The real property may be described by reference to the county assessor's maps or by such other reference sufficient to identify the property affected. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.280 - Notice of hearing. 
The city clerk shall cause notice of the filing of the report and notice of the time and place of the hearing thereon by the city council to be published once a week for two successive weeks prior to the date set for hearing in the News-Messenger, a newspaper of general circulation within the city. Prior to collection of charges on the tax roll, the city clerk shall mail written notice of the filing of the report and of the time and place of hearing thereon to each person to whom any part or parcel of real property described in the report was assessed on the last equalized assessment roll. Notice shall be mailed to the address shown on the roll. 
(Ord. 408B §4 (part), 1982: Ord. 364B §3.7, 1979; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.290 - Hearing. 
At the hearing provided for in Section 13.04.280, the city council shall hear any objections or protests by landowners liable to be assessed for delinquent fees. The council may make such revisions or corrections to the report as it deems just, after which, by resolution, the report shall be confirmed. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.300 - Report to county auditor. 
On or before August 10 in each year following the final determination and confirmation of the report by the city council, the city clerk shall file with the county auditor a copy of the report with a statement endorsed thereon over the city clerk's signature that it has been finally adopted by the city council, and the auditor shall enter the amounts of the delinquent fees as special assessments against the respective lots or parcels of land as they appear on the current assessment roll. Where any such lots are outside the boundaries of the city, they shall be added to the assessment roll of the city for the purpose of collecting such charges. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.310 - Parcels not on assessment roll. 
If the property is not described on the roll, the auditor shall enter the description thereon together with the amounts of the delinquent charges, as shown on the report. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.320 - Attachment of lien. 
The amount of the charges as set forth in the confirmed report shall constitute special assessments against the respective parcels of property and are a lien against the lot or parcel of land against which the water service has been supplied. The lien shall attach upon recordation in the Office of the Placer County Recorder of a certified copy of the report and the resolution confirming the report. The tax collector shall include the amount of the delinquent charge on bills for taxes levied against the respective lots and parcels of land. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.330 - Collection with general taxes. 
After the attachment of the lien, as provided in Section 13.04.320, the amount of the delinquent water charges shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner and by the same person as, together with and not separately from, the general taxes for the city, and shall be delinquent at the same time and thereafter by subject to the same penalties for delinquency as other taxes and assessments. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.340 - Applicable laws generally—Transfer or conveyance—Lien of encumbrancer. 
All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of general taxes of the city, including, but not limited to, those pertaining to the matters of delinquency, correction, cancellation, refund and redemption, are applicable to such water service charges, except that if any real property to which such lien would attach has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of such taxes would become delinquent, then the lien which would otherwise be imposed by this article shall not attach to such real property and the delinquent fees, as confirmed, relating to such property, shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.350 - Compensation to county. 
The county shall be compensated for services rendered in connection with the levy, collection and enforcement of such charges for the city in an amount fixed by agreement between the board of supervisors and the city council. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.355 - Civil action. 
In addition to any other remedy that the city may have for the collection of delinquent fees or charges, all fees, charges, penalties and interest imposed by this chapter shall constitute a debt of the city and the city may institute a civil action to recover delinquent fees, charges, penalties and interest. In such action, reasonable attorneys' fees shall be awarded to the city. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
Article V. - Connection Fees 
 
13.04.360 - Established—Apportionment—Purpose. 
(a)  There shall be a charge for a new service connection or for a change in size or location for the customer's benefit which shall be paid before work is started. Water connection fees shall include the city's water connection charge pursuant to Section 13.04.160 and either the Placer County Water Agency Water Connection Charge (PCWA WCC) or the Nevada Irrigation District Water Connection Charge (NID WCC), as determined by the city, in effect at the time of payment. 
(b)  Connection fees for every service connection to the city water system are established for the purpose of providing funds for the payment of the costs for design and construction of the city's water system and to make the required service connection payments to the Placer County Water Agency or Nevada Irrigation District in order that such costs be shared by those receiving the benefit. 
(c)  Source water capacity for PCWA WCC and NID WCC shall be based on the peak day demand for non-residential facilities by the methods for calculation of required connection specified in Section 13.04.160 and shall be based on gallons per day. 
(d)  Source water capacity for PCWA WCC and NID WCC for Residential Facilities shall be as follows and charged on the basis of gallons per day: 
Lot Size (sq ft) 	Source Water Connection (gpd) 
MDU (1) 	250 
=2,900.99 	250 
2,901=4,400.99 	450 
4,401=5,500.99 	550 
5,501=7,000.99 	700 
7,001=10,000.99 	850 
10,001=17,000.99 	1,200 
17,001=35,000.99 	1,725 
>35,001 	2,875 
 
(1)  Multi-Dwelling Unit (MDU) source water connection assessment is per unit and for indoor water use only. A separate metering for outdoor water use is required. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018; Ord. No. 981B , § 2, 1-8-2019)  
13.04.362 - Indoor fire sprinkler requirement. 
The water connection fees for customers required to install indoor fire sprinklers shall be based upon the size meter that would otherwise be used to serve the customer but for the requirement of a larger meter for the sprinklers. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.370 - Use of revenues. 
Amounts collected shall be set aside in separate funds and used for the purposes enumerated in Section 13.04.360. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.380 - Other costs—Indemnification of city. 
In addition to the connection charge, all costs and expenses incident to the installation of a water connection shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city against any loss or damage that may result directly or indirectly from the performance of the construction and installation of the water connection. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.390 - Oversized capacity reimbursement. 
The city may require, pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act and the subdivision regulations of the city, oversized capacity, in which case the city shall reimburse the applicant pursuant to the provisions of the law then in effect for such oversized capacity based on the prevailing costs of material and labor for such work. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.400 - Temporary connection charges. 
(a)  An applicant for a temporary connection shall make a nonrefundable cash deposit and shall supply all materials and labor necessary for connection. 
(b)  Upon request for disconnection, an applicant shall make a refundable cash deposit. This fee shall be refunded, less unpaid charges, upon dismantling and removal of the connection. 
(c)  Monthly charges for water usage shall be assessed in accordance with the water use rates for construction water as provided in Section 13.04.207. 
(d)  Temporary connections shall be one-inch metered connections unless otherwise approved by the city. Fees for any other type or size of temporary connection shall be determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.405 - Connection fee due for reapplication. 
If a reapplication is made pursuant to Section 13.04.075, the person desiring water service must pay the new water connection fee due at the time reapplication is made with credit being given for any previously paid connection fees. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
Article VI. - Conservation 
 
13.04.410 - Condition of plumbing. 
All consumers, whether owners or not, shall maintain and keep in good repair the water pipes on the interior and exterior of the property served. Such persons shall not allow faucets or water closets to leak, and such fixtures must not be left running. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.420 - Watering spray or nozzle required. 
Watering of lawns and gardens from an open hose is prohibited. A spray or nozzle must, in all cases, be used. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.430 - Irrigation hours. 
The city reserves the right to limit irrigation hours in the case of water shortages or emergencies. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.440 - Gross waste. 
It is unlawful and an infraction for any person to cause or allow any water received by such person to flow away in unreasonable amounts, from property owned or occupied by such persons, in any gutter, ditch or other manner over the surface of the ground. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
Article VII. - Wells 
 
13.04.450 - Permit requirements. 
No person shall drill for water without first obtaining a permit from the director and from the county health officer. The director may deny the issuance of a permit if, in his opinion, the premises where the well is to be located can be served by the city water system. If a permit for a potable drinking water well is issued, it shall be conditioned upon connection to the city water system and discontinuance of the use of such will be conditioned upon notice from the director that the premises may be served by the city water system. The health officer may deny the issuance of a permit if, in his opinion, the proposed well will contaminate existing water sources or be a health menace to the community. The applicant for the permit may appeal to the city council from the decision of the health officer or the director by filing a notice of appeal, in writing, with the city clerk within 15 days of the date of the decision, and the city clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda for the next regular meeting of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.460 - Workman qualifications. 
Wells shall be constructed, reconstructed or destroyed by persons licensed in accordance with the provisions of the Contractor's License Law (Chapter 9, Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code), unless such persons are exempted from licensing by that Act. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.470 - Inspections. 
Inspections may be made by the county health officer or the department of public services during the process of well construction. A final inspection shall be made when the well construction is completed. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.480 - Protection from contamination—Surface water diversion. 
In cases where the area adjacent to the well is susceptible to contamination, the well shall be properly protected. Drainage shall be away from the well. No well shall be located any closer than the distances specified in the permit. All surface water shall be properly diverted away from a well site during construction or repairs. Disposal of this water shall be made in such a manner so as not to flood adjacent property or constitute a public nuisance. No waste discharge from well-drilling operations shall be allowed to enter a sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.490 - Forced abandonment—Filling holes. 
(a)  Upon determination that a well is polluted or contaminated and reasonable efforts to clear the pollution or contamination have been unsuccessful, the county health officer shall have the authority to enforce the permanent abandonment of such wells. Wells must be abandoned according to health department rules and regulations. 
(b)  Abandoned wells or test holes shall be filled with selected material to protect the water-bearing formation against possible contamination or pollution and to eliminate a potential hazard to public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.499 - Potable wells prohibited; exceptions. 
Except as otherwise authorized by the city council, connection to the city water system is required for all drinking water. Potable water wells are prohibited within the city unless owned and operated by the city and incorporated as part of the city's water system, or unless otherwise authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 901B , § 2, 6-23-2015; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
Article VIII. - Prohibitions and Violations 
 
13.04.500 - Use in violation. 
It is unlawful for any person to use, turn on or tap water except in accord with this chapter and without obtaining a permit as required by Article I. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.510 - Heating and cooling devices. 
It is unlawful for any heating or cooling device to use water that is not re-circulated. The only water added to such systems shall be limited to the purposes of making up losses in the process. Under no circumstances shall water be returned to the distribution system of the city. This prohibition shall apply to all devices for heating or cooling, whether used for residential, commercial, industrial or manufacturing purposes. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.530 - Fluoridation. 
It is unlawful for any agent or employee of the city or any person, firm or corporation acting in behalf of the city under a contract with the city or otherwise, to mingle or combine any fluorides in any form or in any quantity or in any manner with the public water supply of the city. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.540 - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  A first violation of any provision of Article VI is an infraction punishable as provided in the general state law for infractions. A second or subsequent violation of a provision of Article VI during any calendar year is a misdemeanor as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Any violation of this chapter, except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, is a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense. 
(c)  In addition to a prosecution for a violation of this chapter, a consumer or occupant, or owner of property served by the city with water may have such service discontinued if, after a noticed hearing, the director determines that such person willfully wastes water on a continuing basis. The determination of the director may be appealed to the city council if a notice of appeal has been filed with the city clerk within ten days after the determination of the director to discontinue service has been delivered in writing to the person whose service is being discontinued. During the pendency of an appeal to the council, whose decision shall be final, water service shall be maintained in effect. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
Article IX. - Water Conservation; Penalties 
 
13.04.600 - City manager authority to impose water conservation restrictions. 
The city manager is authorized to enact, impose, implement, and modify water conservation restrictions in order to meet the state or local water conservation standards, and to declare the appropriate water conservation stage as provided in the city's water shortage contingency plan. 
(Ord. No. 900B , § 2, 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.610 - Penalties for violation of water conservation restrictions. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any person who violates any ordinance, resolution, standard, or other restriction relating to water conservation shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  The first and second violations within a one-year period shall be subject to an oral or written warning. 
(2)  The third violation within a one-year period shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $51.00 per occurrence. The city manager or his appointee may waive these fines if the violating party participates in a water conservation education course provided or approved by the city. 
(3)  The fourth and following violations within a one-year period shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 per occurrence. 
(4)  For purposes of this article, each day that a violation occurs shall be considered a separate occurrence. 
(5)  The city manager or his/her designee(s) shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 899B , § 3, 5-26-2015; Ord. No. 900B , § 2, 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
13.04.620 - Appeals. 
Penalties imposed pursuant to Section 13.04.610 may be appealed to a hearing officer or hearing body appointed by the city manager. Any such appeal shall be submitted in writing to the city clerk within ten days of the notice of the violation. The decision of the hearing officer or hearing body shall be final and subject to no further administrative appeals. To the extent that is not inconsistent with the provisions of this article, the provisions of Chapter 1.20 shall govern the administrative citation and appeal process for fines imposed hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 899B , § 3, 5-26-2015; Ord. No. 900B , § 2, 6-9-2015; Ord. No. 974B , § 2(Exh. 1), 8-28-2018)  
CHAPTER 13.05 - CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL 
 
13.05.010 - Purpose. 
(a)  The purposes of this chapter are: 
(1)  to protect the city water system against actual or potential cross-connections by isolating within premises, contamination or pollution that may occur because of undiscovered or unauthorized cross-connections on premises; 
(2)  to eliminate existing connections between the city water system and other sources of water that are not approved as safe and potable for human consumption; 
(3)  to prevent the making of cross-connections in the future; and 
(4)  to encourage the exclusive use of public water systems as sources of water supply. 
(b)  It is the intent of this chapter to recognize that there are varying degrees of hazard and to apply the principle that the degree of protection should be commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
(Ord. 540B §1(part), 1990)  
13.05.020 - Definitions. 
The meanings of terms used in this chapter are as follows: 
"Air-gap separation" means a physical separation between the discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or nonpressure receiving vessel. An "approved air-gap separation" shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim of the receiving vessel and in no case shall be less than one inch. 
"Approved," as herein used in reference to backflow prevention assemblies, means approval by the city. 
"Atmospheric vacuum breaker (nonpressure)" means backflow prevention device containing a shutoff valve followed by a valve body containing a float-check, a check seat and an air inlet port. 
"Auxiliary water system" means any water supply on or available to a customer's premises other than the city water system. 
"Backflow" means the undesirable reversal of the flow of water or any mixture of water and other liquid, gas or other substance into the distribution pipes of the city water system from any source or sources. 
"Certified backflow prevention device tester" means a person who has been certified by the city as having the necessary training and competence to test backflow prevention assemblies. 
"Cross-connection" means any unprotected actual or potential connection or structural arrangement between any part of the city water system used or intended to supply water for human consumption, and any source or system containing used water, industrial fluid, gas or other substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe, wholesome and potable for human consumption. 
"Double check valve assembly" means a backflow prevention device incorporating two, single, independently acting check valves, a shutoff valve at each end of the device and necessary appurtenances for testing as required by the city. 
"Pressure vacuum breaker assembly" means a backflow prevention device incorporating one or two independently operating, loaded check valve(s), an independently operating loaded air inlet valve, a shutoff valve at each end of the device and necessary appurtenances for testing as required by the city. 
"Reduced pressure principle assembly" means a backflow prevention device incorporating two independently acting check valves, a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure relief valve, a shutoff valve at each end of the device and necessary appurtenances for testing as required by the city. 
"Service connection" means the point at which the city water system piping ends and the water system piping of the customer begins. If a meter is installed as part of the city water system, then the term "service connection" means the downstream end of the meter. 
(Ord. 540B §1(part), 1990)  
13.05.030 - Protection required. 
(a)  Protection shall be required at each service connection from the city water system that supplies water to premises having an auxiliary water system. 
(b)  Protection shall be required at each service connection from the city water system that supplies water to premises on which any substance is or may be handled in such a manner as to permit entry into the city water system, including water originating from the city water system which is or may be subjected to deterioration in sanitary quality. 
(c)  Protection shall be required at each service connection to any premises that has cross-connections unless such cross-connections are abated to the satisfaction of the city. 
(Ord. 540B §1(part), 1990)  
13.05.040 - Type of protection. 
The type of protection required shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard. In determining the degree of hazard and the type of protection required, the following criteria shall be issued: 
(1)  At each service connection to any premises where there exists an auxiliary water system with no known cross-connections, the city water system shall be protected by an approved double check valve backflow prevention assembly or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. 
(2)  At each service connection to any premises on which there is an auxiliary water system where cross-connections are known to exist, the city water system shall be protected by an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. 
(3)  At each service connection to any premises on which an objectionable but nonhazardous substance is, or may be, handled in such a manner as to permit entry into a city water system, the city water system shall be protected by an approved double check valve backflow prevention assembly or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. 
(4)  At each service connection to any premises on which any hazardous substance is or may be handled in such a manner as to permit entry into the city water system, the city water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation. The air-gap shall be located as close as practicable to the service cock and all piping between the service cock and any receiving vessel shall be visible. If these conditions cannot reasonably be met, the city water system shall be protected by an approved reduced pressure principal backflow prevention assembly, provided that this alternative is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations adopted per Section 13.05.200 of this chapter. 
(5)  At each service connection to any sewage treatment plant or sewage pumping station, the city water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation. The air-gap shall be located as close as practicable to the service cock and all piping between the service cock and any receiving vessel shall be visible. If these conditions cannot reasonably be met, the city water system shall be protected by an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly, provided that this alternative is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations adopted per Section 13.05.200 of this chapter. 
(6)  A swivel-ell connection is authorized cross-connection control for non-dual plumbed systems. Swivel-ell connections shall not be used on dual plumbed systems. A dual plumbed system is a system that utilizes separate piping systems for reclaimed water and potable water within a facility and where the reclaimed water is used for either of the following purposes: to serve plumbing outlets (excluding fire suppression systems) within a building, or outdoor landscape irrigation at individual residences. 
A swivel-ell connection shall be designed to preclude the simultaneous use of both potable and reclaimed water sources to supply a distribution system at the same time. The swivel-ell may be manually switched between the reclaimed water source connection and the potable water source connection to supply the use area's distribution system. In no case shall it be acceptable for the potable water supply to be directly connected to a reclaimed water supply. The public services department shall document that all site specific conditions have been satisfied prior to the use and connection of a swivel-ell connection. The public services department may at any time require installation of a permanent air-gap separation between the potable water supply and the reclaimed water distribution system. 
The following is required for all reclaimed water projects, including those that have a swivel-ell connection: 
a.  No simultaneous use of the potable water supply and the reclaimed water supply shall be allowed in the same distribution system. 
b.  Prior to construction of any facilities, written approval shall be obtained from the public services department. 
c.  Only disinfected tertiary reclaimed water is used. 
d.  Each reclaimed water distribution system may only be supplied from a single reclaimed water feed line. There shall be no other inter-connections between the reclaimed water distribution system and potable water system within the use area or facility. 
e.  The swivel-ell connection (which includes the reclaimed water service, potable water service, and the service riser to the facility or use area) must be located above ground, color coded in accordance with the Health and Safety Code Section 116815, and have appropriate signs. Security precautions must be provided (e.g. locked gate valves, warning signs, etc.) to prevent interconnections, vandalism, and unauthorized use. The city shall inspect each location on a minimum annual basis to verify that a switchover has not occurred without the purveyor's approval. Meters must be provided on both connections and records of water use maintained. 
f.  The potable water service connection must be protected by an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly (RP). The swivel-ell connection must be located downstream of the RP assembly. The need for on-site backflow protection must also be evaluated. 
g.  To avoid simultaneously using both sources, swivel-ell connections must be designed such that a tee connection, or other prefabricated mechanical appurtenances, cannot readily be substituted for the swivel-ell. The reclaimed water and potable water service connections should not approach the use area service riser at an angle of 180°. 
h.  The RP on the potable water supply line must be tested in accordance with Title 17, Section 7605 immediately prior to a switchover from the reclaimed water supply to the potable water supply. The completed test report must be sent to the Regional Board prior to activation. 
i.  The public services department and regional board must be notified within 24 hours of each switchover. 
j.  The city shall supervise the switchover and activation of the potable water service; and subsequent deactivation. 
(Ord. 540B §1(part), 1990; Ord. No. 968B, § 2, 5-8-2018 )  
13.05.050 - Customer responsibility. 
It shall be the responsibility of each customer to furnish, and install in a manner approved by the city, and keep in good working order and safe condition, any and all backflow prevention assemblies as required by this chapter. The city shall not be responsible for any loss or damage directly or indirectly resulting from or caused by any improper or negligent installation, operation, use, repair or maintenance of, or interfering with, any backflow prevention assembly, required by this chapter, by any customer or any other person. 
(Ord. 540B §1(part), 1990)  
13.05.060 - Authority to inspect. 
The customer's premises shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the city to determine if protection of the city water system is required at the service connection(s). 
(Ord. 540B §1(part), 1990)  
13.05.070 - Testing, maintenance and reporting. 
(a)  The owners of any premises on which backflow prevention devices are installed shall have the devices tested by a backflow prevention device tester certified by the city. 
(b)  Backflow prevention devices must be tested at least annually and immediately after installation, relocation or repair. The city may require a more frequent testing schedule if it is determined to be necessary. 
(c)  Reports of tests of backflow prevention devices shall be filed with the city in a form acceptable to the city within 20 days after said tests are conducted. 
(d)  Upon request, the city will test a customer's backflow prevention device to fulfill the requirements of this chapter. The customer will be charged for the test and any minor maintenance found necessary to keep the device in working order, on the next regular water bill. The fee for testing shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(e)  No device shall be placed back in service unless it is functioning as required. These devices shall be serviced, overhauled, or replaced whenever they are found to be defective and all costs of testing, repair, and maintenance shall be borne by the water user. 
(Ord. 540B §1(part), 1990)  
13.05.080 - Backflow prevention device removal. 
Approval must be obtained from the city before a backflow prevention device is removed, relocated or replaced. 
(1)  Removal. The use of a device may be discontinued and the device removed from service upon presentation of sufficient evidence to the city to verify that a hazard no longer exists or is not likely to be created in the future. 
(2)  Relocation. A device may be relocated following confirmation by the city that the relocation will continue to provide the required protection and satisfy installation requirements. A retest will be required following the relocation of the device. 
(3)  Repair. A device may be removed for repair, provided the water use is discontinued until repair is completed and the device is returned to service, or the service connection is equipped with other backflow protection approved by the city. A retest will be required following the repair of the device. 
(4)  Replacement. A device may be removed and replaced provided the water use is discontinued until the replacement device is installed. All replacement devices must be approved by the city and must be commensurate with the degree of hazard involved. 
(Ord. 540B §1(part), 1990)  
13.05.090 - User supervisor. 
At each premises where it is necessary, in the opinion of the city, a user supervisor shall be designated by and at the expense of the water user. This user supervisor shall be responsible for the monitoring of the backflow prevention devices and for avoidance of cross-connections. In the event of contamination or pollution of the drinking water system due to a cross-connection on the premises, the city shall be promptly notified by the user supervisor so that appropriate measures may be taken to overcome the contamination. The water user shall inform the city of the user supervisor's identity on, as a minimum, an annual basis and whenever a change occurs. 
(Ord. 540B §1 (part), 1990)  
13.05.100 - Review proposed new services. 
The city shall review requests for new services to determine if backflow prevention is needed. Plans and specifications must be submitted to the city upon request for review of possible cross-connection hazards as a condition of service for new service connections. If it is determined that a backflow prevention device is necessary to protect the public water system, the required device must be installed before service will be granted. 
(Ord. 540B §1(part), 1990)  
13.05.110 - Water system survey. 
(a)  The city may require an on-premises inspection to evaluate cross-connection hazards. The city will transmit a written notice requesting an inspection appointment to each affected water user. Any customer who cannot or will not allow an on-premises inspection of their piping system shall be required to install the backflow prevention device the city considers necessary. 
(b)  The city may, at its discretion, require a reinspection for cross-connection hazards of any premises to which it serves water. The city will transmit a written notice requesting an inspection appointment of each affected water user. Any customer who cannot or will not allow an on-premises inspection of their piping system shall be required to install the backflow prevention device the city considers necessary. 
(Ord. 540B §1(part), 1990)  
13.05.120 - Customer notification—Device installation. 
(a)  The city will notify the water user of the survey findings, listing corrective action to be taken if required. A period of 60 days will be given to complete all corrective action required including installation of backflow prevention devices. 
(b)  A second notice will be sent to each water user who does not take the required corrective action prescribed in the first notice within the 60-day period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a two-week period to take the required corrective action. If no action is taken within the two week period, the city may terminate water service to the affected water user until the required corrective actions are taken. 
(Ord. 540B §1(part), 1990)  
13.05.130 - Customer notification—Testing and maintenance. 
(a)  The city will notify each affected water user when it is time for the backflow prevention device installed on their service connection to be tested. This written notice shall give the water user 30 days to have the device tested and supply the water user with the necessary form to be completed and resubmitted to the city. 
(b)  A second notice shall be sent to each water user who does not have the backflow prevention device tested as prescribed in the first notice within the 30-day period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a two-week period to have his/her backflow prevention device tested. If no action is taken within the two-week period, the city may terminate water service to the affected water user until the subject device is tested. 
(c)  Should the customer want the city to perform the test as set forth in Section 13.05.070, the city shall be so notified within seven days of receipt of notice. 
(Ord. 540B §1(part), 1990)  
13.05.140 - Water service termination. 
When the city encounters water uses that represent a clear and immediate hazard to the potable water supply that cannot be immediately abated, the city shall institute the procedure for discontinuing the city water service. 
(Ord. 540B §1(part), 1990)  
13.05.150 - Basis for termination. 
Conditions or water uses that create a basis for water service termination shall include, but are not limited to, the following items: 
(1)  Refusal to install a required backflow prevention device; 
(2)  Refusal to test, or allow testing of, a backflow prevention device; 
(3)  Refusal to repair a faulty backflow prevention device; 
(4)  Refusal to replace a faulty backflow prevention device; 
(5)  Bypassing or rendering inoperative any backflow prevention device installed under these provisions; 
(6)  Direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a sewer line; 
(7)  Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a system or equipment containing contaminants; 
(8)  Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and an auxiliary water system; and 
(9)  A situation which presents an immediate health hazard to the public water system. 
(Ord. 540B §1(part), 1990)  
13.05.160 - Termination procedures. 
(a)  For conditions (1), (2) or (3), the city will terminate service to a customer's premises after two written notices have been sent specifying the corrective action needed and the time period in which it must be done, if no action is taken within the allowed time period. 
(b)  For conditions (4), (5), (6), (7), (8) or (9), the city will take the following steps: 
(1)  Make a reasonable effort to advise the water user of intent to terminate water service; 
(2)  Terminate water supply and lock service valve. The water service will remain inactive until correction of violation has been approved by the city. 
(Ord. 540B §1 (part), 1990)  
13.05.170 - Certification as a backflow prevention device tester. 
Each applicant for certification as a tester of backflow prevention devices shall file an approved application with the city clerk, together with a fee as may be established by the city council. 
(Ord. 540B §1(part), 1990)  
13.05.180 - Minimum requirements for certification. 
Competency in all phases of backflow prevention device testing and repair must be demonstrated by means of education and experience in order to obtain certification. The following are minimum requirements: 
(1)  Applicants shall have had at least two years experience in plumbing or pipefitting or equivalent qualifications. 
(2)  Applicants shall hold a valid certification from the American Water Works Association (A.W.W.A.), California-Nevada Section, from an approved county certification program, or have equivalent training in the opinion of the city, and the State Department of Health Services. 
(3)  Each applicant must have at his disposal, the proper test equipment which has been calibrated to the manufacturer's specifications within the previous three years. He shall be responsible for the competency and accuracy of all tests and reports prepared by him. 
(Ord. 540B §1(part), 1990)  
13.05.190 - Length of certification. 
The certification issued to any tester is valid for a period of two years, provided that the basic (non-city) certification remains valid, and may be revoked, suspended, or not renewed by the city for improper testing, repairs, and/or reporting. 
(Ord. 540B §1(part), 1990)  
13.05.200 - Rules and regulations. 
The city administrator is authorized to make all necessary and reasonable rules and regulations with respect to the enforcement of this chapter. All such rules and regulations shall be consistent with the provisions of this chapter and shall be effective 30 days after being filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. 540B §1(part), 1990)  
CHAPTER 13.08 - SEWAGE FACILITY REGULATIONS  
Article I. - Definitions 
 
13.08.010 - Applicability of article. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as set out in this article. 
(Ord. 314B Art. I (part), 1976)  
13.08.020 - Applicant. 
"Applicant" means the owner or the agent of the owner of the property for which sewer service is being requested. 
(Ord. 314B §101, 1976)  
13.08.030 - B.O.D. 
"B.O.D." (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius. 
(Ord. 314B §102, 1976)  
13.08.040 - Building drain. 
"Building drain" means that part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer beginning two feet outside the building wall. 
(Ord. 314B §103, 1976)  
13.08.050 - Building sewer. 
"Building sewer" means that part of the horizontal piping of a drainage system which extends from the end of the building drain and which receives the discharge of the building drain and conveys it to a public sewer, private sewer, individual sewage-disposal system or other point of disposal. 
(Ord. 314B §104, 1976)  
13.08.060 - City inspector. 
"City inspector" means the employee of the city designated as the inspector of sewer service, or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. 314B §105, 1976)  
13.08.070 - Combined sewer. 
"Combined sewer" means a public sewer which is designed to carry both sanitary and storm flows. 
(Ord. 314B §106, 1976)  
13.08.080 - Commercial service. 
"Commercial service" means provision of sewer service to any structure, facility or premises which is neither residential or industrial in character and which is used for business, trade, manufacturing or processing activities. "Commercial service" includes hotels, motels, rest homes, schools and all other service not otherwise defined as "domestic service" or "industrial service." 
(Ord. 314B §107, 1976)  
13.08.090 - Domestic service. 
"Domestic service" means provision of sewer service for household residential purposes to either single-family or multiple-family dwelling units. 
(Ord. 314B §108, 1976)  
13.08.100 - Garbage. 
"Garbage" means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
(Ord. 314B §109, 1976)  
13.08.110 - Industrial service. 
"Industrial service" means provision of sewer service to any structure, premises or facility used for manufacturing, processing or similar industrial uses, and shall include all uses permitted only within an industrial zone by the zoning ordinance, except residential and commercial uses. 
(Ord. 314B §110, 1976)  
13.08.120 - Industrial wastes. 
"Industrial wastes" means the liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
(Ord. 314B §111, 1976)  
13.08.130 - Mains. 
"Mains" means collection pipelines located in streets, highways, public ways or private rights-of-way which are used to serve the general public. 
(Ord. 314B §112, 1976)  
13.08.140 - Natural outlet. 
"Natural outlet" means any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, pond, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
(Ord. 314B §113, 1976)  
13.08.150 - Person. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, company, association, society, partnership, corporation, organization or group. 
(Ord. 314B §114, 1976)  
13.08.160 - pH. 
"pH" means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration in grams per liter of solution. 
(Ord. 314B §115, 1976)  
13.08.170 - Premises. 
"Premises" means buildings, establishments, parcels of land or lots which are improved and benefited by drainage, or the integral property or area, including improvements thereon, to which sewer service is or will be provided. 
(Ord. 314B §116, 1976)  
13.08.180 - Properly shredded garbage. 
"Properly shredded garbage" means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
(Ord. 314B §117, 1976)  
13.08.190 - Public sewer. 
"Public sewer" means any sewer which is controlled by the city or other public agency operating a sanitary sewer within the city. 
(Ord. 314B §118, 1976)  
13.08.200 - Sanitary sewage. 
"Sanitary sewage" means any waste discharging into the sewage system and which contains human or animal excreta, offal or any feculent matter. 
(Ord. 314B §119, 1976)  
13.08.210 - Sanitary sewer. 
"Sanitary sewer" means any sewer which carries sanitary sewage or industrial wastes, and to which storm waters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
(Ord. 314B §120, 1976)  
13.08.220 - Service connection. 
"Service connection" means the pipe or other conduit by means of which sewage is conducted from the premises to a main. 
(Ord. 314B §121, 1976)  
13.08.230 - Sewage. 
"Sewage" means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwaters, surface waters and storm waters as may be present. 
(Ord. 314B §122, 1976)  
13.08.240 - Sewage facilities. 
"Sewage facilities" means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage, whether public or private. 
(Ord. 314B §123, 1976)  
13.08.250 - Sewage treatment plant. 
"Sewage treatment plant" means any arrangement of devices and structures used for the treatment of sewage. 
(Ord. 314B §124, 1976)  
13.08.260 - Sewer. 
"Sewer" means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
(Ord. 314B §125, 1976)  
13.08.270 - Storm drain. 
"Storm drain" means a pipe or conduit for carrying the runoff from storm and surface drainage. 
(Ord. 314B §126, 1976)  
13.08.280 - Suspended solids. 
"Suspended solids" means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtration, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
(Ord. 314B §127, 1976)  
13.08.290 - Watercourse. 
"Watercourse" means a channel in which a flow of water, either groundwater or surface water, occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. 314B §128, 1976)  
Article II. - Use of Public Sewers 
 
13.08.300 - Plumbing code applicability. 
The provisions of the Uniform Plumbing Code, 1973 Edition, as adopted by reference by the city, or the provisions or any subsequent edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code adopted by the city, shall apply unless otherwise specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 314B §201, 1976)  
13.08.310 - Connection to proximate sewer required. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, every building in which plumbing fixtures are installed and every premises having drainage piping thereon shall have a connection to a public sewer, provided that a sewer main is located 200 feet or less from the building or drainage facility. 
(Ord. 314B §202, 1976)  
13.08.315 - Continued use of private sewer system. 
Property owners using private sewer systems that are in compliance with applicable codes and regulations may continue to use the private system when new public sewer systems are constructed within 200 feet or less from the building or drainage facility. The construction or installation of a public sewer system will not cause property owners to abandon their private sewer systems. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 3, 11-12-2013)  
13.08.320 - Deposit of waste. 
It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be placed or deposited upon public or private property within the city any garbage, refuse, sewage or waste, except as provided by this chapter or applicable ordinances. 
(Ord. 314B §203, 1976)  
13.08.330 - Discharge of polluted waters to natural outlet. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any natural outlet any garbage, sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters unless suitable treatment has been provided and approved by the city inspector. 
(Ord. 314B §204, 1976)  
13.08.340 - Unpolluted waters—Discharge to sanitary sewer. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. 314B §205, 1976)  
13.08.350 - Unpolluted waters—Proper discharge—Interceptor maintenance. 
Storm waters and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the city inspector. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the city inspector, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(Ord. 314B §206, 1976)  
13.08.360 - Discharges prohibited without permit. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to a public sewer within the city any of the following-described substances, materials, waters or wastes without first obtaining a written permit issued by the city inspector: 
(1)  Any water or waste which contains more than 100 milligrams per liter of fat, oil or grease. The limitation of hexane-soluble materials shall not apply to those wastewaters from industries processing fats and oils of vegetable or animal origin for which the industry supplies, at its own expense, satisfactory evidence that the wastewaters are transportable in the sewers without causing obstructions to flow; 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not; 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5 or lower than 5.5; 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids in excess of 300 parts per million by weight, or of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant. 
(Ord. 314B §207, 1976)  
13.08.370 - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city inspector, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except, that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city inspector, and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
Cross reference— For provisions on the maintenance and operation of grease, oil and sand interceptors, see Section 13.08.350 of this code. 
(Ord. 314B §208, 1976)  
13.08.380 - Control manhole, instruments, tests and logs required when. 
When required by the city inspector, the owner of any property derived by a building sewer carrying industrial waste shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the waste. Tests and logs of tests may be required of the industry and shall be made available to the city. Such manhole, when required, shall be safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city inspector. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe at all times. In addition, the manhole shall be readily accessible during working hours by request to the owner or his representative. 
(Ord. 420B §2 (part), 1982: Ord. 314B §209(part), 1976)  
13.08.390 - Sewer meters required when. 
All building permits and construction permits for the construction of commercial or industrial facilities shall be conditioned upon the installation of a sewer meter. Such meter shall be located and constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city inspector and shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and maintained by him so as to be safe at all times. 
(Ord. 420B §2(part), 1982: Ord. 314B §209(part), 1976)  
13.08.400 - Preliminary treatment facilities required when. 
The admission into a public sewer of any waters or wastes having: 
(1)  A five-day B.O.D. greater than 300 parts per million by weight; or 
(2)  Containing more than 300 parts per million by weight of suspended solids; or 
(3)  Containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in Section 13.08.360; or 
(4)  Having an average daily flow greater than one percent of the average daily flow of the city; shall be subject to the review and approval of the city engineer. Where necessary, in the opinion of the city engineer, the owner shall provide at his expense such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce the B.O.D. or the suspended solids to levels provided in this chapter, to reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to the limits provided in this chapter, or to control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for approval by the city inspector and the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Central Valley Region, and no construction of such preliminary treatment facility shall be commenced until such approvals have been obtained in writing. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Ord. 314B §210, 1976)  
13.08.410 - Measurement, test and analysis methodology. 
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In the even that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. 
(Ord. 314B §211, 1976)  
13.08.420 - Agreement to accept wastes not prohibited. 
No provision of this chapter shall be construed to prevent the city from entering into an agreement with any discharger of industrial waste which exceeds the characteristics and limitations set forth in this chapter, upon payment by such discharger of such costs as may be determined by the city to be sufficient to provide for the receipt and treatment of such wastes. 
(Ord. 314B §212, 1976)  
Article III. - Private Sewers 
 
13.08.430 - Connection to approved private system required when. 
When no public sewer is available as provided in this chapter, drainage piping from any building or facility shall be connected to an approved private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of the Uniform Plumbing Code and the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 314B §301, 1976)  
13.08.440 - Permit required—Application—Fee. 
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage-disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the city inspector. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information deemed necessary by the city inspector. A fee established by resolution of the city council shall be paid at the time the application is filed for the purpose of defraying the cost of plan checks and inspection of the work. 
(Ord. 412B §10(5)(part), 1982; Ord. 322B §1, 1977: Ord. 314B §302, 1976; Ord. No. 985B , § 8, 5-14-2019)  
13.08.450 - Inspections. 
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city inspector. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any state of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city inspector when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. 
(Ord. 314B §303, 1976)  
13.08.460 - County health recommendations apply—Area for soil absorption—Septic tank or cesspool discharge. 
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the county health department. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area is less than 15,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet. 
(Ord. 314B §304, 1976)  
13.08.470 - Connection to available public sewer. 
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in Section 13.08.310, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Ord. 314B §305, 1976)  
13.08.480 - Sanitary operation and maintenance. 
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Ord. 314B §306, 1976)  
13.08.490 - Lines serving two or more structures. 
Private sanitary sewer lines servicing two or more buildings or structures located on the same lot, when such lines are not maintained by the city, shall be constructed to meet the standards for construction of public sewer lines. 
(Ord. 314B §307, 1976)  
13.08.500 - Private storm sewers. 
Private storm sewers which are not maintained by the city shall be constructed in accordance with standard specifications for public storm sewers. 
(Ord. 314B §308, 1976)  
Article IV. - Building Sewers and Connections 
 
13.08.510 - Permit—Required. 
No person shall use, alter, connect to, uncover or discharge into any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city inspector. 
(Ord. 314B §401, 1976)  
13.08.520 - Permit—Classes—Application—Fee. 
There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: (A) for residential and commercial service, and (B) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by such plans, specifications or other information required by the city inspector. In addition to the connection charges imposed by Chapter 13.12, a fee established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the city for a building sewer permit at the time application is filed, to defray the cost of plan checks and inspection of the work. 
(Ord. 412B §10(5)(part), 1982; Ord. 322B §2, 1977: Ord. 314B §402, 1976; Ord. No. 985B , § 9, 5-14-2019)  
13.08.525 - Expiration of permit. 
Every building sewer permit issued by the city inspector under the provisions of Article IV shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new building sewer permit shall first be obtained so to do, and the fee therefor shall be the amount required for a new permit for such work with a credit being given for any fees previously paid to the city for the original building sewer permit. A credit for fees previously paid will be granted provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and provided further that any failure to commence, suspension or abandonment of work has not exceeded one year. 
(Ord. 501B §3, 1988)  
13.08.530 - Owner to bear costs and liability. 
All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer to the building drain and public sewer shall be borne by the property owner. The owner shall indemnify and hold harmless the city from and against any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly result by the installation or connection of the building sewer by city employees. 
(Ord. 314B §403, 1976)  
13.08.540 - Existing sewers. 
No existing sewer may be used by any building or facility constructed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter unless the sewer is determined by the city inspector to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 314B §404, 1976)  
13.08.550 - Materials, size and slope. 
Building sewer materials shall be approved by the city inspector. The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the city inspector, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall be not less than one-quarter inch per foot. The slope of building sewers six inches and larger shall be not less than one-eighth inch per foot. 
(Ord. 314B §405, 1976)  
13.08.560 - Depth, course, grade and fittings. 
Whenever possible the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building sewer shall be laid at a uniform grade and in straight alignment in so far as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. 
(Ord. 314B §406, 1976)  
13.08.570 - Lift means. 
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Ord. 314B §407, 1976)  
13.08.580 - Pipelaying and backfill. 
Pipelaying and backfill shall be subject to the approval of the city inspector. Building sewer piping shall be laid on a firm bed throughout its entire length. No backfill shall be placed until after the work has been inspected. 
(Ord. 314B §408, 1976)  
13.08.590 - Connection—Specifications. 
(a)  Connections of building sewers to a public sewer shall be made by the city upon the payment of a connection fee as established by ordinance. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. 
(b)  If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, the city shall at the owner's expense install a "Y" branch in the public sewer at the location specified by the city inspector. 
(c)  Where the public sewer is greater than 12 inches in diameter, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, a neat hole may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees. A 45-degree "L" may be used to make such connection, so that the spigot end does not extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. 
(d)  The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the city inspector. 
(Ord. 314B §409, 1976)  
13.08.600 - Connection—Supervision by city. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city inspector when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the city inspector, or his representative. 
(Ord. 314B §410, 1976)  
13.08.610 - Excavation safety measures—Restoration of public property. 
All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately protected in accordance with applicable law and regulations. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. 314B §411, 1976)  
Article V. - Inspections, Appeals and Penalties 
 
13.08.620 - Right of entry—Conduct of inspector. 
(a)  The city inspector or any other duly authorized employee of the city may enter any public or private property at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; provided, that if such property is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and shall request entry; if such building or premises are unoccupied he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the city inspector, or other duly authorized employee of the city, shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(b)  When the city inspector, or other duly authorized employee of the city, has first obtained a proper inspection warrant, no owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of any building, premises or property shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made, to permit entry by the city inspector, or the duly authorized employee of the city, for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  The city inspector, or other duly authorized employee, shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises during his inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing. 
(Ord. 412B §8, 1982: Ord. 314B §501, 1976)  
13.08.630 - Appeal—Right. 
Any person adversely and directly affected by any determination made by the city inspector or any other officer or employee of the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal the determination to the city council. 
(Ord. 314B §505, 1976)  
13.08.640 - Appeal—Filing notice. 
The notice of appeal must be filed with the city clerk not later than 15 days following the determination of the city inspector or 15 days following the date when the appellant is informed of the determination appealed, whichever is the last to occur. The notice of appeal shall specify the basis of the appeal and only grounds mentioned therein shall be considered by the council. 
(Ord. 314B §506, 1976)  
13.08.650 - Appeal—Hearing scheduling and notice. 
Within ten days of receipt of the appeal, the city clerk shall transmit it to the council with the request that it be set for hearing. The city council shall thereafter set the matter for hearing within 30 days of the date on which it receives the appeal and shall instruct the clerk to give the appellant written notice of the time, date and place of the hearing by mailing notice thereof to the address of the appellant as shown in the notice of appeal. 
(Ord. 314B §507, 1976)  
13.08.660 - Appeal—Hearing. 
At the time of the hearing, the council shall consider all testimony and evidence presented which is relevant to the subject of the appeal and shall within 15 days thereafter affirm, modify or reverse the determination of the city inspector. 
(Ord. 314B §508, 1976)  
13.08.670 - Appeal—Stay of subject determination. 
Any appeal filed pursuant to this chapter shall stay the determination of the city inspector; provided, however, that the filing of the appeal shall not stay any determination; made by the city inspector and the determination shall remain in full force and effect unless and until modified or reversed by the city council. 
(Ord. 314B §509, 1976)  
13.08.680 - Violation—Misdemeanor. 
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties provided by law. 
(Ord. 314B §502, 1976)  
13.08.690 - Violation—Restraint or abatement action. 
In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the city attorney may institute appropriate actions or procedures in a court of competent jurisdiction to restrain or abate any violations of the provisions of this chapter as a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 314B §503, 1976)  
13.08.700 - Violation—Disconnection. 
(a)  In addition to all of the remedies provided in this ordinance, discharge of prohibited waters or wastes shall result in disconnection of the premises from the public sewer. 
(b)  Prior to such discontinuance of service the owner of the real property to which the service was rendered shall be served with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. 
(c)  When service has been disconnected as provided in this ordinance, city inspector may require that the person requesting that such service be reestablished furnish a bond in the sum of $500.00 payable to the city and conditional upon compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, before granting permission to make such connection. The person making application for such reestablishment of service shall pay all expenses incurred by the city in causing such disconnection and reconnection before such permission may be granted. 
(Ord. 314B § 504, 1976)  
CHAPTER 13.12 - SEWER CHARGES  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
13.12.010 - Purpose and authority. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority of Article 4 of Chapter 6 of Part 3, Division 5 of the Health and Safety Code for the purpose of prescribing and providing for the collection and enforcement of charges for sewer services, and charges for the privilege of connecting to sewage facilities. 
(Ord. 297B § 1.1, 1975)  
13.12.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall be construed as defined in this section, unless otherwise specifically defined in this chapter, or unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
(1)  "B.O.D." means biochemical oxygen demand, indicating the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius. 
(2)  "Commercial facility" means any structure, premises or facility which is neither residential or industrial in character and shall include office, professional and institutional facilities, whether public or private. 
(3)  "Dwelling unit" means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, and shall include a mobile home. 
(4)  "Industrial facility" means any structure, premises or facility used for manufacturing, processing or similar industrial uses, and shall include all uses permitted only within an industrial zone by the zoning ordinance, except residential and commercial uses. 
(5)  "Residential facility" means any dwelling unit or combination of dwelling units, whether located in a single-family structure, multi-family structure, apartment, board and care facility, condominium or other combination of multiple dwelling units, excepting hotels and motels. 
(Ord. 504B § 3, 1988; Ord. 297B § 1.2, 1975)  
13.12.030 - Use of revenues. 
Revenues derived under the provisions of this chapter shall be used only for the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, maintenance and operation of the water, sewer and sanitations systems and facilities of the city, to repay principal and interest on bonds issued for the acquisition, construction or reconstruction of such water, sewer and sanitation systems and facilities and to repay any federal or state loans or advances made for the construction or reconstruction of such water, sewer and sanitation systems and facilities; provided, however, that such revenue shall not be used for the acquisition or construction of new local street sewers or laterals as distinguished from main trunk, interceptor and outfall sewers. 
(Ord. 297B § 1.3, 1975)  
Article II. - Connection Charges 
 
13.12.040 - Established. 
Sewer connection charges are established in the amounts set forth in this article for the privilege of connecting to city sewer facilities. 
(Ord. 297B § 2.1, 1975)  
13.12.050 - Factors for types of service. 
(a)  Reserved for "Residential Facilities - Except Hotel and Motel" 
(b)  Reserved for "Hotel and Motel" 
(c)  Commercial or Industrial - Low Strength - Low Quantity: (1) Strength less than 200 mg/l B.O.D. and/or suspended solids, and (2) quantity of less than 25,000 gallons per day. 
(1)  Special low density - 1 EDU per five employees, or fraction thereof: 
a.  Parking garages. 
b.  Warehouses. 
c.  Storage facilities. 
(2)  Low density - 1 EDU per 6,000 square feet, or fraction thereof: 
a.  Churches without kitchen or meeting hall. 
b.  Low usage retail stores (hardware, appliance, furniture). 
(3)  Medium density - 1 EDU per 3,000 square feet, or fraction thereof: 
a.  Theaters. 
b.  Offices. 
c.  Auditoriums, halls, and lodges. 
d.  Retail stores. 
e.  Schools (without cafeterias or gymnasiums). 
f.  Banks and financial offices. 
g.  Bowling/entertainment centers (without kitchen). 
(4)  High density - 1 EDU per 1,500 square feet, or fraction thereof: 
a.  Barber/beauty shops (with lavatories). 
b.  Bars. 
c.  Medical/dental offices. 
d.  Schools (with cafeterias or gymnasiums). 
e.  Service stations. 
f.  Sports/fitness centers. 
(5)  Special commercial users: 
a.  Carwashes - per automatic washing stall ..... 8 EDU 
b.  Carwashes - per self-service stall ..... 2 EDU 
c.  Laundromats - per washing machine .....2/3 EDU 
d.  Markets (without disposal) - per 1,000 square feet .....2/3 EDU 
e.  Markets (with disposal) - per 1,000 square feet ..... 2 EDU 
f.  Restaurants, bakeries, cafes - per 1,000 square feet ..... 2 EDU 
g.  Mortuaries - per 1,000 square feet ..... 2 EDU 
h.  Hospitals - per licensed bed ..... ½ EDU 
i.  Rest home - per licensed bed 1/3 EDU 
j.  Convalescent hospital - per licensed bed 1/3 EDU 
k.  Memory care facility - per licensed bed 1/3 EDU 
(6)  For other types of commercial or industrial users, an independent study may be reviewed and approved at the discretion of the city engineer. 
(d)  Commercial or Industrial - Low Strength - High Quantity: (1) Strength less than 200 mg/l B.O.D. and/or suspended solids, and (2) quantity greater than or equal to 25,000 gallons per day. The city may require flow monitoring for verification. 
(1)  Sewer units based upon discharges as follows: 
a.  Calculation: gpd flows/((((gpd flows - 25,000)/1000) x 2.15) +215) 
Example: 40,000 gpd flows = 161.8 sewer EDUs 
40,000/((((40,000 - 25,000)/1000) x 2.15) +215) = 161.8 EDUs 
40,000/((15 x 2.15) +215) = 161.8 EDUs 
40,000/247.25 = 161.8 EDUs 
(e)  Commercial or Industrial - High Strength: (1) Strength greater than 200 mg/l B.O.D. and/or suspended solids, and/or (2) requiring either special handling or treatment. 
(1)  Calculation of sewer units shall be as follows: 
Sewer units = (gpd/215) x (0.61 + (B.O.D./200) x 0.22 + (SS/200) x 0.17) + special treatment or handling costs 
(f)  General Regulations. 
(1)  Not less than one connection per building. 
(2)  Special provisions can be made within each category where, in the judgment of the city, application of ordinance produces inequities or irregularities requiring revision. 
(3)  Prescribed connection charges apply only to the particular uses listed; where multiple uses, within the meaning of the connection charge ordinance are contained in the same structure, the city will determine and allocate the respective square footage or employment dedicated to each use, and will determine a composite collection charge composed of the respective collection charges for each such use. 
(4)  Classification of shell buildings having no use when connecting to the sewage system shall be determined based on the judgment of the city based on building permit data, applicable zoning, and plans of the developer. Subsequent modifications to such buildings may result in reclassification and the assessment of additional incremental charges. No refunding of previously paid connection charges will be made where modifications are made to any structure which places it in a classification with a lower connection charge rates. 
(5)  When the use of a building changes, the city retains the right to review the previously paid connection charges and require the payment additional connections charges based upon the new use. No refunding of previously paid connection charges will be made where the change in use is within a classification with lower connection charge rates. 
(6)  The city may require additional documentation, procedures, tests or studies to appropriately classify the connection fees. Such requirements may include, but are not limited to, flow monitoring, flow equalization, installation of flow controls, special treatment and specific discharge permitting. 
(Ord. 716B § 1, 2002; Ord. 514B § 1, 1989: Ord. 297B § 2.2, 1975; Ord. No. 919B , § 2(Att. 2), 10-11-2016)  
13.12.060 - Sewer connection charge. 
The basic connection unit charge for residential and non-residential type discharges shall be $6,134.00 per equivalent dwelling unit (EDU). One sewer connection EDU is equal to 215 gallons per day. 
The sewer connection charge set forth herein shall be subject to an annual adjustment up to the change in the San Francisco Construction Cost Index (CCI) as reported by the Engineering News Record (ENR) for the 12-month period beginning March 1 as determined by resolution of the city council. The annual adjustments shall be effective each May 1, beginning in the year 2013. 
(Ord. No. 862B, § 3, 3-13-2012; Ord. 811B § 1(part), 2006: Ord. 725B § 1(part), 2002: Ord. 710B § 1, 2001: Ord. 545B § 1, 1990; Ord. 514B § 1, 1989: Ord. 424B § 1(part), 1982: Ord. 382B § 2(part), 1981: Ord. 297B § 2.3(part), 1975)  
13.12.070 - Payment of connection charges. 
In those cases in which a building permit is not required, connection charges shall be payable as a condition of any land-use approval and, in any event, before connection is made to the city sewer system. For mobile home parks, connection charges shall be paid prior to the time of the first connection of a mobile home lot, for the total number of mobile home lots permitted. 
(Ord. 634B § 1, 1996: Ord. 424B § 1(part), 1982: Ord. 382B § 2(part), 1981: Ord. 297B § 2.3(part), 1975)  
13.12.075 - Time for connection. 
In the event connection to the city sewer system is not completed within 180 days after payment of the sewer connection charges, the person desiring to connect to the city sewer system will be required to pay the new sewer connection charges due at the time actual connection to the city sewer system is completed with credit being given for any previously paid sewer connection charges. 
(Ord. 501B § 4, 1988)  
13.12.076 - Establishment of city sewer service connection. 
Connection to the city sewer is deemed established when all structures to be constructed on the property for which sewer service is being requested have been connected to city sewer facilities and are capable of discharging sewage into a public sewer. 
(Ord. 504B § 2, 1988)  
13.12.080 - Expansion of existing facilities. 
The connection charge for expansion of existing facilities shall be governed by the provisions of Section 13.12.050. 
(Ord. 297B § 2.4, 1975)  
Article III. - Monthly Service Charges 
 
13.12.090 - Established. 
Sewer service charges are established in the amounts set forth in this article, payable monthly for each facility which has a sewer connection or otherwise discharges sewage into the city sewage system. Monthly sewer service charges and rates established by this article shall be reviewed annually by the city council. 
(Ord. 297B § 3.1, 1975)  
13.12.100 - Factors for service classifications. 
There is established a monthly unit service charge for the discharge of sewage into the sewer system of the city, on the basis of classification of use, as follows: 
Classification of Use 	Unit Charge 
(a) Residential: For each dwelling unit other than in a hotel, motel or roominghouse 	one 
(b) Hotels, motels and roominghouses: 	
(1) For each living unit with a kitchen facility 	three-fourths 
(2) For each living unit without a kitchen facility 	one-half 
(c) Commercial and industrial: 	
(1) Commercial or industrial establishments which do not discharge into the sanitary sewer system except for employee restrooms: 	
a. Establishments with up to ten employees 	one 
b. For each additional group of ten or fewer employees 	one 
(2) Commercial and industrial users where wastes are not of a residential type or character: The sewer monthly service charge shall be determined by a resolution of the city council on the basis of a study by the city administrator. The city may require pretreatment before acceptance of wastes. 	
(d) Schools: For each twelve students and employees 	one 
(e) Churches 	one 
(f) Service clubs with bar and/or kitchen, each sixty seats 	one 
(g) Restaurants, taverns, bars: For each twenty seats 	one 
(h) Service stations 	two 
(i) Mobile home parks, per lot 	one 
(j) Others: An equivalent unit service charge shall be fixed by resolution of the city council on the basis of studies submitted by the city administrator. 	
 
(Ord. 297B § 3.2, 1975)  
13.12.110 - Basic monthly sewer service charge. 
(a)  The monthly unit service charge per equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) for residential and non-residential industrial users within the city limits shall be as follows: 
Effective January 1, 2014 	$32.08 
Effective July 1, 2014 to June 30, 2015 	32.08 
Effective July 1, 2015 to June 30, 2016 	32.08 
Effective July 1 , 2016 to June 30, 2017 	32.08 
Effective July 1, 2017 	32.08 
 
The city shall determine the non-residential industrial users and classify them as such in the utility billing system. 
(b)  The monthly unit service charge per account for non-residential users, excluding industrial users, within the city limits shall be as follows: 
Effective January 1, 2014 	$32.08 
Effective July 1, 2014 to June 30, 2015 	32.08 
Effective July 1, 2015 to June 30, 2016 	32.08 
Effective July 1 , 2016 to June 30, 2017 	32.08 
Effective July 1, 2017 	32.08 
 
Non-residential users, excluding industrial users, shall pay a flow charge in addition to the monthly unit service charge per account. The flow charges shall be based upon each 1,000 gallons of water consumed as recorded by the customers water meter. The flow charges will include two categories; average strength and high strength. 
High strength flows are defined as those types of users whose discharge into the sewer system typically exceed one of the following: 
(1)  B.O.D. of 350 ppm (parts per million); or 
(2)  Suspended solids of 300 ppm; or 
(3)  Both a B.O.D. of 250 ppm and suspended solids of 250 ppm. 
The flow charges per each 1,000 gallons of potable water delivered will be as follows: 
Flow Type 	1/1/2014 	7/1/2014 	7/1/2015 	7/1/2016 	7/1/2017 
Average Strength 	$1.46 	$2.33 	$3.19 	$4.05 	$4.92 
High Strength 	4.62 	5.48 	6.35 	7.21 	8.07 
 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 4, 11-12-2013; Ord. 808B § 1, 2006: Ord. 635B § 1, 1996: Ord. 602B § 1, 1993: Ord. 574B § 1, 1992: Ord. 524B § 1, 1989: Ord. 437B § 1(part), 1983: Ord. 297B § 3.3(a, b), 1975)  
13.12.130 - Lift station surcharge. 
No additional monthly charge will be required to cover the costs of lift station operations, maintenance or replacement. 
(Ord. No. 888B, § 4, 11-12-2013; Ord. 602B § 5, 1993: Ord. 297B § 3.4, 1975)  
13.12.132 - Capital replacement surcharge. 
No additional monthly charge will be required to cover the cost of replacement of property, plant and equipment used for the purpose of collecting and treating wastewater. 
(Ord. 808B § 2, 2006: Ord. 602B § 6, 1993)  
Article IV. - Billing 
 
13.12.140 - Direct billing—Regular billing period. 
Unless action is taken pursuant to Article V to collect current sewer service charges on the tax roll, the city shall bill users directly for such charges. The regular billing period shall be monthly, provided that the city administrator may establish quarterly, semiannual or annual billing periods for public schools and other public institutions. 
(Ord. 297B § 4.1, 1975)  
13.12.150 - Opening and closing bills. 
Opening and closing bills for less than the normal billing period shall be for not less than one month. 
(Ord. 297B § 4.2, 1975)  
13.12.160 - Due date. 
Charges for service shall be due and payable on the first day following the month or other established billing period such services were used unless otherwise provided. 
(Ord. 508B § 5, 1988: Ord. 297B § 4.3, 1975)  
13.12.170 - Billing with other utilities. 
The city council may provide that sewer service charges shall be collected with the rates and charges for any other utility service furnished by the city and that any or all such charges may be itemized and billed upon the same bill and collected as one item. 
(Ord. 297B § 4.15, 1979)  
Article V. - Collection with General Taxes 
 
13.12.180 - Authorization by council. 
(a)  The city council may, by ordinance approved by a two-thirds vote, elect to have sewer service charges for any forthcoming fiscal year, or delinquent sewer service charges which have accrued, together with interest thereon, or both, collected on the secured tax roll, in the same manner and at the same time as general property taxes. 
(b)  The city council elects to have delinquent sewer charges, together with any interest or penalties thereon, collected on the secured tax roll, in the same manner and at the same time as general property taxes; provided, that this subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the city from collecting any or all of such charges in any other manner provided by ordinance or law. 
(Ord. 407B §1, 1982; Ord. 297B §4.4, 1975)  
13.12.190 - Report preparation. 
In the event of an election pursuant to Section 13.12.180, a written report shall be prepared and filed with the city clerk, which report shall contain a description of each parcel of real property receiving services and facilities and the amount of the current and/or delinquent sewer service charges for each parcel computed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. The real property may be described by reference to county assessor's maps or by such other reference sufficient to identify the property affected. 
(Ord. 297B §4.5, 1975)  
13.12.200 - Notice of report and hearing. 
The city clerk shall cause notice of the filing of the report and notice of the time and place of a hearing thereon by the city council to be published once a week for two successive weeks prior to the date set for hearing in the NewsMessenger, a newspaper of general circulation printed and published in the county. Prior to collection of charges on the tax roll for the first time, the city clerk shall cause notice in writing of the filing of the report, and of the time and place of hearing thereon, to be mailed to each person to whom any part or parcel of real property described in the report is assessed on the last equalized assessment roll, at the address shown on the roll or as known to the city clerk. 
(Ord. 297B §4.6, 1975)  
13.12.210 - Hearing. 
At the time of the hearing provided for in Section 13.12.200, the city council shall hear and consider all objections or protests, if any, to the report referred to in the notice and many continue the hearing from time to time. If the city council finds that protest is made by the owners of a majority of the separate parcels of property described in the report, the report shall not be adopted and the charges shall be collected separately from the tax roll and shall not constitute a lien against any parcel or parcels of property. 
(Ord. 297B §4.7, 1975)  
13.12.220 - Final determination by council. 
Upon the conclusion of the hearing on the final report, unless protest is made by the owners of a majority of the separate parcels of property described in the report, the city council may adopt, revise, change, reduce or modify any sewer service charge, or overrule any or all objections, and shall make its determination upon each charge as described in the report, which determination shall be final. 
(Ord. 297B §4.8, 1975)  
13.12.230 - Filing of report with auditor. 
On or before August 10 in each year following the final determination of the city council, the city clerk shall file with the auditor a copy of the report with a statement endorsed thereon over the city clerk's signature that it has been finally adopted by the city council, and the auditor shall enter the amounts of the sewer service charges against the respective lots or parcels of land as they appear on the current assessment roll. Where any such parcels are outside the boundaries of the city, they shall be added to the assessment roll of the city for the purpose of collecting such charges. 
(Ord. 297B §4.9, 1975)  
13.12.240 - Parcels not on roll. 
If the property is not described on the roll, the auditor shall enter the description thereon together with the amounts of the sewer service charges, as shown on the report. 
(Ord. 297B §4.10, 1975)  
13.12.250 - Lien effective date. 
The amount of the charges shall constitute a lien against the lot or parcel of land against which the sewer service charge has been imposed as of noon on the first Monday in March immediately preceding the date of levy. The tax collector shall include the amount of the sewer service charges on bills for taxes levied against the respective lots and parcels of land. 
(Ord. 297B §4.11, 1975)  
13.12.260 - Collection with general tax bill. 
Thereafter, the amount of the sewer service charges shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner and by the same persons as, together with and not separately from, the general taxes for the city, and shall be delinquent at the same time and thereafter be subject to the same penalties for delinquency. 
(Ord. 297B §4.12, 1975)  
13.12.270 - Applicability of general tax laws. 
All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of general taxes of the city, including but not limited to those pertaining to the matters of delinquency, correction, cancellation, refund and redemption, are applicable to such sewer service charges, except as provided by Health and Safety Code section 5473.8. 
(Ord. 297B §4.13, 1975)  
13.12.280 - Separate billing—Compensation for county's costs. 
(a)  The tax collector may, in his discretion, issue separate bills for such sewer service charges and separate receipts for collection on account of such charges. 
(b)  The county shall be compensated for services rendered in connection with the levy, collection and enforcement of such charges for the city in an amount to be fixed by agreement between the board of supervisors and the city council. The compensation shall not exceed $5.00 for each account handled, or one percent of all money collected, whichever is greater. The compensation shall be paid into the county salary fund. 
(Ord. 297B §4.14, 1975)  
13.12.290 - Payment under protest. 
Whenever provision is made by this chapter, or any ordinance pursuant to this chapter, for the collection of sewer charges imposed by this chapter on the tax roll on which general taxes are collected, any person may pay the charges established by this chapter under protest and the provisions of Article 2, Chapter 5, Part 9, Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall apply. 
(Ord. 297B §1.6, 1975)  
Article VI. - Delinquency 
 
13.12.300 - Penalty—Interest. 
All fees or charges (other than sewer service charges for which provision is made, prior to delinquency, for collection on the tax rolls on which general city property taxes are collected) which are not paid on or before the 30th day following the date such charges were due and payable are delinquent and a penalty of ten percent of the charge shall be imposed on the 30th day following the date such charge was due and payable. In addition, a penalty of one-half of one percent per month of the basic charge plus the ten percent penalty shall be imposed on the 60th day following the date such charge was due and payable and on each 30th day thereafter until there is payment in full of the charge plus all penalties. Penalties imposed pursuant to this section shall be billed and collected in the same manner as other fees and charges imposed pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. 482B §9, 1986: Ord. 297B §5.1, 1982)  
13.12.310 - Lien status. 
If any charge imposed by this chapter remains delinquent for a period of 60 days, such charge shall constitute a lien against the lot or parcel of land against which it was imposed, upon recording thereof with the county recorder. Such lien shall have the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien and shall continue for three years from the time of recording unless sooner released or otherwise discharged. The city shall include a statement on its bill to each property owner which shall give notice of the lien provided for by this section. 
(Ord. 297B §5.2, 1975)  
13.12.320 - Civil action. 
Sewer service charges and connection charges imposed by this chapter shall constitute a debt to the city and the city may institute a civil action to recover delinquent charges, in which event it shall have judgment for the cost of suit and reasonable attorneys' fees. 
(Ord. 297B §5.3, 1975)  
13.12.330 - Disconnection—Authorized—Reconnection. 
The city may disconnect any premises from the sewer system if charges are not paid after they have become delinquent. The city administrator shall estimate the cost of disconnection and the cost of reconnecting the facility to the sewer system and the owner of the premises shall deposit the estimated costs of disconnection and reconnection before such premises are reconnected to the sewer system. In the event such arrearages are paid and the premises are reconnected to the sewer system, the city administrator shall refund any part of the deposit remaining after payment of all costs of disconnection and reconnection. 
(Ord. 297B §5.4, 1975)  
13.12.340 - Disconnection—Notice. 
At least 15 calendar days prior to any proposed termination, the city shall give notice of the delinquency and the impending termination by first-class mail to the customer to whom the service is billed and to the property owner. Notice to the property owner shall be sent to the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the county. 
(Ord. 578B §2, 1992: Ord. 408B §5(part), 1982: Ord. 297B §5.45(a), 1975)  
13.12.350 - Disconnection—Review. 
(a)  Any customer who has initiated a complaint or requested a hearing on his bill within five days of receiving the notice of disconnection shall be given an opportunity for review of such complaint by the city administrator or his designated representative. 
(b)  The city shall not terminate sewer service during the pendency of an investigation or review of a customer dispute or complaint or prior to any hearing initiated pursuant to this section or Section 13.12.340. 
(c)  The city administrator is authorized to resolve complaints or disputes initiated pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. 408B §5(part), 1982: Ord. 297B §5.45(b, c, d), 1975)  
13.12.360 - Disconnection—Abatement of habitation. 
During any period of nonconnection or disconnection, habitation of premises required to connect to the sewer system shall constitute a public nuisance, and the city council shall cause proceedings to be brought for the abatement of the occupancy of the premises for human habitation. In the event such action is commenced, there shall be paid to the city, as a condition of connection or reconnection, reasonable attorneys' fees and costs of suit arising in such action. 
(Ord. 297B §5.5, 1975)  
Article VII. - Appeals 
 
13.12.370 - Right—Initiation. 
Any person adversely and directly affected by a determination made by the city administrator or his designee under the provisions of this ordinance may appeal the determination to the city council. Notice of appeal must be filed in writing with the city clerk not later than 15 days from the date of such determination, or not later than 15 days from receipt by the appellant of notice of such determination, whichever shall last occur. The notice shall specify the basis for appeal. 
(Ord. 297B §1.4, 1975)  
13.12.380 - Hearing. 
At its next regular meeting following receipt of the appeal by the city clerk, the city council shall set the matter for hearing within 30 days and shall direct the city clerk to give the appellant written notice of the time, date and place of the hearing. At the time of the hearing, the city council shall consider all testimony and evidence presented which is relevant to the subject of the appeal and shall, within 15 days thereafter, affirm, modify or reverse the determination of the city administrator or his designee. 
(Ord. 297B §1.5, 1975)  
CHAPTER 13.14 - CONSOLIDATED BILLING FOR CITY UTILITIES 
 
13.14.010 - Consolidated billing. 
Fees and charges for utilities furnished by the city, including but not limited to sewer service, water service and refuse collection service charges and fees together with any delinquency penalties and interest thereon shall be billed upon the same bill and collected as one item. 
(Ord. 482B §10(part), 1986)  
13.14.020 - Nonpayment—Disconnection of services. 
In addition to any other remedy that the city may have for the collection of delinquent utility charges and fees under ordinance or state law, in the event of nonpayment of any one or more of the utility services billed in the consolidated billing pursuant to this chapter, the city may disconnect and terminate all utility services to the service location. Prior to any proposed disconnection or termination of utility services for nonpayment, the city shall give notice of the delinquency and the impending disconnection or termination as provided in Sections 13.04.240 and 13.12.340. 
(Ord. 482B §10(part), 1986)  
CHAPTER 13.16 - UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS 
 
13.16.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases defined in this section are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions: 
(1)  "Commission" means the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California. 
(2)  "Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures" means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above ground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. 
(3)  "Underground utility district" or "district" means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.16.030. 
(Ord. 236B §1, 1969)  
13.16.020 - Public hearing on proposed district. 
The council may, from time to time, call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 236B §2, 1969)  
13.16.030 - Designation by resolution—Time for undergrounding. 
If, after any public hearing, the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area composing such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
(Ord. 236B §3, 1969)  
13.16.040 - Compliance required. 
Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 13.16.030, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires or associated structures in the district after the date when such overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as the overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 13.16.090, and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 236B §4, 1969)  
13.16.050 - Exempted facilities. 
This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.16.030 shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities: 
(1)  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer; 
(2)  Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting; 
(3)  Overhead wires, exclusive of supporting structures, crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited; 
(4)  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts; 
(5)  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street; 
(6)  Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures used by a utility for furnishing communication services; 
(7)  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts; 
(8)  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(Ord. 236B §6, 1969)  
13.16.060 - Notice to property owners and utility companies. 
(a)  Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.16.030, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by the resolution of the adoption of the resolution. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communications or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. 
(b)  Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.16.030, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. 
(Ord. 236B §7, 1969)  
13.16.070 - Responsibility of utility companies—Notice. 
(a)  If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.16.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. 
(b)  Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.16.030, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. 
(Ord. 236B §8, 1969)  
13.16.080 - Responsibility of property owners—Notice. 
(a)  Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 13.16.070 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served, all in accordance with applicable rules and regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.16.030, the city engineer shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten days after receipt of such notice. 
(b)  The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States Mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner's name appears, and must be addressed to such owner's last known address as it appears, on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of Lincoln, California. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within 48 hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the city engineer shall, within 48 hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(c)  The notice given by the city engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if the work is not completed within 30 days after receipt of such notice, the city engineer will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon the property. 
(Ord. 236B §9 (a, b, c), 1969)  
13.16.090 - Performance by city and assessment therefor. 
(a)  If, upon the expiration of the 30-day period provided for in subsection 13.16.080(c), the required underground facilities have not been provided, the city engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, that if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communication services are being furnished thereto, the city engineer shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. 
(b)  Upon completion of the work by the city engineer, he shall file a written report with the city council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which time shall not be less than ten days. 
(c)  The city engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner provided in this chapter for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the council will pass upon such report and will hear any protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment. 
(d)  Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there are any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment. 
(e)  If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the city engineer, and the city engineer is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of the properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which the assessment was not paid. The assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as the property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per year. 
(Ord. 236B §9(d-g), 1969)  
13.16.100 - Responsibility of city. 
The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed under this chapter in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.16.030. 
(Ord. 236B §10, 1969)  
13.16.110 - Extension of compliance deadlines. 
In the event that any act required by this ordinance or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.16.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(Ord. 236B §11, 1969)  
CHAPTER 13.20 - PUBLIC FACILITIES IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS 
 
13.20.010 - Public facilities improvement standards. 
The city council adopts the "January 2004 Public Facilities Improvement Standards" and the "January 2004 Design Criteria and Procedures Manual" both of which are incorporated by reference and copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 760B §§1, 2, 2004)  
Chapter 13.30 - CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER RUNOFF CONTROL  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
13.30.010 - Findings of fact. 
The city council adopts this chapter based upon the following findings: 
(1)  The federal CWA provides for the regulation and reduction of pollutants discharged into waters of the United States by extending NPDES requirements to storm water and urban runoff discharges into the city's storm water conveyance system. 
(2)  Storm water flows from individual properties to the municipal storm drain system and then ultimately discharges to waters of the United States. 
(3)  The city has obtained permit coverage under the Phase II NPDES Permit. Under the provisions of the Phase II NPDES Permit, the city is required to possess the necessary legal authority and implement appropriate procedures to regulate the discharge of pollutants and non-storm water discharges into the city's storm water drainage system. The Phase II NPDES Permit also requires the city to ensure all construction activity conducted within the city's jurisdiction that is subject to the requirements of the current construction general permit obtains the required construction general permit coverage. 
(Ord. No. 876B, § 1, 1-22-2013)  
13.30.020 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to ensure the health, safety, and general welfare of citizens, and to protect and enhance water quality of watercourses and water bodies in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the federal CWA by reducing pollutants in storm water discharges associated with construction activity to the maximum extent practicable and by prohibiting non-authorized non-storm water discharges to the storm water conveyance system. 
(Ord. No. 876B, § 1, 1-22-2013)  
13.30.030 - Definitions. 
Any term(s) defined in the CWA, and as amended, and/or defined in the regulations for the storm water discharge permitting program issued by the SWRCB, and as amended, and which are not specifically defined in this chapter, shall have the same meaning as those terms which are set forth in said act or regulation: 
"Applicant" means a property owner or agent of a property owner who is completing construction activity. 
"Best management practices ("BMPs")" means activities, practices, and procedures implemented to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to the municipal storm drain system and waters of the United States. BMPs include, but are not limited to: treatment measures to remove pollutants from storm water; operating and maintenance procedures, scheduling; preservation of existing vegetation; management practices to control runoff and run-on; measures for spill prevention and cleanup; waste management and disposal practices and measures; management practices related to the handling, storing and disposal of materials and waste; erosion and sediment control practices; and the prohibition of specific activities, practices and procedures and other such provisions as the city determines appropriate for the control of pollutants. 
"Building" means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and occupying more than 100 square feet of area. 
"Channel" means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conveys continuously or periodically flowing water. 
"City" means the city of Lincoln. 
"Common plan of development" means a site where multiple separate and/or distinct construction activities may be taking place at different times on different schedules, but still under a single plan. Examples include, but are not limited to: phased projects and projects with multiple lots, even if the separate phases or filings/lots will be constructed under separate contract or by separate owners; a development plan that may be phased over multiple years, but is still under consistent plan for long-term development; and projects in a contiguous area that may [be] unrelated but still under the same contract, such as construction of a building extension and a new parking lot at the same facility. If the project is part of a common plan of development or sale, the disturbed soil area of the entire plan shall be used in determining permit and construction storm water requirements. 
"Construction activity" means any clearing, grading, grubbing, or excavation, or any other activity that results in land disturbance. 
"Development" means the division of land into lots or parcels. 
"Drainage system" means all facilities operated by the city for collecting, transporting, treating and disposing of storm water. For the purpose of this chapter the drainage system also includes facilities owned and operated by other public entities or private citizens that direct storm water to the city's drainage system and are subject to the jurisdiction of the city as defined by law, contract, or inter-jurisdictional agreement. 
"Erosion and sediment control" means any temporary or permanent measures taken to reduce erosion, control siltation and sedimentation and ensure that sediment-laden water does not leave the site, including, but not limited to: preservation of existing vegetation, seeding, mulching, erosion control matting, plastic covers, fiber rolls, silt fences, drain inlet protection, sediment traps, sediment basins, check dams. 
"Erosion and sedimentation control plan" means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during construction activities. 
"Grading" means any excavation, filling, or combination thereof. 
"Land disturbance activity" means any activity which removes existing vegetation or otherwise disturbs the surface of the land. This may include the grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of vegetation, or any activity which bares soil or rock. 
"Landowner" means the legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding proprietary rights in the land. 
"Municipal separate storm sewer system ("MS4")" means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned by a state, county, city, town, or other public body, that is designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water, which is not a combined sewer, and which is not a part of a publicly owned treatment works. 
"Non-storm water discharge" means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of storm water. 
"Pollutant" means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: sediment; paints, varnishes, and solvents, oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid waste and yard wastes, refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that they may cause or contribute to pollution, floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure (including but not limited to sediments, slurries, and concrete waste), and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
"Prohibited non-storm water runoff" means any non-storm water that contains any pollutant(s), and is not generated from the following activities: 
(1)  Water line flushing; 
(2)  Landscape irrigation; 
(3)  Diverted stream flows; 
(4)  Rising groundwater; 
(5)  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR Section 35.2005 (20)); 
(6)  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater; 
(7)  Discharges from potable water sources; 
(8)  Foundation drains; 
(9)  Air conditioning condensation; 
(10)  Irrigation water; 
(11)  Springs; 
(12)  Water from crawl space pumps; 
(13)  Footing drains, 
(14)  Lawn watering; 
(15)  Individual residential car washing; 
(16)  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
(17)  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; and 
(18)  Discharges or flows from firefighting activities. 
"Project" or "project site" means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips subject to land disturbing or construction activities. 
"Receiving water" means any body of water or surface water system to which surface runoff is discharged via point source of storm water or via sheet flow. 
"Stop work order" means an order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped. 
"Storm water" means water that originates from atmospheric moisture (rainfall or snowfall) that falls onto land, water, or other surfaces. 
"Storm water pollution prevention plan ("SWPPP")" means a plan that is developed for construction activities that will create one acre or more of disturbed soil area. The intent of the SWPPP is to control pollution related to construction activities. All SWPPPs are required to be prepared in compliance with the requirements of the construction general permit issued by SWRCB. 
"Water body" or "watercourse" means a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or manmade, which gathers or carries surface water. 
"Waters of the United States" means surface watercourses and water bodies as defined at 40 CFR section 122.2, including all natural waterways and definite channels and depressions in the earth that may carry water, even though such waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and may not carry storm water at and during all times and seasons. 
"Waters of the State" means all surface watercourses and water bodies, including lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks, marshes, inlets, canals, and all other bodies of surface waters (Porter Cologne Section 13050 (e)). This definition includes, but is broader than, Waters of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 876B, § 1, 1-22-2013)  
13.30.040 - Applicability. 
This construction storm water ordinance shall be applicable to all subdivision or site plan applications, building permits, grading permits and encroachment permits ("projects") unless eligible for an exemption or granted a waiver by the city. This chapter shall be applicable to all projects which result in water entering the storm water conveyance system generated on any developed or undeveloped land (hereinafter referred to as, "projects") within the city, unless exempt or expressly waived by the city. 
(Ord. No. 876B, § 1, 1-22-2013)  
13.30.050 - Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements. 
This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter should be considered the minimum requirements, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose a higher protective standard for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 876B, § 1, 1-22-2013)  
13.30.060 - Construction storm water manual. 
The city may furnish additional policy, criteria, and information including specifications and standards, for the implementation of the requirements of this chapter and may provide such information in the form of a construction storm water manual. Until such time, BMPs shall be designed and implemented in accordance with the construction general permit and either the California Storm Water Quality Association's ("CASQA's") Construction BMP Handbook or the California Department of Transportation's ("Caltran's") Construction Site BMP Manual. 
(Ord. No. 876B, § 1, 1-22-2013)  
13.30.070 - Liability. 
Neither issuance of a grading permit, building permit, encroachment permit or subdivision agreement or approval of a sedimentation and erosion control plan under the provisions of the construction storm water ordinance nor compliance with the provisions hereof or with any conditions imposed in any permit or agreement issued hereunder shall relieve any person from responsibility for damage to any person or property or impose any liability upon the city for damage to any person or property 
(Ord. No. 876B, § 1, 1-22-2013)  
13.30.080 - Water obstruction. 
No person shall do or permit to be done any construction activity which may obstruct, impede, or interfere with the natural flow of storm waters, whether such waters are unconfined upon the surface of the land or confined within land depressions, natural drainage ways, unimproved channels, watercourses, improved ditches, channels or conduits, in such manner as to cause flooding where it would not otherwise occur, aggravate any existing flooding condition or cause accelerated erosion except where said grading is in accordance with all applicable laws including, but not limited to, the provisions of the construction storm water ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 876B, § 1, 1-22-2013)  
Article II. - Requirements and Procedures 
 
13.30.090 - Projects creating less than one acre of disturbed soil area. 
All projects that meet the criteria of this chapter, create less than one acre of disturbed soil area, and are not required to obtain coverage under the construction general permit shall develop an erosion and sedimentation control plan that complies with the requirements of this section and the city's current version of the city of Lincoln, Department of Public Works Design Criteria and Procedures Manual. If this chapter and the Design Criteria and Procedures Manual differ in requirements, this chapter shall govern. The erosion and sedimentation control plan shall identify all BMPs that will be implemented throughout construction to control the discharge of pollutants in storm water runoff and to eliminate prohibited non-storm water runoff. At the city's discretion, the requirements of this section may be waived. 
Pollutant storm water discharges and all prohibited non-storm water runoff discharges to the city's storm drainage system, to a water body, or off of the project site, are prohibited. In the event of an act of nature or an event which is outside the control of the applicant, owner or occupant, and which the affected project has in place the appropriate BMPs or other similar controls, such discharge shall not be considered as noncompliance with this chapter. 
The erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be submitted to the city for review and written approval prior to the start of construction. 
Drain inlet protection shall be installed on all drain inlets that will receive storm water runoff from disturbed soil areas prior to the start of construction. 
All waste shall be handled, stored, utilized and disposed of in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations and in a manner that prohibits contact with storm water. All garbage shall be picked up and disposed of on a regular basis. 
Hazardous materials shall be handled, stored, utilized and disposed of in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations, and in a manner that prohibits contact with storm water and storm water runoff. 
All projects shall effectively stabilize all disturbed soil areas with permanent erosion control or a hard surface protection system upon the completion of construction and any temporary BMPs shall be removed to the city's satisfaction. 
(Ord. No. 876B, § 1, 1-22-2013)  
13.30.100 - Projects creating one acre or more of disturbed soil area or are considered part of a larger common plan of development. 
All projects meeting the criteria of this chapter and creating one acre or more disturbed soil area or are part of a larger common plan of development shall obtain coverage under the SWRCB's current construction general permit. 
Pollutant storm water discharges and all prohibited non-storm water runoff discharges to the city's storm drainage system, to a water body, or off of the project site, are prohibited. In the event of an act of nature or an event which is outside the control of the applicant, owner or occupant, and which the affected project has in place the appropriate BMPs or other similar controls, such discharge shall not be considered as noncompliance with this chapter. 
The landowner or person responsible for construction activities, per the legally responsible person ("LRP") conditions of the construction general permit, shall develop and submit a SWPPP to the city prior to issuance of a grading permit or encroachment permit. This requirement shall also be included in all subdivision agreements. The SWPPP shall be prepared and implemented in compliance with all requirements of the construction general permit. 
If the SWPPP requires amendment, per the requirements of the construction general permit, the amended SWPPP shall be submitted to the city within seven days of amendment. 
(1)  Waste discharge identification ("WDID") number shall be obtained from the SWRCB prior to the commencement of any construction activities and shall be furnished to the city. 
An erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be submitted to the city that identifies the BMPs that will be implemented throughout the duration of construction to control pollutant discharges. The erosion and sedimentation control plan shall comply with the requirements of this section and the city's current version of the city of Lincoln, Department of Public Works Design Criteria and Procedures Manual. If this chapter and the Design Criteria and Procedures Manual differ in requirements, this chapter shall govern. The erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be reviewed and approved in writing by the city prior to the commencement of any construction activity and shall be the same plan as approved by SWRCB. 
The erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be prepared and submitted concurrently with the grading plan. The erosion and sedimentation control plan may be incorporated on the same plan sheet as the grading plan unless it makes the sheet cluttered, or it may be submitted on a clean separate sheet. The separate sheet shall be drawn clearly and legibly and entitled "Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan," shall contain a statement of the purpose of the proposed best management practices to be used. 
The erosion and sedimentation control plan shall include the items required by the city of Lincoln Public Facilities Improvement Standards, the city's Design Criteria and Procedures Manual and the following: 
(1)  Identification of the receiving water body for the project; 
(2)  Identification of the project's risk level in accordance with the construction general permit; 
(3)  Sizing information for any basins or other structural control BMPs that require sizing, 
(4)  Identification of the quantity and locations of storm water run-on; and 
(5)  Identification of all discharge points and all sampling and monitoring points per the requirements of the construction general permit. 
The erosion and sedimentation control plan shall include the rationale for selecting or rejecting BMPs, including soil loss calculations, if required by the city. 
The erosion and sedimentation control plan shall list applicable permits including, but not limited to, the construction general permit, a 401 Water Quality Certification, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 404 permit, California Department of Fish and Game 1600 agreement. The project applicant shall submit evidence to the city that all required permits for the project have been obtained prior to the commencement of soil disturbing activities. 
If the erosion and sedimentation control plan requires revision, the city shall review and approve in writing all revisions. 
All projects shall effectively stabilize all disturbed soil areas with permanent erosion control or a hard surface protection system upon the completion of construction and any temporary BMPs shall be removed to the city's satisfaction. 
All projects shall remain subject to the requirements of this chapter until the construction general permit's notice of termination requirements are met and the city has accepted all improvements and has confirmed that the conditions of this chapter have been met in full. 
(Ord. No. 876B, § 1, 1-22-2013)  
13.30.110 - Projects that are exempt. 
The following activities are exempt from this chapter: 
(1)  Disturbances to land surfaces solely related to agricultural activities such as disking, harrowing, terracing and leveling, and soil preparation, 
(2)  Activities or construction conducted on tribal lands; 
(3)  Landfill construction activity that is subject to the SWRCB's industrial general permit. 
(Ord. No. 876B, § 1, 1-22-2013)  
13.30.120 - City inspections. 
The city or designated agent shall make inspections, as hereinafter required, to determine compliance with the project's erosion and sedimentation control plan, the project's SWPPP, or the construction general permit. The city may inspect any work done pursuant to this chapter during the course of construction in accordance with the Municipal Code. No person shall be deemed to have complied with this chapter until a final inspection of the work has been made by the city. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
The frequency of the inspections shall be determined by the city based on the nature and scoping of the project. At a minimum the inspections may be conducted: 
(1)  Prior to the start of construction; 
(2)  Upon completion of grading; 
(3)  Any work within a Waters of the U.S.; 
(4)  Upon completion of any in-water work; 
(5)  Completion of ground work; 
(6)  Upon the completion of landscaping; 
(7)  Upon project closeout. 
During any inspection as provided herein, the city representative may take samples (or require the owner to take samples) and, perform any testing deemed necessary, and take photographs to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or to record site activities. This authority may include the installation of sampling and metering devices, or requiring the owner to supply samples. All costs for said testing shall be paid for by the applicant. Such costs, if performed by the city, may be covered by the owner's inspection fee deposit. 
(Ord. No. 876B, § 1, 1-22-2013)  
Article III. - Enforcement 
 
13.30.130 - Enforcement official. 
The city or authorized agent shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 876B, § 1, 1-22-2013)  
13.30.140 - Violations. 
Any construction or land disturbance activity that is commenced or is conducted contrary to this chapter shall be deemed to be a public nuisance and may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by Chapters 1.20 or 8.08 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 876B, § 1, 1-22-2013)  
13.30.150 - Notice of violation. 
When the city determines that an activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, it shall issue a written administrative notice of violation to the owner of the property or the legally responsible person. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or applicant; 
(2)  The address of the project site or a description of the project site location if an address is not available; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the construction activity into compliance with this chapter and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  The violation may require the performance of monitoring, analysis, and reporting; 
(6)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the violation is directed; 
(7)  A statement that the determination of the violation may be appealed to the municipality by filling written notice of appeal within 15 days of services of notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 876B, § 1, 1-22-2013)  
13.30.160 - Stop work orders. 
Persons receiving a notice of violation will be required to halt all construction activities except for remedial actions required by the notice of violation. The "stop work order" will be in effect until the city confirms that the construction activity is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address the notice of violation in a timely manner can result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 876B, § 1, 1-22-2013)  
13.30.170 - Administrative citation and civil and criminal penalties. 
In addition to, or as an alternative to any penalty provide herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a civil fine in accordance with Chapter 1.20 of the city's Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 876B, § 1, 1-22-2013)  
13.30.180 - Abatement by city. 
If correction has not occurred within the time period required by the notice of violation, the continuing violation shall be deemed a public nuisance, and the city or contracting agent hired by the city may abate the nuisance as provided by the city's Municipal Code Section 8.08. 
(Ord. No. 876B, § 1, 1-22-2013)  
13.30.190 - Restoration of lands. 
Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time notice, the city may take necessary corrective action as provided by the city's Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 876B, § 1, 1-22-2013)  
13.30.200 - Holds on issuance of certificates of occupancy. 
Certificates of occupancy will not be granted until all corrections to all storm water practices have been made and accepted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 876B, § 1, 1-22-2013)  
13.30.210 - Appeal and hearing. 
If a property owner chooses to show why any specific enforcement action does not apply to the conditions on his property he may appeal the enforcement action in accordance with the Municipal Code by writing to the city within ten days of receiving the enforcement action. The city will respond to the appeal within ten days. If the property owner is still not satisfied with the outcome of the appeal, he may request a formal hearing regarding the matter being appealed. All abatements may be appealed per the hearing requirements per Chapter 8.08 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 876B, § 1, 1-22-2013)  
CHAPTER 13.34 - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION CONTROL  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
13.34.010 - Findings of fact. 
The city council adopts this chapter based upon the following findings: 
(1)  The Federal Clean Water Act ("CWA") provides for the regulation and reduction of pollutants discharged into waters of the United States by extending National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System ("NPDES") requirements to stormwater and urban runoff discharges into the City of Lincoln's ("city's") stormwater conveyance system. 
(2)  Stormwater flows from individual properties to the municipal storm drain system and then ultimately discharges to Waters of the United States. 
(3)  The city has obtained permit coverage under the Phase II Small NPDES Permit. Under the provisions of the general permit for the discharge of stormwater from small municipal separate storm sewer systems ("MS4s") ("Phase II Small NPDES Permit"), the city is required to possess the necessary legal authority and implement appropriate procedures to regulate the discharge of pollutants and nonstormwater discharges into the city's stormwater drainage system. 
(4)  The Phase II Small NPDES Permit requires the city to regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by stormwater discharges by any user, to prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the MS4, and to establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance 
(Ord. No. 894B , § 1, 12-9-2014)  
13.34.020 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to ensure the health, safety, and general welfare of citizens, and to protect and enhance water quality of watercourses and water bodies in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the federal CWA by reducing pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with the municipal storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable and by controlling the introduction of pollutants to the municipal storm drainage system. 
(Ord. No. 894B , § 1, 12-9-2014)  
13.34.030 - Definitions. 
Any term(s) defined in the CWA, and as amended, and/or defined in the regulations for the stormwater discharge NPDES permitting program issued by the State Water Resources Control Board, and as amended, and which are not specifically defined in this chapter, shall have the same meaning as those terms which are set forth in said act or regulation. 
"Applicant" means a property owner or agent of a property owner who is completing construction activity. 
"Channel" means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conveys continuously or periodically flowing water. 
"City" means the City of Lincoln. 
"Construction activity" means any activity resulting in grubbing, clearing, grading, grubbing, excavation or any other activity that result in land disturbance. 
"Drainage system" means all facilities operated by the city for collecting, transporting, treating and disposing of stormwater. For the purpose of this chapter, the drainage system also includes facilities owned and operated by other public entities or private citizens that direct stormwater to the city's drainage system and are subject to the jurisdiction of the city as defined by law, contract, or inter-jurisdictional agreement. 
"Hazardous material" means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed (California Health and Safety Code § 25117). 
"Illegal connection" means any drain or conveyance connected from any residential, commercial, or industrial land use, to the storm drain system which has not been documented in permit applications, plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the city. 
"Illicit discharge" means any direct or indirect discharge of prohibited nonstormwater or polluted stormwater to the storm drain system, except as exempted in Article II, Section 13.34.070 of this chapter. 
"Incidental runoff" means unintended amounts (volume) of runoff, such as minimal over-spray from sprinklers. Water leaving an intended use area is not considered incidental if it is part of the facility design, if it is due to excessive application, if it is due to intentional overall or application, or if it is due to negligence. 
"Municipal separate storm sewer system ("MS4")" means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned by a state, county, city, town, or other public body, that is designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, which is not a combined sewer, and which is not a part of a publicly owned treatment works. 
"Nonstormwater discharge" means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
"Pollutant" means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: sediment; paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid waste and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that they may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure (including, but not limited to, sediments, slurries, and concrete waste); and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
"Prohibited nonstormwater runoff" means any nonstormwater that contains any pollutant(s); and is not generated from the following activities: 
(1)  Water line flushing; 
(2)  Landscape irrigation and watering; 
(3)  Diverted stream flows; 
(4)  Rising groundwater; 
(5)  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR Section 35.2005 (20)); 
(6)  Uncontaminated pumped groundwater; 
(7)  Discharges from potable water sources; 
(8)  Foundation drains; 
(9)  Air conditioning condensation; 
(10)  Springs; 
(11)  Water from crawl space pumps; 
(12)  Footing drains; 
(13)  Individual residential car washing; 
(14)  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
(15)  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; and 
(16)  Discharges or flows from firefighting activities. 
"Receiving water" means any body of water or surface water system to which surface runoff is discharged via point source of stormwater or via sheet flow. 
"Stormwater" means any surface flow, runoff, or drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation. 
"Water" means water that originates from atmospheric moisture (rainfall or snowfall) that falls onto land, water, or other surfaces. 
"Water body" or "Watercourse" means a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or manmade, which gathers or carries surface water. 
"Waters of the United States" means surface watercourses and water bodies as defined at 40 CFR section 122.2, including all natural waterways and definite channels and depressions in the earth that may carry water, even though such waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and may not carry stormwater at and during all times and seasons. 
"Waters of the State" means all surface watercourses and water bodies, including lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks, marshes, inlets, canals, and all other bodies of surface waters (Porter Cologne Section 13050 (e)). This definition includes, but is broader than, Waters of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 894B , § 1, 12-9-2014)  
13.34.040 - Applicability. 
Nonstormwater discharge, illicit discharge and illegal connection control ordinance shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands, unless explicitly exempted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 894B , § 1, 12-9-2014)  
13.34.050 - Compatibility with other permit and chapter requirements. 
This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter should be considered the minimum requirements, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose a higher protective standard for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 894B , § 1, 12-9-2014)  
13.34.060 - Ultimate responsibility. 
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore, this chapter does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 894B , § 1, 12-9-2014)  
Article II. - Discharge Prohibitions 
 
13.34.070 - Prohibition of illicit discharges. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system, water body or watercourse any pollutants, materials, or stormwaters containing any pollutants, any prohibited nonstormwater, or any water that otherwise causes or contributes to a violation of applicable water quality standards. Pollutant stormwater discharges and all prohibited nonstormwater runoff discharges to the city's storm drainage system, a Water of the United States or a Water of the State are prohibited. 
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illicit discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(1)  The following nonstormwater discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this ordinance: water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pool water (if dechlorinated}, firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants. 
(2)  Discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(3)  Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a written notification to the city prior to the time of the test. 
(4)  The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under a NPDES permit issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal EPA or the State Water Quality Control Board, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
(Ord. No. 894B , § 1, 12-9-2014)  
13.34.080 - Prohibition of illegal connections. 
The construction, use, or continued existence of illegal connections to the city's storm drainage system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the storm drainage system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  All connections of piping or any other type of conveyance system to the city's storm drainage system that is not permitted or otherwise approved by the city is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 894B , § 1, 12-9-2014)  
13.34.090 - Waste disposal prohibitions. 
No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, left, or maintained in or upon any public or private property, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, component of the storm drain system, or Waters of the U.S., any refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution. Wastes deposited in streets in proper waste receptacles for the purposes of collection are exempted from this prohibition. 
(Ord. No. 894B , § 1, 12-9-2014)  
13.34.100 - Runoff in excess of incidental runoff. 
No person shall intentionally allow runoff in excess of incidental runoff to escape the area of intended use. Parties responsible for controlling runoff in excess of incidental runoff shall: 
(1)  Detect leaks and correct leaks within seventy-two hours of learning of the leak. 
(2)  Properly design and aim sprinkler heads. 
(3)  Not irrigate during precipitation events. 
(4)  Manage ponds containing recycled water such that no discharge occurs unless the discharge is a result of a twenty-five-year, twenty-four-hour storm event or greater, and the city is notified in writing no later than twenty-four hours after the discharge. The written notification shall include identifying information, including discharger's name, address, and telephone number. 
(Ord. No. 894B , § 1, 12-9-2014)  
Article III. - Suspension of MS4 Access 
 
13.34.110 - Suspension due to illicit discharge in emergency situations. 
The city may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or Waters of the United States. if the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the city may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or Waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(Ord. No. 894B , § 1, 12-9-2014)  
13.34.120 - Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. 
Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this ordinance may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The city will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the city for a reconsideration and hearing. 
A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the city. 
(Ord. No. 894B , § 1, 12-9-2014)  
13.34.130 - Suspension of illegal connection. 
The city may require, by written notice, that a person responsible for an illegal connection to the storm drain system comply with the requirements of this chapter to eliminate or secure approval for the connection by a specified date, regardless of whether or not the connection or discharges to it had been established or approved prior to the effective date of this chapter. 
If, subsequent to eliminating a connection found to be in violation of this chapter, the responsible person can demonstrate that an illegal discharge will no longer occur, said person may request city approval to reconnect. The reconnection or reinstallation of the connection shall be at the responsible person's expense. 
(Ord. No. 894B , § 1, 12-9-2014)  
Article IV. - Notification of Spill 
 
13.34.140 - Notification of spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or Water of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the city in person or by phone, email, or electronic submission via the city's website no later than the next business day. 
(Ord. No. 894B , § 1, 12-9-2014)  
Article V. - Enforcement 
 
13.34.150 - Enforcement official. 
The city manager or designee shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 894B , § 1, 12-9-2014)  
13.34.160 - Violations. 
Any discharge or illegal connection that is commenced or is conducted contrary to this chapter shall be deemed to be a public nuisance and may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by Chapters 1.20 or 8.08 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 894B , § 1, 12-9-2014)  
13.34.170 - Notice of violation. 
When the city determines that an activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, it shall issue a written administrative notice of violation to the person committing the violation. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the person committing the violation; 
(2)  The address of the project site or a description of the project site location if an address is not available; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the discharge or illegal connection into compliance with this chapter and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  The violation may require the performance of monitoring, analysis, and reporting; 
(6)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the violation is directed; 
(7)  A statement that the determination of the violation may be appealed to the municipality by filling written notice of appeal within fifteen days of services of notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 894B , § 1, 12-9-2014)  
13.34.180 - Illegal connection termination order. 
Persons responsible for an illegal connection receiving a notice of violation will be required to remove the illegal connection within three business days of receipt of the written violation. If the illegal connection is not removed, the city will remove the illegal connection. The violation and illegal connection termination order will be in effect until the city confirms that the illegal connection has been removed or the city has otherwise approved the connection in writing. Failure to address the notice of violation in a timely manner can result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 894B , § 1, 12-9-2014)  
13.34.190 - Requirement to remediate. 
Whenever the city finds that a discharge of pollutants is taking place or has occurred which will result in or has resulted in pollution of stormwater or the discharge of prohibited nonstormwater, to the storm drain system or water of the U.S., the city may require, by written notice to the owner of the property and/or the responsible person, that the pollution be remediated and the affected property restored within a specified time pursuant to the provisions of Sections 13.34.190 through 13.34.230 below. 
(Ord. No. 894B , § 1, 12-9-2014)  
13.34.200 - Requirement to monitor and analyze. 
The city may require by written notice that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution, illegal discharges, and/or prohibited nonstormwater discharges to the storm drain system or Waters of the U.S., to undertake at said person's expense such monitoring and analyses and furnish such reports to the City of Lincoln as deemed necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 894B , § 1, 12-9-2014)  
13.34.210 - Administrative citation and civil and criminal penalties. 
In addition to, or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a civil fine in accordance with Chapter 1.20 of the City's Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 894B , § 1, 12-9-2014)  
13.34.220 - Abatement by city. 
If correction has not occurred within the time period required by the notice of violation, the continuing violation shall be deemed a public nuisance, and the city or contracting agent hired by the city may abate the nuisance as provided by the City's Municipal Code Section 8.08. 
(Ord. No. 894B , § 1, 12-9-2014)  
13.34.230 - Restoration of lands. 
Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time notice, the city may take necessary corrective action as provided by the City's Municipal Code Section 8.08. 
(Ord. No. 894B , § 1, 12-9-2014)  
13.34.240 - Appeal and hearing. 
If a property owner chooses to show why any specific enforcement action does not apply to the conditions on his property he may appeal the enforcement action in accordance with the Municipal Code by writing to the city within ten business days of receiving the enforcement action. The city will respond to the appeal within ten business days. If the property owner is still not satisfied with the outcome of the appeal, he may request a formal hearing regarding the matter being appealed. All abatements may be appealed per the hearing requirements per Section 8.08 of the Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 894B , § 1, 12-9-2014)  
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION  
CHAPTER 15.04 - ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL UNIFORM AND CALIFORNIA CODES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 926B , §§ 1, 2, adopted Nov. 15, 2016, repealed Ch. 15.04 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 15.04 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 15.04, §§ 15.04.030—15.04.250, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 889B, § 6, adopted Dec. 10, 2013. 
 
15.04.030 - Uniform Housing Code. 
The Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition International Property Maintenance Code 2015 Edition, published by the International Code Council is hereby adopted by reference. One copy of the Uniform Housing Code, 1997, International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, is on file in the office of the community development department/building division for use and examination by the public. In the event of any conflict between this code and any law, rule or regulation of State Housing Law as published in the California Code of Regulations, Title 25; State Housing Law shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 926B , § 6, 11-15-2016)  
15.04.040 - Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. 
The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference. One copy of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, is on file in the office of the community development department/building division for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 926B , § 6, 11-15-2016)  
15.04.050 - California Residential Code (CRC), Part 2.5. 
International Residential Code with California Amendments, 2016 Edition as published by the International Code Council, establishing minimum standards to safeguard life, health, property and public welfare for residential construction including Appendix Chapter H (Patio Covers), and Appendix Chapter Q (ICC International Residential Code Electrical Provisions/National Electrical Code Cross-Reference) with the changes and additions as set forth herein is hereby adopted as referenced. One copy of the California Residential Code is on file in the office of the development services department/building division for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 926B , § 6, 11-15-2016)  
15.04.060 - California Green Building Code (CGBC), Part 11. 
The California Green Building Code 2016 Edition, published by the California Building standards Commission, is hereby adopted by reference. One copy of the California Green Building Code is on file in the office of the community development department/building division for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 926B , § 6, 11-15-2016)  
15.04.070 - California Mechanical Code (CMC), Part 4. 
The Uniform Mechanical Code with California Amendments, 2016 Edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials and the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference. One copy of the Uniform Mechanical Code with California Amendments is on file in the office of the development services department/building division for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 926B , § 6, 11-15-2016)  
15.04.080 - California Plumbing Code (CPC), Part 5. 
The Uniform Plumbing Code with California Amendments, 2016 Edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, is hereby adopted by reference. One copy of the Uniform Plumbing Code with California Amendments is on file in the office of the community development department/building division for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 926B , § 6, 11-15-2016)  
15.04.090 - California Electrical Code (CEC), Part 3. 
The National Electrical Code with California Amendments, 2016 Edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted by reference. There is one copy of the National Electric Code on file in the office of the development services department/building division for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 926B , § 6, 11-15-2016)  
15.04.100 - California Energy Code (CEC), Part 6. 
The California Energy Code 2016 Editions of the Residential and Non-Residential Regulations, as published by the California Energy Commission, providing provisions to safeguard the public health, safety and welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation and maintenance or use of energy and energy systems. The California Energy Code 2016 Edition is hereby adopted by reference. There is one copy of the California Energy Code 2016 Edition on file in the office of the community development department/building division for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 926B , § 6, 11-15-2016)  
15.04.110 - California Existing Building Code, Part 10. 
California Existing Building Code 2016 Edition, published by the International Code Council, providing provisions for the minimum requirements and standards for the protection of public health, safety and welfare. The California Existing Building Code 2016 Edition is hereby adopted by reference. There is one copy of the California Existing Building Code 2016 Edition on file in the office of the community development department/building division for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 926B , § 6, 11-15-2016)  
15.04.120 - California Referenced Standards Code, Part 12. 
California Referenced Standards Code, 2016 Edition, published by the International Code Council providing provisions for the minimum requirements and standards for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. The California Referenced Standards Code 2016 edition is hereby adopted by reference. There is one copy of the California Referenced Standards Code 2016 Edition on file in the office of the community development department/building division for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 926B , § 6, 11-15-2016)  
15.04.130 - California Administrative Code (CAC), Part 1. 
California Administrative Code, 2016 Edition, published by the International Code Council establishing administrative regulations and procedures concerning the construction and reconstruction, alteration and additions to buildings. The California Administrative Code 2016 Edition is hereby adopted by reference. There is one copy of the California Administrative Code on file in the office of the community development department/building division for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 926B , § 6, 11-15-2016)  
15.04.140 - California Historical Code (CHC) Part 8. 
California Historical Code, 2016 Edition, published by the International Code Council. The California Historical Code 2016 Edition is hereby adopted by reference. There is one copy of the California Administrative Code on file in the office of the community development department/building division for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 926B , § 6, 11-15-2016)  
15.04.150 - The National Fire Protection Association 13 and 13D Standards for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems. 
The National Fire Protection Associations current 13 and 13D Standards for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems, 2016 Edition is hereby adopted by reference. There is one copy of the National Fire Protection Association 13 and 13D Standards for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems, 2016 Edition, on file in the office of the community development department/building division for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 926B , § 6, 11-15-2016)  
15.04.160 - California Fire Code (CFC), Part 9. 
The California Fire Code 2016 edition as published by the International Code Council including Appendix Chapter 4, Appendix Chapter A, B, BB, C, CC, E, F, G, H, I, and J with the changes and additions as set forth herein is hereby adopted by reference. There is one copy of the International Fire Code/California Fire Code on file in the office of the community development department/building division for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 926B , § 6, 11-15-2016)  
15.04.170 - California Fire Code. 
The International Fire Code with California amendments is amended to read as follows: 
California Fire Code, Section 903 is amended to read as follows: 
An automatic fire-extinguishing system shall be installed in the occupancies and locations as set forth in this section. In the event of any conflict between this Code and any law, rule or regulation of the State of California or any other jurisdiction, that requirement which establishes the higher standard of safety shall govern. Failure to comply with such standard of safety shall be a violation of this Code. 
California Fire Code, Section 903.2: Where required an automatic sprinkler system shall be installed: 
1.  In all new construction including residential structures. 
2.  In all other buildings or structures, when: 
(a)  There is a change of occupancy classification as defined in the International Building or Fire Code with California Amendments; or 
(b)  There are alterations or repairs within any 12-month period which exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the assessed value of the existing building or structure. 
Exception: Subject to approval of the city of Lincoln, public and private restroom buildings that are separated from other occupancies by at least 60 feet and are classified throughout as a minimum of type A or B one-hour construction as defined by the International Building Code with California Amendments. 
California Fire Code, Section 903.3.1.3: NFPA 13D Sprinkler Systems is amended to read as follows: 
Automatic fire sprinkler systems required to be installed in one-and two-family dwellings and townhouses pursuant to the California Fire Code shall be permitted to be designed and installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D or the California Residential Code, Section R313.3. Each fire sprinkler riser is required to have installed a water flow switch and a 120 volt horn strobe at the exterior. The exterior flow alarm horn strobe shall be located on the exterior of the building at or near the front or side corner facing the fronting street. The horn strobe shall be loud enough to notify the occupants that water is flowing. The fire riser shall be installed pursuant to the city of Lincoln, Public Facilities Improvement Standards and as specified herein. In the event of any conflict between this Code and any law, rule or regulation of the State of California or any other jurisdiction, that requirement which establishes the higher standard of safety shall govern as determined by the fire code official or building official. 
(Ord. No. 926B , § 6, 11-15-2016)  
15.04.180 - California Building Code (CBC). 
The California Building Code with California Amendments, 2016 Edition published by the International Code Council and the California Building Standards Commission establishing minimum standards to safeguard life, health, property and public welfare by regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, use, occupancy, location and maintenance of all buildings and structures within this jurisdiction including Administrative Chapters, Divisions I & II; the Appendix Chapter I, Patio Covers; and Appendix Chapter J, Grading with the changes and additions as set forth herein is hereby adopted by reference with the following revisions: 
California Building Code, Chapter 1, Scope and Administration, Section 105.2 "Work Exempt from Permit", "Building", item 1 is amended to read as follows: 
1.  One-story detached utility occupancy accessory buildings used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses or similar uses as determined by the authority having jurisdiction, provided the square footage does not exceed 120 square feet, with no utilities [water, sewer or electrical] attached or established in the structure and the structure is a single story structure less than 16 feet in height built entirely above grade and is not located in a maintenance easement, on a public utilities easement, or in front and side street setbacks as required by the Zoning Code of the City of Lincoln. The structure shall not exceed the height requirements set forth in the City of Lincoln Zoning Code. The eave overhangs shall not extend more than 24 inches (610 mm) beyond the exterior wall of the structure. The location on the property for the purposes of fire protection shall be in compliance with the currently adopted Residential Building Code and/or the California Building Code. All construction shall be in compliance with acceptable standards for construction as outlined in the currently adopted uniform and international Codes with California Amendments. All construction shall be in compliance with currently adopted zoning and municipal code regulations related to accessory structures such as sheds including; but not limited to setbacks and building height requirements. 
Section 105.2 "Work Exempt from Permit", "Building", items 3 [oil derricks], and 5 [water tanks] are hereby deleted. 
Section 105.2 "Work Exempt from Permit", "Building", Item 9 is amended to read as follows: 
Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy that are less than 24 inches (610mm) deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons (18925L) and are installed entirely above grade are exempt from a building permit provided they have fencing installed in accordance with the City of Lincoln pool fencing regulations adopted by the City of Lincoln, Municipal Code, Chapter 15.20. 
Section 105.2 "Work Exempt from Permit", "Building", item 10 is hereby deleted. [Shade cloth structures] 
Section 105.5 "Expiration" is amended to read as follows: 
Every permit issued by the Building Official under the provisions of this code shall expire and become null and void after one year from the date of issuance of said permit. 
Any permit holder holding an unexpired permit for which work has commenced may apply for an extension provided no changes have been made to the original plans. The fee will not be charged for a one-time 6 month extension provided the permit is not expired and additional extension for another 6 months can be applied for and a fee of $60.00 is paid for the extension. No permit shall be extended without first being approved by the Building Official or his or her designee. Once a permit has expired a new permit can be applied for and fees shall be charged based on the valuation for the work that is left to perform under the original permit issued. 
If a permit expires without commencement of work, a new permit shall be obtained before work can commence. This shall constitute a new application, complete plans, and full payment of all permit fees. 
For the purpose of this section, commencement of work shall be defined as; the inspection and successful completion of the entire foundation system for the permitted structure, including the placing of the concrete. If the permit is for something other than a structure, the Building Official will determine if the amount of work completed shows a good faith effort was made to complete work authorized by the permit. 
(Ord. No. 926B , § 6, 11-15-2016)  
15.04.190 - California Building Code, Chapter 9 Fire Protection Systems. 
The following sections of the California Building Code Chapter 9 are amended to read as follows: 
California Building Code, Section 903 amended—Automatic fire-extinguishing systems. Section 903 of the California Building Code is amended to read as follows: 
Section 903 is amended as follows: 
An automatic fire-extinguishing system shall be installed in the occupancies and locations as set forth in this section. In the event of any conflict between this Code and any law, rule or regulation of the State of California or any other jurisdiction, that requirement which establishes the higher standard of safety shall govern. Failure to comply with such standard of safety shall be a violation of this Code. 
Section 903.2: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed: 
1.  In all new construction including residential structures. 
2.  In all other buildings or structures, when: 
(a)  There is a change of occupancy classification as defined in the International Building Code with California Amendments; or 
(b)  There are alterations, additions or repairs within any 12-month period which exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the current assessed value of the existing building or structure. The assessed value is determined by the Placer County Assessor. 
Exception: Subject to approval of the City of Lincoln, public and private restroom buildings that are separated from other occupancies by at least 60 feet and are classified throughout as a minimum of type A or B one-hour construction as defined by the International Building Code with California Amendments. 
Section 903.3.1.3: NFPA 13 D Sprinkler Systems is amended to read as follows: 
Automatic fire sprinkler systems required to be installed in one-and two-family dwellings and townhouses pursuant to the California Building Code shall be permitted to be designed and installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D or the California Residential Code, Section R313.3. Each fire sprinkler riser required to be installed shall have installed a water flow switch and a 120 volt horn strobe installed at the exterior. The exterior flow horn strobe shall be located on the exterior of the building at or near the front or side corner facing the fronting street. The horn strobe shall be loud enough to notify the occupants that water is flowing. The fire riser shall be installed pursuant to the City of Lincoln, Public Facilities Standards and as specified herein. In the event of any conflict between this Code and any law, rule or regulation of the State of California or any other jurisdiction, that requirement which establishes the higher standard of safety shall govern as determined by the fire code official or building official. 
(Ord. No. 926B , § 6, 11-15-2016)  
15.04.200 - California Building Code, Appendix J amended—Excavation and Grading. 
All references to the "Building Official" within this appendix are hereby amended to read "City Engineer". All grading operations within the City of Lincoln shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the Building Code, the City of Lincoln Grading Ordinance and any other regulations of the City pertaining to grading operations. The following sections of Appendix J of the California Building Code are hereby amended to read as follows: 
Section J101.2 "Flood Hazard Areas" is amended to read as follows: The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to grading, excavation and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments, in floodways within flood hazard areas where design flood elevations are specified. All grading in flood hazard areas shall be performed in accordance with the City of Lincoln Flood Ordinance, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) guidelines and any other regulations of the City pertaining to grading operations. 
"Other Hazards." Whenever the City Engineer determines that any existing excavation or embankment or fill on private property or alterations to drainage affecting adjoining property has become a hazard to life and limb, or endangers property, or adversely affects the safety, use, stability or capacity of a public way, drainage channel, the owner of the property upon which the excavation or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the City Engineer, shall within the period specified therein repair or eliminate the hazard and be in conformance with the requirements of the California Building Code and any other grading regulations of the City of Lincoln. The City Engineer or his designee shall have the authority to issue a "Stop work Notice" for violations of the grading provisions of this Code. 
"Grading Designation." If the City Engineer determines that special conditions or unusual hazards exist, grading shall conform to the requirements for engineered grading. 
Section J103.1 "Permits Required" Except as specified and amended in Section J103.2 of this chapter, no person shall perform any grading over ten (10) cubic yards without first having obtained a grading permit from the City Engineer, Department of Public services. A separate permit shall be obtained for each site, and may cover both excavations and fills. Any site disturbance/grading over one (1) acre in size or a development project requires an additional storm water permit from the State Water Resources Department (National Pollutants Discharge Elimination System, NPDES). In the event of any conflict between this Code and any law, rule or regulation of the State of California, that requirement which establishes the higher standard of safety shall govern. Failure to comply with such standard of safety shall be a violation of this Code. 
Section J103.2 "Exemptions" Section J103.2 Exemptions is amended as follows: Items 2, 5 and 6 are hereby deleted. 
"Fees." Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the currently established "Master Fee Schedule" of the City of Lincoln and this section. 
"Plan Review Deposit." When a plan or other data are required to be submitted, a plan review deposit shall be paid at the time of submitting plans and specifications for review. Said plan review deposit shall be 1% of the contractor's cost for the grading project or five hundred dollars, whichever is greater. Separate plan review fees shall apply to retaining walls or major drainage structures as required elsewhere in this code. 
"Grading Permit Deposit (Inspections)." A deposit for each grading permit shall be paid to the City Engineer. Said permit deposit shall be 4% of the contractor's cost for the grading project or one-thousand dollars, whichever is greater. Separate permits and fees shall apply to retaining walls or major drainage structures as required elsewhere in this code. There shall be no separate charge for standard terrace drains and similar facilities. 
"Preparation of Ground." The preparation of ground shall be determined at the time of plan review by the City Engineer. 
Section J1061 "Maximum Slope" Except as specified elsewhere in this section, cut and fill slopes shall be set back from site boundaries in accordance with this section and the Public Services Design Criteria and Procedures Manual and Public Facilities Improvement Standards. Setback dimensions shall be horizontal distances measured perpendicular to the site boundary; a building setback letter may be required. All setbacks to be approved by the City Engineer. 
Section J110.1 Erosion Control, "General" shall be amended to add the following language: Erosion control shall be in accordance with the "Erosion and Sediment Control Guidelines of the High Sierra Resource Conservation District" and the City of Lincoln Erosion Control grading requirements. Storm Water Protection Plans shall be enforced in accordance with the Public Facilities Improvement Standards and Design Criteria and Procedures Manual and all other Federal and State requirements. One copy of the California Building Code is on file in the office of the Community Development Department/Building Division for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 926B , § 6, 11-15-2016)  
15.04.210 - California Residential Code (CRC). 
The following sections of the California Residential Code are amended to read as follows: 
Section 1.1.5 "Referenced Standards" is amended to include reference to the Uniform Plumbing Code with California Amendments, Uniform Mechanical Code with California Amendments and the National Electrical Code NFPA 70 with California Amendments as recognized Standards for residential construction of one and two-family dwellings. 
Section R105.2. "Work Exempt from Permit", "Building", item 1 is amended to read as follows: 
1.  One-story detached residential accessory buildings used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses or similar uses as determined by the authority having jurisdiction, provided the square footage does not exceed 120 square feet with no utilities [water, sewer or electrical] attached or established in the structure and the structure is a single story structure less than 16 feet in height built entirely above grade and is not located in a maintenance easement, on a public utilities easement, or in front and side street setbacks as required by the Zoning Code of the City of Lincoln. The structure shall not exceed the height requirements set forth in the City of Lincoln Zoning Code. The eave overhangs shall not extend more than 24 inches (610 mm) beyond the exterior wall of the structure. The location on the property for the purposes of fire protection shall be in compliance with the currently adopted Residential Building Code and/or the California Building Code. All construction shall be in compliance with acceptable standards for construction as outlined in the currently adopted uniform and international Codes with California Amendments. All construction shall be in compliance with currently adopted zoning and municipal code regulations related to accessory structures such as sheds including; but not limited to setbacks and building height requirements. 
Section R105.2 "Work Exempt from Permit", "Building", item 4 is hereby deleted. 
Section R105.2 "Work Exempt from Permit", "Building", Item 5 is amended to read as follows: 
Sidewalks and driveways provided they are not part of the public way and considered an accessible path of travel required by this Code. 
Section R105.2 "Work Exempt from Permit", "Building", Item 7 is amended to read as follows: 
Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy that are less than 24 inches (610mm) deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons (18925L) and are installed entirely above grade are exempt from building permit provided they have fencing installed in accordance with the City of Lincoln pool fencing regulations adopted by the City of Lincoln, Municipal Code, Chapter 15.20. 
Section R105.5 "Expiration", is amended to read as follows: 
Every permit issued by the Building Official under the provisions of this code shall expire and become null and void after one year from the date of issuance of said permit. 
Any permit holder holding an unexpired permit for which work has commenced may apply for an extension provided no changes have been made to the original plans. The fee will not be charged for a one-time extension provided the permit is not expired subsequent extensions shall be charged based on the valuation for the work that is left to perform under the original permit issued. No permit shall be extended without first being approved by the Building Official or his or her designee. 
If a permit expires without commencement of work, a new permit shall be obtained before work can commence. This shall constitute a new application, complete plans, and full payment of all permit fees. 
For the purpose of this section, commencement of work shall be defined as; the inspection and successful completion of the entire foundation system for the permitted structure, including the placing of the concrete. If the permit is for something other than a structure, the Building Official will determine if the amount of work completed shows a good faith effort was made to complete work authorized by the permit. 
Section R313.1.1 is revised to read as follows: 
Automatic fire sprinkler systems required to be installed in townhouses pursuant to the California Residential Code shall be permitted to be designed and installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D or the California Residential Code, Section R313.3. Each fire sprinkler riser required to be installed shall have installed a water flow switch and a 120 volt horn strobe at the exterior. The exterior flow alarm horn strobe shall be located on the exterior of the building at or near the front or side corner facing the fronting street. The horn strobe shall be loud enough to notify the occupants that water is flowing. The fire riser shall be installed pursuant to the City of Lincoln Public Facilities Improvement Standards and as specified herein. In the event of any conflict between this Code and any law, rule or regulation of the State of California or any other jurisdiction, that requirement which establishes the higher standard of safety shall govern as determined by the fire code official or building official. 
Section R313.2.1 is revised to read as follows: 
Automatic fire sprinkler systems required to be installed in one-and two-family dwellings pursuant to the California Residential Code shall be permitted to be designed and installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D or the California Residential Code, Section R313.3. Each fire sprinkler riser required to be installed shall have installed a water flow switch and a 120 volt horn strobe at the exterior. The exterior flow alarm horn strobe shall be located on the exterior of the building at or near the front or side corner facing the fronting street. The horn strobe shall be loud enough to notify the occupants that water is flowing. The fire riser shall be installed pursuant to the City of Lincoln Public Works Standards and as specified herein. In the event of any conflict between this Code and any law, rule or regulation of the State of California or any other jurisdiction, that requirement which establishes the higher standard of safety shall govern as determined by the fire code official or building official. 
(Ord. No. 926B , § 6, 11-15-2016)  
15.04.220 - Fees. 
On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required in accordance with the established fee schedule as adopted by the currently established "Master Fee Schedule" of the city of Lincoln. The fee schedule is based upon the current cost of construction valuation established by either taking the actual contract price or shall be determined by the use of the current edition of "Valuation Data," and the currently adopted edition of the Building Code whichever is higher as published by the International Code Council. 
(Ord. No. 926B , § 6, 11-15-2016)  
15.04.230 - Plan review fees. 
A plan review deposit shall be paid at the time of submitting the submittal documents for plan review based on the valuation of the project. Plan review fees shall be established in accordance with the currently established "Master Fee Schedule" of the city of Lincoln and as set forth in the California Building Code. Said plan review fees are separate fees from the permit fees and are in addition to the permit fees. 
(Ord. No. 926B , § 6, 11-15-2016)  
15.04.240 - Violation—Misdemeanor. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of any code adopted in this chapter, any person who violates any provision of any code adopted by this chapter by reference, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable as the same is now or may hereafter be punishable under the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 926B , § 6, 11-15-2016)  
15.04.250 - Findings. 
The city council finds that the regulations enacted by this chapter and the modifications to the California Construction Code Standards are reasonably necessary because of local climatic, topographical, or geographical conditions present within the city of Lincoln. Pursuant to California Health and Safety Code, Section 18941.5, the city of Lincoln has made certain modifications based on these climatic, topographical and geographical conditions as follows: 
Average yearly rainfall for the city is approximately 16—22 inches. This rainfall normally occurs from October to April. During the summer months, there is generally no measurable precipitation. Temperatures for this dry period average from 80 to 100 degrees Fahrenheit and are frequently accompanied by light to gusty northerly winds. The city is surrounded by several hundred acres of grassland, which in conjunction with the dry and sometimes windy climate creates a hazardous fire situation that has led to extensive grass and brush fires in recent years. Over the past decade, the city has grown in population and continues development extending from the urban core into these grassland areas and at some locations, oak tree covered areas. In these areas of the city, wind-driven fires could lead to severe consequences, as has been the case on several occasions in similar areas of the state. 
Uniquely for a city of its size, the city is bisected by several topographical features, including two ravines (Auburn Ravine and Markham Ravine), one railroad line (Union Pacific), and State Highway 65 and State Highway 193. As a result, the city is divided into four different areas, including the East-side (east of the railroad), West-side (west of the railroad), Lincoln Hills (south of Auburn Ravine), and Twelve Bridges (south of Twelve Bridges Drive). Traffic between these areas is channeled into several thoroughfares which must cross the creeks, railroad tracks, and state highways by means of bridges or at grade crossings (which are sometimes blocked by trains with only one overpass). Heavy traffic congestion on the city's major streets already acts as a barrier to timely response for fire equipment and emergency services. In the event of an accident or other emergency at one of the main points of intersection between the road, creek, or railroad sections, portions of the city could become isolated or emergency response times could be sufficiently slowed so as to increase the risk of substantial injury or damage. 
These local climatic, topographical and geographical conditions could potentially create serious concerns regarding the potential for an explosive fire situation and the inability of the city to provide a rapid emergency services response to various areas of the city. Additionally, there are areas of the city that have larger homes located within their confines and private gated areas where homes are further apart. As a result, it is necessary to mitigate these issues by amending the California Residential, Building and Fire Codes as provided for in California Health and Safety Code Sections 17958 et seq., requiring installation of horn/strobe devices for townhouses and one- and two-family dwellings during activation of the code-required dwelling sprinkler system. 
Failure to enact this chapter with the amendments outlined could place the residents of the city of Lincoln in a condition which would be perilous to their health and safety and therefore, pursuant to California Government Code Section 65961(a)(1), the requirements for horn/strobe devices during activation of the code-required dwelling sprinkler system as required by this chapter shall be imposed as a condition to the issuance of a building permit for townhouses and one- and two-family dwellings pursuant to the requirements of the California Building and Residential Codes of the California Building Standards. 
(Ord. No. 926B , § 6, 11-15-2016)  
CHAPTER 15.05 - EXPEDITED PERMIT PROCESS FOR SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEMS 
 
15.05.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of the chapter is to provide an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014, CA Govt. Code Section 65850.5) in order to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter encourages the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. This chapter allows the city to achieve these goals while protecting public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 909B , § 2(Exh. A), 10-13-2015)  
15.05.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Electronic submittal" means the utilization of electronic e-mail, submittal via the internet or facsimile. 
"Reasonable restrictions" on a solar energy system are those restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits. 
"Restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance" means: 
(1)  For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating systems: an amount exceeding ten percent of the cost of the system, but in no case more than $1,000.00, or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding ten percent, as originally specified and proposed. 
(2)  For photovoltaic systems: an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding ten percent as originally specified and proposed. 
"Small residential rooftop solar energy system" means all of the following: 
(1)  A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal. 
(2)  A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city, and all state and city health and safety standards. 
(3)  A solar energy system that is installed on a single- or two-family dwelling. 
(4)  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the city. 
"Solar energy system" means either of the following: 
(1)  Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating. 
(2)  Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating. 
"Specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct, unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
(Ord. No. 909B , § 2(Exh. A), 10-13-2015)  
15.05.030 - Applicability. 
(a)  This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city. 
(b)  Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. 
(c)  A certificate of appropriateness and/or architectural review may be required for properties deemed historically significant as determined by the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 909B , § 2(Exh. A), 10-13-2015)  
15.05.040 - Solar energy system requirements. 
(a)  All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the city. 
(b)  Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code. 
(c)  Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. 
(Ord. No. 909B , § 2(Exh. A), 10-13-2015)  
15.05.050 - Applications and documents. 
(a)  All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application will be made available on the city website. 
(b)  Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by email, or the Internet will be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants. 
(c)  The city's building department will implement a standard plan and checklist for all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply in order to be eligible for expedited review. 
(d)  The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plan(s), and checklist(s) shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the governor's office of planning and research. 
(Ord. No. 909B , § 2(Exh. A), 10-13-2015)  
15.05.060 - Permit review and inspection requirements. 
(a)  The city manager or his or her designee shall implement an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. The building department shall either approve or deny the issuance of a building permit, the issuance of which is nondiscretionary, on the same day for over-the-counter applications that meet the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan and one to three days for applications submitted by e-mail or facsimile. 
(b)  Review of the application shall be limited to the chief building official's review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements. 
(c)  Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. 
(d)  A city, county, or city and county may not deny an application for a use permit to install a solar energy system unless it makes written findings based upon substantial evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. The findings shall include the basis for the rejection of potential feasible alternatives of preventing the adverse impact. 
(e)  If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. 
(f)  Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the building division for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. 
(g)  The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include a single inspection. 
(h)  If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized. 
(Ord. No. 909B , § 2(Exh. A), 10-13-2015)  
CHAPTER 15.06 - BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 899B, §§ 1, 6, adopted Dec. 10, 2013, repealed Ch. 15.06 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 15.06 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 15.06, §§ 15.06.010—15.06.050, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 850B, § 2, adopted Jan. 11, 2011. 
 
15.06.010 - Establishment. 
In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and types of construction and to provide for reasonable interpretations of the provisions of the California and International Codes enumerated in Chapter 15.04, there is established a building board of appeals, consisting of five members, who shall be qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction and code enforcement matters. 
(Ord. No. 889B, § 6, 12-10-2013)  
15.06.040 - Terms. 
The terms of each board member shall be four years, except for the initial appointments, and shall run concurrently with the term of the city council member who nominated that board member. 
(Ord. No. 889B, § 6, 12-10-2013)  
15.06.050 - Powers and duties—Appeals. 
(a)  The building board of appeals shall have the authority as provided in Section 113 of the International Building Code with California Amendments and shall hear appeals from all decisions of the building official, including the denial of a variance from the provisions of this chapter, and shall also hear requests for variances from any provision of this chapter referred to it by the building official or community development director. Upon such references, or upon appeal, it shall have the same power as the building official to grant such variances and impose conditions thereon. 
(b)  Appeals to the building board of appeals shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk no later than ten days from the date of the decision of the building official. 
(c)  Members of the building board of appeals shall serve without compensation; however, the city council may reimburse said members for reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(d)  Any person, including city staff, may appeal a decision of the building board of appeals to the city council. The appeal shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk no later than ten days from the date of the decision of the building board of appeals and shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 889B, § 6, 12-10-2013)  
CHAPTER 15.08 - WIDTH OF RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
 
15.08.010 - Minimum required for building permit issuance. 
A building permit shall not be issued to any person, firm, corporation or partnership for construction of a building on any lot within the city limits which does not have the required right-of-way width from the centerline of the street, or proposed street, to the property line of the lot. 
(Ord. 724B §2 (part), 2002)  
15.08.020 - Designation of minimum width. 
The width required for the right-of-way from the centerline of existing or proposed streets shall be recommended by the city engineer. The width required for the right-of-way from the centerline of an existing street or proposed street shall be designated by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 724B §2 (part), 2002)  
15.08.030 - Appeal to city council. 
In the event the applicant does not agree with the right-of-way determination of the planning commission of the required right-of-way width from the centerline of existing or proposed streets, the applicant may appeal this determination to the city council. 
(Ord. 724B §2 (part), 2002)  
CHAPTER 15.12 - MOVING OF BUILDINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 828B, §§ 1, 6, adopted Dec. 11, 2007, repealed Ch. 15.12 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 15.12 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 15.12, §§ 15.12.010—15.12.040, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 167B, §§ 1—4, adopted in 1960. 
 
15.12.010 - Permit required. 
All persons who desire to move a building into the city from other localities, or who desire to move buildings within the city, shall first apply to the community development director and chief building inspector/building official of the city for a permit to do so. 
(Ord. No. 828B, § 6, 12-11-2007)  
15.12.020 - Hearings—Approval or disapproval. 
(a)  Upon the filing of an application for permission to move a building into or within the city, the secretary of the planning commission shall set the same for hearing before the planning commission and give notice of the hearing of the application by causing notice thereof to be published in at least one regular issue of a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten days before the hearing on the application. The notice shall contain the name and post office address of the applicant, the type of buildings sought to be moved, street address or block location where the building is proposed to be permanently located and the date, hour and place of the hearing. At least ten days before the hearing of the application by the planning commission the secretary shall mail a copy of the notice to the applicant and to owners of property any part of which lies within a radius of 400 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property on which the building will be permanently located. 
(b)  Upon receipt of each recommendation of the planning commission regarding the moving of buildings into or within the city, the city council shall set the same for hearing by the city council and give notice of hearing by a notice thereof to be published in at least one regular issue of a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least ten days before the first hearing on the recommendation prior to the adoption of a resolution of approval or disapproval of the recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 828B, § 6, 12-11-2007)  
15.12.030 - Information required—Bond—Inspection. 
(a)  As a condition to the filing of an application with the city chief building inspector/building official for permission to move a building into or within the city, the applicant shall furnish the chief building inspector/building official with a correct description of the building, showing the floor plan and dimensions, and also shall furnish the chief building inspector/building official with three current photographs of the building, the photographs to be not more than 90 days old and to be of a size not less than five inches by eight inches; one shall show the front view, another a side view and the other a rear view of the building. 
(b)  At the time of the filing of an application with the city chief building inspector/building official the applicant shall post a bond in the amount of $3,000.00 to $5,000.00 or deposit cash in the amount of $1,250.00 with the city clerk to guarantee that he will comply with all regulations of the Uniform Building Code, the National Electrical Code and the Uniform Plumbing Code of the city. 
(c)  The applicant shall furnish the chief building inspector/ building official with the present location of the building proposed to be moved into or within the city prior to their being moved. The applicant shall deposit with the city clerk a cash deposit sufficient to defray all expenses of the chief building inspector necessarily incurred in making this inspection at the present location of the building proposed to be moved, such as travel and other incidental expenses. 
(Ord. No. 828B, § 6, 12-11-2007)  
15.12.040 - Report by chief building inspector/building official. 
The chief building inspector/building official of the city shall make a detailed report to the planning commission regarding any application for the moving of a building into or within the city. 
(Ord. No. 828B, § 6, 12-11-2007)  
CHAPTER 15.16 - FIRE ZONES 
 
15.16.010 - Commercial buildings included. 
All commercial buildings erected in the city after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter are in a commercial fire zone. 
(Ord. 143B §1, 1958)  
CHAPTER 15.20 - SWIMMING POOLS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 828B, §§ 1, 6, adopted Dec. 11, 2007, repealed Ch. 15.20 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 15.20 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 15.20, §§ 15.20.010—15.20.040, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 186B, §§ 1—4, adopted in 1962; Ord. 592B §§ 1—4, adopted in 1993. 
 
15.20.010 - Permit and fee required. 
Before any person commences the installation of any plumbing, filter system, circulating pumping, chlorinating or emptying system for any swimming, wading or bathing pool, public or private, that contains water over 18 inches deep, an application shall be made to the city for a permit to construct such installation. A permit fee shall be required. 
(1)  An above-ground, pre-wired to plug into a 110 volt electrical outlet, pre-manufactured, self-contained spa unit with a lockable cover shall be exempted from these requirements unless the spa is to be placed in front of a window or within five feet of any mechanical or electrical equipment or any other metal structure. The spa cannot be located so as to obstruct the movement of emergency personnel or create a hazard to emergency egress from a structure. 
(Ord. No. 828B, § 6, 12-11-2007)  
15.20.020 - Application for permit. 
All applications for permits for such construction shall be accompanied by engineered, wet stamped/signed plans and specifications in triplicate and in sufficient detail to show the pool dimensions, size and type of filters, layout of all piping, with size indicated; the method of waste disposal, source of water supply and other data pertinent thereto. In addition to the plans, a site plan must be submitted showing the exact distances from the pool or spa edge and pump(s) or filters to all structures, property lines and/or fences. The proposed barrier and gate requirements as listed in subsection (4) of Section 15.20.030 must be listed or attached to the plans. 
(Ord. No. 828B, § 6, 12-11-2007)  
15.20.030 - Construction requirements. 
For the construction of such pools, the following minimum requirements shall be observed: 
(1)  Permission shall be obtained in writing from the public works director to discharge swimming pool water into the public sewer. A copy of such permission stating the maximum size of the waste line between the interceptor and the sewer shall accompany any application for a permit. 
(2)  There shall be no direct connection between any domestic water supply line and any circulating pump, filter, water softener or other apparatus or device that comes in contact with water in or from the pool. The domestic supply to the storage tank or pool shall be above the extreme overflow in such manner as to prevent water from the tank or pool from entering the domestic supply line. 
(3)  All swimming pools shall have the bottom and inner sides constructed of smooth nonabsorbent material and shall be constructed as to be properly drained through one or more metal grate openings which comply with current state of California requirements. All such drains shall have a gate valve installed therein, located in an accessible place or masonry pit outside the walls of the pool. 
(4)  An outdoor pool shall be provided with a barrier that is to be installed and inspected prior to filling with water. The barrier shall comply with the following: 
a.  The top of the barrier shall be at least 60 inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the pool. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall be two inches measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance at the bottom of the barrier may be increased to four inches when grade is a solid surface. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade, such as an above-ground pool, the barrier may be at ground level or mounted on top of the pool structure. Where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, the maximum vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and the bottom of the barrier shall be four inches. 
b.  Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a four-inch diameter sphere. 
c.  Solid barriers which do not have openings, such as masonry or stone walls, shall not contain substantial indentations or protrusions except for tooled masonry joints. 
d.  Unless the top of the barrier is greater than 60 inches above grade, the horizontal members shall be located on the swimming pool side of the fence. Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed one and three-fourths inches in width. Where there are decorative cut-outs within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed one and three-fourths inches in width. Under no conditions shall horizontal members create a ladder-like condition. 
e.  Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be two inches square. The wire shall not be less than nine gauge. 
f.  Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, such as a lattice fence, the maximum opening formed by the diagonal members shall be no more than one and three-fourths inches. 
g.  Access gates shall comply with the requirements of subsection (4)a. through f. of this section and shall be equipped to accommodate a locking device. Pedestrian access gates shall open outward away from the pool and shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Where the release mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than 54 inches from the bottom of the gate, (1) the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate at least 42 inches from the bottom of the gate, and (2) the gate and barrier shall have no opening greater than one-half inch within 18 inches of the release mechanism. Any gate other than pedestrian access gates shall remain locked at all times when not in use, with a durable sign on or adjacent to the gate stating: "THIS GATE TO REMAIN LOCKED AT ALL TIMES WHEN NOT IN USE." 
h.  Isolation fencing (fencing that completely encloses the pool and separates the pool from the house and remaining yard) shall meet the requirements of subsection (4)a. through g. of this section, where applicable, and the isolation access gate shall swing outward from the pool. 
i.  Where an above-ground pool structure is used as a barrier or where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure and the means of access is a ladder or steps, then (1) the ladder or steps shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access, or (2) the ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier which meets the requirements of subsection (4)a. through h. of this section. When the ladder or steps are secured, locked or removed, any opening created shall not allow the passage of a four-inch diameter sphere. 
(Ord. No. 828B, § 6, 12-11-2007)  
15.20.040 - Abandonment of swimming pools. 
For the abandonment of such pools, the following minimum requirement shall be observed: 
(1)  A demolition permit is required to be obtained prior to the abandonment of a pool structure. 
(2)  The bottom and sides of the pool structure must be completely removed, including all debris. 
(3)  The remaining pool area must be filled with suitable material as per the current edition of the International Building Code for soils compaction and grading requirements. 
(4)  If the filled pool area will be used to support a structure, a soils engineer must provide a soils report to the chief inspector/building official prior to obtaining a demolition permit. 
(Ord. No. 828B, § 6, 12-11-2007)  
CHAPTER 15.24 - SCHOOL OVERCROWDING MITIGATION MEASURES 
 
15.24.010 - Authority and purpose—Declarations. 
(a)  The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted under authority of Government Code section 65974 for the purpose of providing interim school facilities to alleviate conditions of overcrowding caused by new residential development. 
(b)  The city council declares: 
(1)  Public education is provided in the city by the Western Placer Unified School District. 
(2)  From time to time, new residential development may cause overcrowding in one or more schools in the district. 
(3)  It is necessary that a method be available to provide the district with interim classroom facilities when conditions of overcrowding exist in order that education not be adversely affected. 
(Ord. 374B §1, 1980)  
15.24.020 - Definitions. 
In addition to the definitions set forth in section 65973 of the Government Code, the following shall apply: 
"Board" means the board of trustees of the district. 
"Declaration of impact" means a statement adopted by a board and forwarded to the city council declaring the existence of an impacted school or schools in accordance with the requirements of section 65971 of the Government Code. The declaration of impact shall specify the mitigation measures considered by the district. Mitigation measures to be considered by the district shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Boundary adjustments; 
(2)  Double sessions; 
(3)  Tax overrides; 
(4)  Bond issues; 
(5)  Agreements between a subdivider and the district whereby temporary-use buildings will be leased to the district or temporary-use buildings owned by the district will be used. 
(Ord. 374B §2, 1980)  
15.24.030 - Declarations of impact by school board. 
A board may, from time to time, adopt a declaration of impact and file it with the city clerk for consideration by the council. 
(Ord. 374B §3, 1980)  
15.24.040 - Action on declaration by city council. 
Upon receipt of a declaration of impact from a board, the city council shall, if it concurs in the findings set forth in the declaration of impact, withhold approval of, or order the appropriate officer, employee or commission within the city to withhold approval of, new residential development within the attendance area of the impacted school or schools pending compliance with Section 15.24.050. 
(Ord. 374B §4, 1980)  
15.24.050 - Land or fees required to develop in impacted areas. 
(a)  The city council shall require, as a condition of approval of new development within the attendance area of an impacted school, either the dedication of land, the payment of fees in lieu thereof, or a combination of both in accordance with the provisions of section 65974 of the Government Code. 
(b)  The decision concerning whether to accept land, fees or an appropriate combination shall be determined after consultation with the concerned board regarding the needs of the district as they relate to the impacted school or schools. 
(c)  The amount of any fee shall be prescribed by resolution of the council and shall be collected at the time of issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. 374B §5, 1980)  
15.24.060 - Use of land or fees—Report to council. 
(a)  The district shall use the fees and/or land solely to alleviate the conditions of overcrowding within the affected attendance area. 
(b)  The district shall provide to the city council the schedule and report required by sections 65976 and 65978 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 374B §6, 1980)  
15.24.070 - Right to disapprove development unimpaired. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be read to limit the right of the city council to disapprove new residential development for any lawful reason, including but not limited to the impact that such development may have on a school or schools within a district which cannot be alleviated by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 374B §7, 1980)  
CHAPTER 15.26 - SCHOOL FACILITY FINANCING PROGRAM 
 
15.26.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted in order to implement the goals, policies, and objections of the city's general plan regarding school facilities and to mitigate the impacts caused by new development upon school facilities presently, or in the future, to be located in the city. 
(Ord. 663B §1(part), 1998)  
15.26.020 - Policy. 
All new development in the city will be required, as a condition of approval, to participate in the Western Placer Unified School District's ("district") existing community facility district financing program ("financing program"). 
(Ord. 663B §1(part), 1998)  
15.26.030 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, "new development" means any new development receiving any necessary general plan, specific plan or zoning approvals. 
(Ord. 663B §1(part), 1998)  
CHAPTER 15.28 - LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS 
 
15.28.010 - Title for citation. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and referred to as the "Water efficient landscaping ordinance for the city of Lincoln." 
(Ord. 586B §2(part), 1992)  
15.28.020 - Intent. 
The intent of this chapter is to establish rules and regulations relating to tree planting and landscaping within all districts of the city in compliance with the Water Conservation In Landscaping Act beginning with Section 65591 of the Government Code for the state of California. Said legislation requires that steps be taken by city and county agencies to assure that water conservation methods are incorporated in landscape standards throughout California. This chapter serves to establish water efficiency standards for design, installation and maintenance of landscaping and irrigation systems to assure avoidance of excessive water use and to maintain healthy plant growth in new development projects. 
(Ord. 586B §2(part), 1992)  
15.28.030 - Applicability. 
These standards shall apply to all required landscaping proposed as part of projects that are subject to review by the design review board in accordance with Chapter 18.64 of this code, except for projects which meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings built on lands subdivided pursuant to a final or parcel map approved by the city council prior to July 1, 1979; 
(2)  Any single-family residential project with a landscaped area containing less than 2,500 square feet in planted and landscaped coverage; 
(3)  Existing public parks and school grounds unless there is an alteration to planting or irrigation systems requiring obtaining a building permit from the Lincoln building department; 
(4)  Cemeteries; 
(5)  Registered historical sites; 
(6)  Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or 
(7)  Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system. 
(Ord. 586B §2(part), 1992)  
15.28.040 - Authority of public works director. 
The public works director shall have the jurisdiction and control of the design and extent of all irrigation, planting, setting out, location and placement of all trees and landscaping in the street rights-of-way of the city. The public works director shall also have the supervision, direction and control of the care, trimming, removal, relocation and replacement thereof and may require a permit for any or all of the above areas. 
(Ord. 586B §2(part), 1992)  
15.28.050 - Definitions. 
The words used in this chapter shall have the meaning set forth below: 
"Anti-drain valve" or "check valve" means a valve located under a sprinkler head to hold water in the system so it minimizes drainage from the lower elevation sprinkler heads. 
"Automatic controller" means a mechanical or solid state timer capable of operating valve stations to set the days and length of time of a water application. 
"Backflow prevention device" means a safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system. 
"Emitter" means a drip irrigation fitting that delivers water slowly from the system to the soil. 
"Establishment period" means the period at which the plant has established itself where the plant can live without supplemental watering, usually within one or two years of planting. 
"Hydrozone" means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs that are served by a valve or set of valves with the same schedule. A hydrozone may be irrigated or nonirrigated. For example, a naturalized area planted with native vegetation that will not need supplemental irrigation once established is a nonirrigated hydrozone. 
"Irrigated landscaping" means an irrigated surface layer of earth containing landscaping composed of groundcover, shrubs, trees and other plants. Areas dedicated to edible plants, such as orchards or vegetable gardens are not included. 
"Mined-land reclamation projects" means any surface mining operation with reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975. 
"Moisture sensor" connects to the automatic controller, to signal irrigation only when the sensor detects low moisture in the plant root zone. 
"Mulch" means any organic material such as leaves, bark or straw left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purpose of reducing evaporation and erosion. 
"Runoff" means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the area and across property lines or into the public right-of-way. 
"Single-family development" means a dwelling unit consisting of a building or mobile home on a permanent foundation with provisions for sleeping, cooking and sanitation, and with permanent connections to utilities, providing living space for one family. 
"Station" means a planted area served by one valve or by a set of valves simultaneously. 
"Turf" means a surface layer of earth containing grass with its roots. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, Perennial ryegrass, Red fescue, and Tall fescue are cool-season grasses. Bermuda grass, Kikuyu grass, Seashore paspalum, St. Augustine grass, Zoysia grass and Buffalo grass are warm-season grasses. 
"Valve" means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system. 
(Ord. 586B §2(part), 1992)  
15.28.060 - Landscape plan—Required—Submittal. 
Prior to installing landscaping and irrigation, final landscape plans, prepared by a licensed landscape architect or licensed landscape contractor shall be submitted for review and approval in accordance with Chapter 18.68 of this code. Final plans shall include details consistent with the submittal requirements indicated in Chapter 18.68; including, but not limited to, plant materials set in a logical, orderly manner, in scale and relation with the building and neighborhood; and other structural features such as fountains, artworks, screens, walls, berms, benches or fences. Plans shall incorporate the minimum requirements regarding percentage of irrigated landscape coverage, percentage of turf coverage, percentage drought tolerant plants proposed and details on irrigation systems to assure efficient use of water. 
(Ord. 586B §2(part), 1992)  
15.28.070 - Landscape and irrigation development standards. 
Development standards for projects which qualify pursuant to Section 15.28.030 of this chapter are as follows: 
(1)  Landscape Coverage. Except where additional turf area is determined needed for passive or active recreational use by the design review board, no more than 25 percent of the project site covered by irrigated landscaping shall be devoted to turf. At least 50 percent of the project site covered by irrigated landscaping shall be drought tolerant/low water use plants, as suggested by the Sunset Western Garden Book or equivalent publication. The remaining nonturf plants which are nondrought tolerant variety, shall be grouped together by hydrozone and shall be irrigated separately. 
(2)  Use of Turf. Turf shall be discouraged in median areas, in parkway areas less than six feet in width and on slopes of ten percent or greater. Turf shall be prohibited within the drip line of native oak trees. Turf areas exceeding 1,000 square feet or used as an essential part of development, such as golf courses or playing fields, shall utilize soil moisture sensors as part of their irrigation system. 
(3)  Mulch Coverage. All planted areas, except those with lawns, native forested areas, established groundcover or other low lying shrub areas shall include mulch material to an average thickness of at least two inches throughout, except in the immediate vicinity of plant stems. 
(4)  Permanent Irrigation System Design. Irrigation systems shall be designed to prevent over-spray, run-off, low-head drainage or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, walks, roadways or structures. Drip, trickle or other low volume irrigation methods are encouraged. All irrigation systems shall incorporate automatic controllers and be designed such that there are separate valves serving each of the following areas: 
a.  Turf areas; 
b.  Areas planted with drought tolerant/low water use plants; 
c.  Areas planted with nondrought tolerant plants. 
(5)  Temporary Irrigation System Design. Use of temporary irrigation for open space or hydroseeded areas shall be removed after the establishment period. 
(Ord. 586B §2(part), 1992)  
15.28.080 - Installation. 
All landscaping and irrigation shall be installed under the supervision and inspection of a qualified professional. Prior to final building inspection, landscaping and irrigation systems shall be installed according to the approved plans. An extension of time for completion of landscaping and irrigation system installation may be granted by the public works director if implementation is secured by an agreement or posting of adequate bond or cash deposit to guarantee performance under the agreement as required by the public works director. Prior to final inspection and issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the building official, a letter signed by a licensed landscape architect, or the landscape contractor who performed the installation, shall be submitted to the public works director and the building official certifying that landscaping and irrigation for the project has been installed in accordance with the approved plan. 
(Ord. 586B §2(part), 1992)  
15.28.090 - Final landscape inspection. 
Final landscaping approval must be received from the public works director prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or release of the bond or cash deposit which guarantees completion of landscaping. 
(Ord. 586B §2(part), 1992)  
15.28.100 - Tree preservation and removal. 
Projects involving any preservation or removal of existing trees on the project site shall comply with Chapter 18.69 of this code. 
(Ord. 586B §2(part), 1992)  
15.28.110 - Planting establishment. 
To establish planting and assure proper operation of the irrigation system the developer/owner shall either: 
(1)  Enter into a minimum 90-day maintenance contract between the developer/owner and a licensed landscape contractor. A copy of the contract shall be submitted for review and approval by the public works director pursuant to Section 15.28.090 of this chapter before final landscape approval is granted by the public works director. Criteria in the maintenance contract should contain the following minimum provisions: 
a.  Erosion and sedimentation control; 
b.  Establishment of healthy plants or replacement of dead or injured plants; 
c.  Maintenance of tree staking; 
d.  Weed abatement; 
e.  Irrigation maintenance of all valves and heads to remain in satisfactory operational condition for the life of the contract; or 
(2)  Post a bond or cash security with the public works director at the value of the landscape and irrigation installations for a minimum of 90 days. Bond or security may be released upon inspection and approval by the public works director. 
(Ord. 586B §2(part), 1992)  
15.28.120 - Maintenance. 
All woody plants within the city right-of-way shall be the responsibility of the city to prune, spray, brace, remove or replace. All landscaping and irrigation on private property shall be maintained by the developer and any subsequent owners of such real property. Landscaped areas shall be kept free of weeds, litter and debris. All pruning maintenance shall be in accordance with acceptable horticultural practices and in any case where a required planting has not survived, said planting shall be replaced within 30 days upon notice of the public works director. If landscaping and irrigation has not been improved to proper standards within the time specified in the notice, the developer and any subsequent owners of such real property shall be subject to an infraction or penalties or other actions pursuant to Chapter 1.16 of this code. 
(Ord. 586B §2(part), 1992)  
15.28.130 - Water waste. 
Operation of landscape irrigation system which is broken or for other reason wasting water is prohibited pursuant to Section 13.04.440 of this code. The owner of the property shall repair or correct the irrigation system within five days of written notice by the public works director. 
(Ord. 586B §2(part), 1992)  
15.28.140 - Installation of trees and planter boxes. 
The installation of trees and planter boxes on street frontages are required no more than 30 feet apart at existing and proposed sidewalks of at least ten feet in width. The location of trees shall be coordinated with all existing utility poles, drains, signs, fire hydrants, etc. Tree species shall be approved from the master tree list. 
(Ord. 586B §2(part), 1992)  
15.28.150 - Screening. 
Open loading areas and outdoor storage facilities shall be screened from all abutting parcels by dense planting at least six feet in height and not less than three feet wide or by a solid lumber fence, masonry wall or cyclone fence with wood slats at least six feet in height. In no case shall such buffering create safety hazard to oncoming traffic. 
(Ord. 586B §2(part), 1992)  
15.28.160 - Parking lot landscaping. 
Within a parking lot there shall be at least five percent of the parking area landscaped. All planting materials and their height at maturity shall be designated on the plan. Any unused space resulting from the design of the parking lot shall be used for landscaping purposes. 
(Ord. 586B §2(part), 1992)  
15.28.170 - Preservation of granite curbs and hitching posts. 
Granite curbs and hitching posts shall be preserved or reset unless reasons are submitted for removing certain sections to facilitate access for handicapped ramps, driveways, drainage considerations or the like. 
(Ord. 586B §2(part), 1992)  
15.28.180 - Public information. 
The public works director shall make information available to the public on this chapter. The public works director shall also prepare and distribute guidelines and information on water-saving landscaped design techniques on an ongoing basis. 
(Ord. 586B §2(part), 1992)  
15.28.190 - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by an act or determination of the public works director in exercise of the authority granted him or her in this chapter has the right of appeal to the city council, whose decision, after a public hearing of the matter, shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 586B §2(part), 1992)  
CHAPTER 15.32 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 841B, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 13, 2009, repealed Ch. 15.32 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 15.32 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 15.32, §§ 15.32.010—15.32.240, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 499B § 1(part), adopted in 1987; Ord. 640B §§ 1—8, adopted in 1996; Ord. 771B §§ 1—4, adopted in 2004. 
 
Article I. - Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Methods 
 
15.32.010 - Statutory authorization. 
The legislature of the state of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the city of Lincoln does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations based on the California Model Floodplain Management Ordinance for Non-Coastal Communities, December 2006. 
(Ord. No. 841B, § 2, 10-13-2009)  
15.32.020 - Finding of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards, which increase flood heights and velocities also contribute to flood losses. 
(Ord. No. 841B, § 2, 10-13-2009)  
15.32.030 - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by legally enforceable regulations applied uniformly throughout the community to all publicly and privately owned land within floodprone, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) or flood-related erosion areas. These regulations are designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas; 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
(8)  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. No. 841B, § 2, 10-13-2009)  
15.32.040 - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes regulations to: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. No. 841B, § 2, 10-13-2009)  
Article II. - Definitions 
 
5.32.050 - Interpretation. 
Unless specifically defined in Section 15.32.060, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
(Ord. No. 841B, § 2, 10-13-2009)  
15.32.060 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
"A zone" - See "Special flood hazard area." 
"Accessory structure" means a structure that is either: 
(1)  Solely for the parking of no more than 2 cars; or 
(2)  A small, low cost shed for limited storage, less than 150 square feet and $1,500.00 in value. 
"Accessory use" means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
"Alluvial fan" means a geomorphologic characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration. 
"Apex" means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
"Appeal" means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance. 
"Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
"Area of special flood hazard" - See "Special flood hazard area." 
"Base flood" means a flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout this ordinance. 
"Base flood elevation" (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) for zones AE, AH, A1-30, VE and V1-V30 that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
"Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade - i.e., below ground level - on all sides. 
"Building" - See "Structure". 
"Development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
"Encroachment" means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
"Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before December 8, 1981. 
"Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for receiving the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
"Flood", flooding" or "floodwater" means: 
(1)  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and 
(2)  The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. 
"Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway. 
"Flood hazard zone" means an area subject to flooding that is delineated as either a special hazard area or an area of moderate hazard on an official flood insurance rate map issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The identification of flood hazard zones does not imply that areas outside the flood hazard zones, or uses permitted within flood hazard zones, will be free from flooding or flood damage. 
"Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
"Flood insurance study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the FIRM, the FBFM, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
"Floodplain" or "flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source - see "Flooding." 
"Floodplain administrator" is the community official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
"Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventative measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
"Floodplain management regulations" means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other applications of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes such state or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
"Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water, and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing, see FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93. 
"Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as "regulatory floodway." 
"Floodway fringe" is that area of the floodplain on either side of the "regulatory floodway" where encroachment may be permitted. 
"Fraud and victimization" as related to Article VI of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100 years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
"Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
"Hardship" as related to Article VI of this ordinance means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The city requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
"Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
"Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
"Levee" means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
"Levee system" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
"Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area including basement (see "Basement" definition). 
(1)  An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to: 
a.  The flood opening standard in subsection 15.32.160(c); 
b.  The anchoring standards in subsection 15.32.180(a); 
c.  The construction materials and method standards in subsection 15.32.180(b); 
d.  The standards for utilities in Section 15.32.190. 
(2)  For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see "basement" definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas. 
"Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
"Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent. 
"Market value" shall be determined by estimating the cost to replace the structure in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation which has accrued since the structure was constructed. The cost of replacement of the structure shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by reference to a building cost estimating guide recognized by the building construction industry. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking into account the age and physical deterioration of the structure and functional obsolescence as approved by the floodplain administrator, but shall not include economic or other forms of external obsolescence. Use of replacement costs or accrued depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized building cost estimating guides may be considered only if such factors are included in a report prepared by an independent professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation of the differences. 
"Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
"Moderate hazard area" means an area in the floodplain subject to a half-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on a flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) or federal insurance rate map (FIRM) as zone B or X (shaded). 
"New construction" means, for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after December 8, 1981, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
"New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after December 8, 1981. 
"Non-urban area" or "not urbanizing area" means developed an area or area outside a developed area in which there are fewer than 10,000 residents. Lincoln is an urban area and does not constitute any non-urban or urbanizing area. 
"Obstruction" includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
"One-hundred-year flood" or "100-year flood" - see "Base Flood." 
"Program deficiency" means a defect in a community's floodplain management regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those floodplain management regulations. 
"Public safety and nuisance" as related to Article VI of this chapter, means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
"Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
"Remedy a violation" means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with State or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
"Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
"Sheet flow area" - see "Area of shallow flooding." 
"Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area in the floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, or AH. 
"Start of construction" includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
"Structure" means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home. 
"Substantial damage" means: 
(1)  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damaged occurred; or 
(2)  Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. This is also known as "repetitive loss." 
"Substantial improvement" means any repair, reconstruction, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "Start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement to correct existing violations or existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
"Urban area" means a developed area in which there are 10,000 residents or more. All lands within the city limits of Lincoln are considered an urban area. 
"Urban level of flood protection" means the level of protection that is necessary to withstand flooding that has a 1-in-200 chance of occurring in any given year using criteria consistent with, or developed by, the California Department of Water Resources. "Urban level of flood protection" shall not mean shallow flooding or flooding from local drainage that meets the criteria of the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection. 
"Urbanizing area" means a developed area or an area outside a developed area that is planned or anticipated to have 10,000 residents or more within the next ten years. Lincoln is an urban area and does not consist of any non-urban or urbanizing areas. 
"Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
"Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
"Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
"Watercourse" means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. No. 841B, § 2, 10-13-2009; Ord. No. 913B , § 3(Exh. A), 6-28-2016)  
Article III. - General Provisions 
 
15.32.070 - Lands to which provisions apply. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 841B, § 2, 10-13-2009)  
15.32.080 - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the "Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the City of Lincoln, California" dated November 2, 2018, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs), dated November 2, 2018, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the City Council of the City of Lincoln by the floodplain administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file with the city's department of public works. 
(Ord. No. 841B, § 2, 10-13-2009; Ord. No. 984B , 1-22-2019)  
15.32.090 - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 841B, § 2, 10-13-2009)  
15.32.100 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 841B, § 2, 10-13-2009)  
15.32.110 - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 841B, § 2, 10-13-2009)  
15.32.120 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city of Lincoln, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 841B, § 2, 10-13-2009)  
15.32.130 - Severability. 
This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 841B, § 2, 10-13-2009)  
Article IV. - Administration 
 
15.32.140 - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
The city engineer is hereby appointed to administer, implement and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions. 
(Ord. No. 841B, § 2, 10-13-2009)  
15.32.150 - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Permit Review. 
a.  Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, including determination of substantial improvement and substantial damage of existing structures; 
b.  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; 
c.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding; 
d.  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. This means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city of Lincoln; and 
e.  All letters of map revision (LOMRs) for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition. 
(2)  Development of Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage Procedures. 
a.  Using FEMA publication FEMA 213, "Answers to Questions about Substantially Damaged Buildings," develop detailed procedures for identifying and administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial damage, to include defining "market value." 
b.  Assure procedures are coordinated with other departments/divisions and implemented by community staff. 
(3)  Review, Use and Development of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.32.080, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Article V. 
NOTE: A base flood elevation shall be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication, FEMA 265, "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas - A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations" dated July 1995. 
(4)  Notification of Other Agencies. 
a.  Alteration or Relocation of a Watercourse: 
1.  Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation; 
2.  Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and 
3.  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
b.  Base Flood Elevation Changes Due to Physical Alterations: 
1.  Within six months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR). 
2.  All LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition. Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements are based on current data. 
3.  Changes in corporate boundaries: 
Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate limits. 
(5)  Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following: 
a.  Certification required by subsection 15.32.180(3)a. and Section 15.32.210 (lowest floor elevations); 
b.  Certification required by subsection 15.32.180(3)b. (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures); 
c.  Certification required by subsection 15.32.180(3)c. (wet floodproofing standard); 
d.  Certification of elevation required by subsection 15.32.200(a)(3) (subdivisions and other proposed development standards); 
e.  Certification required by subsection 15.32.230(2) (floodway encroachments); and 
f.  Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(6)  Map Determination. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 15.32.170. 
(7)  Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 15.32.090. 
(8)  Biennial Report. Complete and submit biennial report to FEMA. 
(9)  Planning. Assure city's general plan is consistent with floodplain management objectives herein. 
(10)  Non-conversion of Enclosed Areas Below the Lowest Floor. To ensure that the areas below the BFE shall be used solely for parking vehicles, limited storage, or access to the building and not be finished for use as human habitation without first becoming fully compliant with the floodplain management ordinance in effect at the time of conversion, the floodplain administrator shall: 
a.  Determine which applicants for new construction and/or substantial improvements have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are five feet or higher; 
b.  Enter into a "Non-Conversion Agreement for Construction within Flood Hazard Areas" or equivalent with the city of Lincoln. The agreement shall be recorded with the Placer County Recorder as a deed restriction. The non-conversion agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the floodplain administrator and county council; and 
c.  Have the authority to inspect any area of a structure below the base flood elevation to ensure compliance upon prior notice of at least 72 hours. 
(Ord. No. 841B, § 2, 10-13-2009)  
15.32.160 - Development permit. 
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development, including manufactured homes, within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 15.32.070. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city. The applicant shall provide the following minimum information: 
(1)  Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing: 
a.  Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, storage of materials and equipment and their location; 
b.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other utilities; 
c.  Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any proposed fill, and drainage facilities; 
d.  Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable; 
e.  Base flood elevation information as specified in Section 15.32.080 or subsection 15.32.150(3); 
f.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; and 
g.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in subsection 15.32.180(3)b. of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93. 
(2)  Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building meets the floodproofing criteria in subsection 15.32.180(3)b. 
(3)  For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in subsection 15.32.180(3)c. of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93. 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(5)  All appropriate certifications listed in subsection 15.32.150(5) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 841B, § 2, 10-13-2009)  
15.32.170 - Appeals. 
The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 841B, § 2, 10-13-2009)  
Article V. - Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction 
 
15.32.180 - Standards of construction. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required: 
(1)  Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
(2)  Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvement of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be constructed: 
a.  With flood-resistant materials, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage for areas below the base flood elevation; 
b.  Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
c.  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and 
d.  Within zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(3)  Elevation and Floodproofing. 
a.  Residential Construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement: 
1.  In AE, AH, A1-30 zones, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. 
2.  In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified. 
3.  In an A zone, without BFEs specified on the FIRM [unnumbered A zone], elevated to or above the base flood elevation; as determined under subsection 15.32.150(3). 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
b.  Nonresidential Construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall either be elevated to conform with subsection 15.32.180(3)a. or: 
1.  Be floodproofed, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the elevation recommended under subsection 15.32.180(3)a., so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
2.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
3.  Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect that the standards of subsections 15.32.180(3)b.1. and 2. are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
c.  Flood Openings. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  For non-engineered openings: 
i.  Have a minimum of two openings on different sides having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
ii.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; 
iii.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; and 
iv.  Buildings with more than one enclosed area must have openings on exterior walls for each area to allow floodwater to directly enter; or 
2.  Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect. 
d.  Manufactured Homes. 
1.  See Section 15.32.210. 
e.  Garages and Low-Cost Accessory Structures. 
1.  Attached Garages. 
i.  A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters. See subsection 15.32.180(3)c. Areas of the garage below the BFE must be constructed with flood resistant materials. See subsection 15.32.180(2). 
ii.  A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the above requirements or be dry floodproofed. For guidance on below grade parking areas, see FEMA Technical Bulletin TB-6. 
2.  Detached Garages and Accessory Structures. 
i.  "Accessory structures" used solely for parking (two-car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost sheds), as defined in Section 15.32.060, may be constructed such that its floor is below the base flood elevation (BFE), provided the structure is designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements: 
A.  Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking or limited storage; 
B.  The portions of the accessory structure located below the BFE must be built using flood-resistant materials; 
C.  The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement; 
D.  Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the BFE; 
E.  The accessory structure must comply with floodplain encroachment provisions in Section 15.32.230; and 
F.  The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters in accordance with subsection 15.32.180(3)c. 
ii.  Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the above standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards in Section 15.32.180. 
(Ord. No. 841B, § 2, 10-13-2009)  
15.32.190 - Standards for utilities. 
(a)  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from systems into floodwaters. 
(b)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 841B, § 2, 10-13-2009)  
15.32.200 - Standards for subdivisions and other proposed development. 
(a)  All new subdivisions proposals and other proposed development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall: 
(1)  Identify the special flood hazard areas (SFHA) and base flood elevations (BFE). 
(2)  Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed structures and pads on the final plans. 
(3)  If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the following as-built information for each structure shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an application for a letter of map revision based on Fill (LOMR-F) to the floodplain administrator: 
a.  Lowest floor elevation. 
b.  Pad elevation. 
c.  Lowest adjacent grade. 
(b)  All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(c)  All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(d)  All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 841B, § 2, 10-13-2009)  
15.32.210 - Standards for manufactured homes. 
(a)  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, on sites located: 
(1)  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
(2)  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
(3)  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
(4)  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall: 
a.  Within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(b)  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection 15.32.210(a) will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the: 
(1)  Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or 
(2)  Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. 841B, § 2, 10-13-2009)  
15.32.220 - Standards for recreational vehicles. 
(a)  All recreational vehicles placed in zones A1-30, AH, and AE will either: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect-type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
(3)  Meet the permit requirements of Section 15.32.160 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in subsection 15.32.210(a). 
(Ord. No. 841B, § 2, 10-13-2009)  
15.32.230 - Floodways. 
Since floodways are an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  Until a regulatory floodway is adopted, no new construction, substantial development, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city. 
(2)  Within an adopted regulatory floodway, the city shall prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development, unless certification by a registered civil engineer is provided demonstrating that the proposed encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  If subsections 15.32.230(1) and (2) are satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article V. 
(Ord. No. 841B, § 2, 10-13-2009)  
Article VI. - Floodplain Management Findings 
 
15.32.240 - Development agreements. 
The city council shall not approve the execution of a development agreement for a property that is located within a flood hazard zone unless the city council finds, based on substantial evidence in the record, one of the following: 
(1)  The facilities of the state plan of flood control or other flood management facilities protect the property to the urban level of flood protection in urban and urbanizing areas or the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection in nonurbanized areas; 
(2)  The city has imposed conditions on the development agreement that will protect the property to the urban level of flood protection in urban and urbanizing areas or the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection in nonurbanized areas; 
(3)  The local flood management agency has made adequate progress (as defined in California Government Code Section 65007) on the construction of a flood protection system that will result in flood protection equal to or greater than the urban level of flood protection in urban or urbanizing areas or the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection in nonurbanized areas for property located within a flood hazard zone, intended to be protected by the system; 
(4)  The property in an undetermined risk area has met the urban level of flood protection; 
(5)  The property is located in an area of potential flooding of three feet or less from sources other than local drainage or potential flooding from local drainage that meets the criteria of the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection; or 
(6)  The property is located within a watershed with a contributing area of ten or fewer square miles, as determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 913B , § 3(Exh. A), 6-28-2016)  
15.32.250 - Permits and entitlements. 
The decision-maker, as designated in Title 18, shall not approve a discretionary permit or other discretionary entitlement that would result in the construction of a new building or construction that would result in an increase in allowed occupancy for an existing building, or a ministerial permit that would result in the construction of a new residence, for a project that is located within a flood hazard zone unless the decision-maker finds, based on substantial evidence in the record, one of the following: 
(1)  The facilities of the state plan of flood control or other flood management facilities protect the property to the urban level of flood protection in urban and urbanizing areas or the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection in nonurbanized areas; 
(2)  The city has imposed conditions on the permit or discretionary entitlement that will protect the project to the urban level of flood protection in urban and urbanizing areas or the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection in nonurbanized areas; 
(3)  The local flood management agency has made adequate progress (as defined in California Government Code Section 65007) on the construction of a flood protection system that will result in flood protection equal to or greater than the urban level of flood protection in urban or urbanizing areas or the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection in nonurbanized areas for property located within a flood hazard zone, intended to be protected by the system; 
(4)  The property in an undetermined risk area has met the urban level of flood protection based on substantial evidence in the record; 
(5)  The property is located in an area of potential flooding of three feet or less from sources other than local drainage or potential flooding from local drainage that meets the criteria of the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection; or 
(6)  The property is located within a watershed with a contributing area of ten or fewer square miles, as determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 913B , § 3(Exh. A), 6-28-2016)  
15.32.260 - Maps. 
The decision-maker, as designated in Title 18, shall not approve a tentative map, or a parcel map for which a tentative map is not required, for a subdivision that is located within a flood hazard zone unless the decision-maker finds, based on substantial evidence in the record, one of the following: 
(1)  The facilities of the state plan of flood control or other flood management facilities protect the subdivision to the urban level of flood protection in urban and urbanizing areas or the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection in nonurbanized areas; 
(2)  The city has imposed conditions on the subdivision that will protect the project to the urban level of flood protection in urban and urbanizing areas or the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection in nonurbanized areas; 
(3)  The local flood management agency has made adequate progress (as defined in California Government Code Section 65007) on the construction of a flood protection system which will result in flood protection equal to or greater than the urban level of flood protection in urban or urbanizing areas or the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection in nonurbanized areas for property located within a flood hazard zone, intended to be protected by the system; 
(4)  The property in an undetermined risk area has met the urban level of flood protection based on substantial evidence in the record; 
(5)  The property is located in an area of potential flooding of three feet or less from sources other than local drainage or potential flooding from local drainage that meets the criteria of the national Federal Emergency Management Agency standard of flood protection; or 
(6)  The property is located within a watershed with a contributing area of ten or fewer square miles, as determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 913B , § 3(Exh. A), 6-28-2016)  
15.32.270 - Construction or development in a flood hazard zone. 
The decision-maker specified in Title 18 must make one of the findings in Title 15, Chapter 15.32, Article VI prior to approving any of the following for construction or development within a flood hazard zone: 
(1)  A development agreement; 
(2)  A discretionary permit or other discretionary entitlement that would result in the construction of a new building or construction that would result in an increase in allowed occupancy for an existing building; 
(3)  A ministerial permit that would result in the construction of a new residence; or 
(4)  A tentative map, or a parcel map for which a tentative map is not required, for a subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 913B , § 3(Exh. A), 6-28-2016)  
Article VII. - Variance Procedure[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 913B , § 3(Exh. A), adopted June 28, 2016, renumbered Art. VI, §§ 15.32.240—15.32.260, as Art. VII, §§ 15.32.280—15.32.300. 
 
15.32.280 - Natures of variances. 
The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only. Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance. 
The variance criteria set forth in this article of the chapter are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this article would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners. 
It is the duty of the city council to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this article are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 841B, § 2, 10-13-2009; Ord. No. 913B , § 3(Exh. A), 6-28-2016)  
15.32.290 - Conditions for variance. 
(a)  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Articles IV and V of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(b)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" (as defined in Article II of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(c)  Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(d)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the "minimum necessary" considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the city need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the city believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance. 
(e)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that: 
(1)  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage, and 
(2)  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the Placer County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
(f)  The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. No. 841B, § 2, 10-13-2009; Ord. No. 913B , § 3(Exh. A), 6-28-2016)  
15.32.300 - Appeal board. 
(a)  The city council shall review and decide requests for variances and shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the: 
(1)  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)  Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property; 
(4)  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)  Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(6)  Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
(7)  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8)  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(9)  Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and 
(11)  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges. 
(b)  Variances shall only be issued upon a: 
(1)  Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
(2)  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional "hardship" to the applicant; and 
(3)  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (see "public safety and nuisance"), cause "fraud and victimization" of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(c)  Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of subsections 15.32.260A. through 15.32.260D. are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance. 
(d)  Upon consideration of the factors of subsection 15.32.250A. and the purposes of this chapter, the city may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 841B, § 2, 10-13-2009; Ord. No. 913B , § 3(Exh. A), 6-28-2016)  
Article VIII. - Penalty[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 913B , § 3(Exh. A), adopted June 28, 2016, renumbered Art. VII, § 15.32.270, as Art. VIII, § 15.32.310. 
 
15.32.310 - Penalty. 
A violation hereof shall be a misdemeanor punishable as the same is now or may hereafter be punishable by the laws of the State of California. 
(Ord. No. 841B, § 2, 10-13-2009; Ord. No. 913B , § 3(Exh. A), 6-28-2016)  
Title 16 - SIGNS  
CHAPTER 16.01 - GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 
 
16.01.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The city council finds as follows: 
(1)  The purpose of this title is to encourage signs which are integrated with, and harmonious to, the buildings and sites which they occupy, to eliminate excessive and confusing sign displays, to preserve and improve the appearance of the city as a place in which to live and to work and as an attraction to nonresidents who come to visit or trade, and to restrict signs which increase the probability of accidents by distracting attention or obstructing vision. 
(2)  The regulations established by this title are intended to appropriately limit the placement, type, size, and number of signs allowed within the city, and to require the proper maintenance of signs. By adopting this title, the city intends to regulate signs on the basis of location, relationship to land uses, illumination, motion, size, height, orientation, separation, safety of physical structures, and the public need for functional information. 
(3)  Intent as to public forum. The city declares its intent that not all city property shall function as a public forum, unless some specific portion of city property is named herein as a public forum of one particular type; in such case, the declaration as to public forum type shall apply strictly to, and only to the specified area and for the specified time period. 
(4)  The purposes of these limitations and requirements are to: 
a.  Safeguard and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare, and advance the goals, policies, and strategies of the city's general plan; 
b.  Reduce or avoid traffic and/or safety hazards to motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians, caused by visual distractions and obstructions, or to impede their access; 
c.  Protect and enhance the character and setting of the city against visual blight by preventing a proliferation of signs that will detract from, and obscure, the scenic qualities of the city and its individual buildings and neighborhoods; 
d.  Promote the aesthetic and environmental values of the community by providing for signs that do not impair the attractiveness of the city as a place to live, work, and shop; 
e.  Promote the public health, safety, and welfare by setting reasonable, nonarbitrary, and nondiscriminatory standards and procedures to facilitate the improvement and protection of the environment by prohibiting the misuse and/or proliferation of signs. 
f.  This title sets forth standards and minimum requirements to safeguard life, safety, property, and public welfare by regulating the size, height, construction, location, electrification, operation, and maintenance of all signs and sign structures exposed to public view within the city. The pleasing visual appearance and traffic safety of the city cannot be preserved and achieved by measures less restrictive than the procedures and standards of this title. 
(Ord. No. 897B , § 2(Exh. A), 3-24-2015)  
16.01.020 - Enforcement authority. 
(a)  The community development director or designee (hereinafter known as "director") for purposes of this title is authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this title. 
(b)  Any violations of this title shall be subject to enforcement remedies, penalties, and abatement provided by the City's Municipal Code, including, without limitation, Chapters 1.16 through 1.18, inclusive, and Chapter 8.08, and state and federal law. Each sign and each day a violation exists is considered a separate violation when applying criminal, civil or administrative penalties. Except where necessary for the immediate protection of the public peace, health, safety, or welfare, no enforcement action shall be taken under this title unless the person alleged to be violating the provision of this title is given not less than five days' written notice to cease the violation. Such notice shall be given in person or by mail to the record owner of the property upon which the violation exists. 
(c)  In adopting this title, the city acts in its proprietary capacity as to city property, as defined herein, within the city. This title is adopted in accordance with the freedom afforded to cities pursuant to the city's general and police powers; California Constitution Article XI, Section 7; California Government Code Sections 65000 et seq., 65850(b), 38774, and 38775; Business and Professions Code Sections 5200 et seq., 5230, and 5490 et seq.; Penal Code Section 556; and other applicable state laws. The provisions of this title constitute the "city sign ordinance." 
(d)  Any person dissatisfied by an act or determination of an official of the city relating to the enforcement or interpretation of this title may appeal such act or determination to the city planning commission, and thereafter the city council, as provided for under Chapter 18.94. The fee for such appeals shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 897B , § 2(Exh. A), 3-24-2015)  
16.01.030 - General principals governing sign regulations. 
(a)  Regulatory Interpretations. The city shall apply this title in a content-neutral manner. The noncommunicative aspects of all signs shall comply with the regulations and standards set forth in this title. "Noncommunicative aspects" includes regulations that do not relate to the content of the sign, including, for example, the time, place, manner, location, size, height, illumination, spacing, and orientation of signs. 
(b)  Planned Development Districts/Sign Criteria. In addition to the sign regulations set forth in this title, each planned development and other areas of the city with approved sign criteria, may have additional or separate regulations for signs in its plan area. Where those planned development districts do not regulate signage, these provisions shall apply. 
(c)  Substitution of Noncommercial Message. In each instance and under the same conditions to which this title permits any sign, a sign containing an ideological, religious, or other noncommercial message shall be permitted wherever a commercial message is permitted. 
(d)  Content Neutral. It is the city's policy to regulate signs in a constitutional manner that is content neutral as to noncommercial messages which are within the protections of the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and the corollary provisions of the California Constitution. 
(e)  Property Owner's Consent. No sign may be displayed without the consent of the legal owner(s) of the property on which the sign is mounted or displayed. 
(f)  Legal Nature of Signage Rights and Duties. As to all signs attached to real or personal property, the signage rights, duties and obligations arising from this title attach to and travel with the land or other property on which a sign is mounted or displayed. 
(g)  Severance. If any section, sentence, clause, phrase, word, portion, or provision of this title is held invalid or unconstitutional, or unenforceable, by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect, impair, or invalidate any other section, sentence, clause, phrase, word, portion, or provision of this title which can be given effect without the invalid portion. In adopting this title, the city council affirmatively declares that it would have approved and adopted the title even without any portion which may be held invalid or unconstitutional, or unenforceable. 
(Ord. No. 897B , § 2(Exh. A), 3-24-2015)  
16.01.040 - Applicability; permit required. 
(a)  General. This title shall apply to all property and land within the City of Lincoln. 
(b)  Permit Requirement. A sign permit is required prior to the installation or display of any sign, except those exempt signs described herein, and the signs that expressly do not require a permit. It is unlawful for any person, firm, organization, or corporation that owns, operates, controls, rents, or leases property or land in the city to construct, maintain, display or alter, or to cause or allow to be constructed, maintained, displayed, or altered, a sign within the city except in conformance with this title. 
(c)  Signs Must be Permitted or Exempted. Unless specifically authorized by this title or other applicable law, no signs may be displayed on city property, except in or on a traditional public forum or a forum so designated by the city, and in accordance with this title. Any unauthorized sign posted on city property may be summarily removed by the city as a trespass and a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 897B , § 2(Exh. A), 3-24-2015)  
16.01.050 - Immediate removal of signs on city property. 
Removal. Any lettering, advertisement, card, poster, sign, or notice of any kind placed on city property or on any curb, sidewalk, post, pole, lamp post, hydrant, bridge, tree, or other surface located on city property in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or any sign that constitutes an immediate peril to persons or property, may be removed without prior notice by any officer or employee of the city designated to do so by the community development director. The cost of removal and of any damage to city property resulting from the placement or removal of a sign under this subsection shall be charged to the person who placed the sign or caused the sign to be placed. 
(Ord. No. 897B , § 2(Exh. A), 3-24-2015)  
16.01.060 - Exempt signs. 
The following signs described in Table 1 do not require a sign permit provided the sign meets the stated conditions. Signs that do not require a sign permit are not counted towards sign area: 
TABLE 1 - Signs Exempt From Sign Permit Requirement 
Exempt Sign 	Conditions 
Address Signs 	House numbers and nameplates not exceeding three square feet in area; business numbers not exceeding ten square feet in area. 
Construction Site Signs 	One sign per property not exceeding 16 square feet identifying contractors, owners, designers, lenders etc., for projects under construction on that property. 
Government and Community Signs 	Traffic control signs; Legal/Public Notices; Street Identification Signs; Utility Signs; Directional or Instructional Signs. 
Interior Signs 	Any sign not visible from another lot of record or from a public right-of-way. 
No Trespassing/No Parking Signs 	Must be posted in compliance with federal, state, and local laws. 
Parking Lot Signs 	A total maximum area of three square feet per sign. The sign locations shall be within 20 feet of a driveway or other ingress/egress to private property. 
Real Estate Signs 	Real estate signs as authorized by Civil Code section 713 et seq. 
Signs Required by Federal or State Law 	Signs required for compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) etc., or legal notices posted pursuant to law or court order. 
Temporary Noncommercial Signs - Residential 	1. Duration - 45 calendar days per event. 
2. Up to 6 times per calendar year. 
3. Size. 12 square feet, not to exceed 4 feet in height. 
4. Quantity. Two per private property. 
Temporary Noncommercial Signs - Nonresidential 	1. Duration - 45 calendar days per event. 
2. Up to 6 times per calendar year. 
	3. Size. For a property with street frontage of less than 60 feet: a total of 16 square feet; for a property with street frontage of 60 to 100 feet: a total of 32 square feet; for every 100 feet of street frontage thereafter, the property may have an additional 32 square feet of signage. No taller than 6 feet in height for any sign. 
	4. Location. On the building face, or outside of the allowed setback. 
Vehicle Signs 	1. Signs on licensed commercial vehicles, provided such vehicles are not used or intended for use as portable signs for general advertising for hire. 
	2. Vehicles which display an advertisement or business identification of its owner, as long as such vehicle is engaged in the usual or regular work of the owner, and not used merely, mainly or primarily to display advertisements; or 
	3. Advertisements on buses or, taxicabs. 
Advertising Statuary 	1. Not exceeding four feet in height or 24 inches in width. 
	2. If located in the public right of way, an encroachment permit is required. 
Pennant/Bunting 	Temporary, made of durable fabric or canvas, can be displayed for up to 10 consecutive days. 
Bulletin Boards 	Not exceeding eight square feet in size 
Grave Stones and Grave Markers 	Must comply with Federal and State requirements. 
Time and Temperature 	Not exceeding eight square feet in size. The square footage counts towards the overall allowed signage. 
Manufacturer's Marks 	Including but not limited to signs on vending machines, gas pumps etc., not exceeding four square feet in size. 
Memorial Signs, Symbols, Insignias, or Tablets 	Names of buildings, dates, commemorative plaques, identification emblems etc. that do not encroach into the public right-of-way. 
Wayfinding Signs 	Destination and directional signage to guide visitors to primary and secondary attractions in the City. 
Service Club Signs 	Community signage, such as community bulletin boards, service club signs, and information sign kiosks 
Window Signs 	1. Window signs shall not cover more than 35 percent of the area of the window. Total signage placed on any window may not include unused signage amounts allowable for other windows. 
	2.  Window sign area shall not be considered in computing the maximum allowed building signage. 
 
(Ord. No. 897B , § 2(Exh. A), 3-24-2015)  
16.01.070 - Prohibited signs. 
(a)  Unless otherwise expressly authorized by this title, no person shall mark, post, paste, print, paint, nail, tack, or otherwise fasten or leave a card, banner, handbill, sign, sticker, poster, or advertisement or notice of any kind or cause the same to be done, on city property. 
(b)  Unless otherwise noted in this title, the following signs in Table 2 are prohibited in all zones, and are subject to abatement by the City of Lincoln: 
TABLE 2 - Prohibited Signs 
Feather Sign, Feather Banner, or Feather Banner Sign. All forms of Feather Sign, Feather Banner, or Feather Banner Sign are prohibited in all zones. 
Freestanding signs installed or placed in the public right-of-way (excludes Government and Community Signs, and A-frame signs). 
Animated Signs (includes mannequin signs). 
Flashing Signs. 
Use of a banner sign as a permanent sign. 
Permanent Off-site Signs. 
Signs placed or maintained so as to interfere with free ingress to or egress from any door, window, fire escape, or parking lot. 
Signs which simulate or imitate in size, color, lettering, or design any traffic sign or signal, or which make use of words, symbols, or characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
Vehicles used only for general signage or parked in a place or manner where the primary purpose is not the use of the vehicle but the primary placement is to display a commercial message. 
Mobile messaging signs or mobile billboards parked upon any street, parking lot, or other public place where the public has the right of travel. 
Balloon signs. 
Air dancer sign. 
Roof signs. 
Abandoned signs. 
Obscene signs. 
Any sign not expressly allowed by this title is expressly prohibited. 
 
(Ord. No. 897B , § 2(Exh. A), 3-24-2015)  
16.01.080 - Standards. 
All signs that are not exempt shall comply with the requirements of this title, in addition to any other applicable requirements. 
(1)  Placement of Signs. 
a.  Commercial signs shall be located on the property on which the product, service, or other commercial activity which is being advertised is located. 
b.  All signs that are located in, or project over, or into the public right-of-way must conform to this title, and are subject to an encroachment permit. 
c.  Building signs shall be placed so as not to project above the roofline, except signs may be placed on a parapet wall, and up to the ridge of a mansard roof. 
d.  At street intersections, no sign exceeding thirty inches in height shall be erected within the site distance triangle as denoted in the city's design criteria and procedures manual and the public facilities improvement standards. 
e.  Freestanding signs shall be set back a minimum of three feet from any property line. 
(2)  Construction Standards. 
a.  All signs shall be constructed in accordance with applicable requirements of Lincoln Municipal Code Section 15.04, Uniform Construction Codes, and the California Building Code. 
b.  Permanent signs shall be constructed of durable materials. 
(3)  Maintenance. All signs shall be maintained in a substantially like-new condition. Normal wear and tear of aged signs shall be repaired when they detract from the visible quality of the sign. When signs are removed the facade behind the sign shall be repaired and painted to match the building. 
(Ord. No. 897B , § 2(Exh. A), 3-24-2015)  
16.01.090 - Permit requirements and procedures. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by this title, no sign (permanent or temporary) shall be installed, erected or displayed until the director has determined that its design and placement comply with all requirements of this title and has issued a sign permit to the applicant of the sign. 
(b)  A sign permit is not required to repair, clean, repaint or refurbish any existing sign, unless such activity involves the replacement, reconstruction or relocation of the sign. 
(c)  No permit is required for changing only the copy of an existing permitted sign, provided: 
(1)  There are no changes to the sign structure or cabinet, and 
(2)  The area of the sign is not being enlarged. 
(d)  An application for a sign permit shall be made on a form prescribed by the director and accompanied by a fee in an amount established by city council resolution. 
(e)  Issuance of a sign permit shall not relieve the applicant from complying with all other applicable laws relating to displaying or erecting a sign, including, but not limited to, obtaining any required sign or electrical permit under Lincoln Municipal Code Chapter 15.04, Uniform Construction Codes, and California Building Code. 
(f)  Disqualification. A sign permit application will not be approved under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  A sign permit will not be approved if the applicant has installed a sign in violation of the provisions of this title. At the time of submission of the application, the applicant shall legalize or remove the sign in violation. 
(2)  A sign permit will not be approved if there is any other existing zoning code violation(s) located on the site of the proposed sign(s) (other than an illegal or nonconforming sign that is not owned or controlled by the applicant and is located at a different business location on the site from that for which the approval is sought) which has not been remedied at the time of the application, unless the noncompliance is proposed to be cured as part of the proposed new sign. 
(3)  A sign permit will not be approved if the applicant has not obtained any other applicable required permit(s). 
(4)  A sign permit will not be approved if the applicant has an outstanding unpaid balance for prior city services. 
(Ord. No. 897B , § 2(Exh. A), 3-24-2015)  
16.01.100 - Violation—Penalty. 
(a)  Violation of this title shall be a misdemeanor, but may be charged as either a misdemeanor or an infraction in the discretion of the prosecuting attorney. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, the city may also remedy violations of this title through administrative code enforcement provisions. 
(b)  Abatement as nuisance. Any sign or billboard, erected, altered or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title, is unlawful and a public nuisance. The city attorney shall, upon order of the city council, immediately commence action or proceedings for the abatement and removal and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
(Ord. No. 897B , § 2(Exh. A), 3-24-2015)  
16.01.110 - Legal nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Legal nonconforming signs shall be permitted to remain until such time as any of the events listed in subsection (b) of this section occurs. At such time, the sign must be removed or brought into conformance with this title. 
(b)  A legal nonconforming sign shall lose its status as a nonconforming sign if any of the following occurs: 
(1)  The sign is relocated or replaced; 
(2)  The structure, height or size of the sign is altered in any way except towards compliance with this title. Face changes and normal maintenance are allowed and not considered alienation; or 
(3)  The sign structure is damaged or destroyed by more than fifty percent of its value at the time of damage or destruction. 
(Ord. No. 897B , § 2(Exh. A), 3-24-2015)  
CHAPTER 16.02 - PERMANENT SIGNS 
 
16.02.010 - General provisions. 
(a)  Unless otherwise stated, the following regulations apply to private property. It is the intent of this limitation to prohibit the use of exterior signs for the general advertisement of products or services having no relation to the premises upon which they are placed. 
TABLE 3 - Regulations for Permanent Signs: 
Type 	Zone/Use 	Number 	Max Dimensions 
Freestanding 
	Developed R-1, R-2, and R-3 
noncommercial institutional uses, no 
illumination 	One per frontage 	16 sf, up to six feet in height 
	Developed Business-Professional 	One per frontage 	20 sf, up to six feet in height 
	Developed Commercial, Highway-Commercial, Light-Industrial, or Industrial 	One per entrance or frontage 	64 sf, up to 14 feet in height 
Billboard 
	Undeveloped or Developed, 
C or I 	One per lot 	See billboard Section 16.02.020(A) 
Building Sign 
	Developed Residential 
R-1, R-2, and R-3 for noncommercial 
institutional uses 	One per building 	One square foot per one linear foot of frontage 
	Developed Business Professional 	One per street frontage 	One square foot per one linear foot of frontage 
	Developed Commercial, Highway-Commercial, Light-Industrial, and Industrial 	One per street frontage 	Two square feet per one linear foot of frontage 
 
(Ord. No. 897B , § 2(Exh. A), 3-24-2015)  
16.02.020 - Standards for specific sign types. 
(a)  Billboards. Billboards may be approved in compliance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Location. Billboards may be approved within nonresidential zones (excluding open space) along Highway 65. 
(2)  Distance Between Billboards. The minimum distance to another legal billboard, as measured along the centerline of the roadway is one thousand five hundred feet. 
(3)  Permits. Operating agreements, a conditional use permit, and building permit(s) are required. 
(4)  Height Limit. The sign shall not exceed a maximum height of twenty-five feet. 
(5)  Sign Face. The sign face shall not exceed a maximum size of two hundred fifty square feet. 
(b)  Freestanding Signs. The following standards apply to freestanding signs where allowed: 
(1)  Separation. Multiple signs shall be separated by a minimum of seventy-five feet to ensure adequate visibility for all signs. This requirement may be waived if the locations of existing signs on adjacent properties would make the seventy-five-foot separation impractical, or there is no other alternative. 
(2)  Safety Requirements. A sign shall not project over public property, vehicular easements, or rights-of-way, and shall not obstruct the traffic site distant triangle, as determined by the director. 
(3)  Street Address. To assist emergency response personnel in locating the site, freestanding signs shall contain an illuminated street address plate. Numbers shall be a minimum of six inches in height. Street address numbers shall not be included in calculations of allowed sign area. 
(4)  Setback Requirements. A freestanding sign shall be set back a minimum of three feet from the property line. 
(5)  Landscaping. A freestanding sign shall be designed and constructed with accent landscaping at the base of sign to the approval of the director. 
(c)  Service Station Signs. Service station signs shall comply with the provisions of California Business and Professions Code Section 13531. Additional signs advertising the price of each grade of gasoline may be placed on each gasoline pump or beneath any canopy which is over the gasoline pumps. 
(d)  Flags (Noncommercial Speech). Flags may be displayed without a permit at all times and in all zones. All poles must comply with applicable building code requirements. Flags are limited to the display of noncommercial speech unless specifically allowed as a temporary special advertising sign. 
(e)  Menu/Order Board Signs. Two menu/order board signs for each drive-through business; provided that each sign not exceed a maximum forty square foot sign area and an eight foot height limit and be located adjacent to the drive-through lane on private property. 
(Ord. No. 897B , § 2(Exh. A), 3-24-2015)  
16.02.030 - Digital freeway sign program. 
(a)  "Digital freeway sign" means an off-site sign utilizing digital message technology, capable of changing the static message or copy on the sign electronically. A digital freeway sign may be internally or externally illuminated. Digital freeway signs shall contain static messages only and shall not have animation, movement, or the appearance or optical illusion of movement, of any part of the sign structure, design, or pictorial segment of the sign. Each static message shall not include flashing, scintillating lighting, or the varying of light intensity. A digital freeway sign consists of a digital display area and a sign structure. 
(b)  Digital freeway signs shall be in addition to all other signs allowed by Title 16. The locations and heights of digital freeway signs shall be governed by this section. Heights of digital freeway signs shall be established relative to topography and setting so as to provide the best balance between the sign's purpose of effectively communicating a visual message, the setting, including topography and surrounding architecture, and freeway traffic safety. However, in no case shall a digital freeway sign exceed a maximum height of sixty-five feet as measured from the center line of the nearest freeway to the top of the digital freeway sign structure. Subject to the limitations of this section, and notwithstanding the provisions of the applicable general development plans, digital freeway signs shall be a conditionally permitted use. 
(c)  No digital freeway signs shall be conditionally permitted until the city has entered into an operating agreement with a digital freeway sign owner to allow for digital billboards under certain circumstances; including: 
(1)  Compensation to the city; 
(2)  The provision of access to the city to a portion of the total available display time to allow the city to present messages of community interest, information, and public safety; 
(3)  The provision of access to the appropriate agencies for the purpose of displaying "Amber Alert" messages and emergency-disaster communications; and 
(4)  To establish quality and maintenance standards. 
(d)  All digital freeway signs shall require approval of a conditional use permit and be subject to design review consistent with the Lincoln Municipal Code. 
(e)  Minimum Display Time. Each message on the sign must be displayed for a minimum of eight seconds. 
(f)  Maximum Face Size. Each face of the sign will be no larger than fourteen feet by forty-eight feet in dimension (total six hundred seventy-two square feet) plus framing. Digital freeway signs are exempt from the area limitations in Section 16.01.060, Permanent Signs. 
(g)  Illumination Standards. Each display must have a light sensing device that will adjust the brightness as ambient light conditions change. Digital freeway sign illumination and distance requirements shall be determined during the discretionary review process. The most current and restrictive technology to measure digital freeway sign illumination shall be required when measuring standard. 
(h)  Future Technologies. The technology currently being deployed for digital freeway signs is LED (light emitting diode), but there may be alternate, preferred or superior technology available in the future. Owners of digital freeway signs are authorized to change the digital freeway signs to any other technology that operates under the maximum brightness standards in this subsection. The city shall expedite any required approvals for technology that is superior in energy efficiency over previous generations or types. 
(i)  The digital freeway signs shall be operated with systems and monitoring in place to either turn the display off or show a "full black" image on the display in the event of a malfunction. 
(j)  After receiving approval to install a digital freeway sign(s), owners of digital freeway signs may at any time add or remove digital faces to their sign structures. However, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Any prior sign removals completed as a part of the operating agreement approval of the digital freeway sign(s) shall not be reinstated. 
(2)  The number of physical sign faces shall not be increased. 
(3)  The overall size of the sign faces shall not be increased by more than five percent. 
(Ord. No. 897B , § 2(Exh. A), 3-24-2015)  
CHAPTER 16.03 - TEMPORARY SIGNS 
 
16.03.010 - Purpose. 
The city council finds that temporary signs are necessary to further the goals and objectives of the city's general plan. 
(Ord. No. 897B , § 2(Exh. A), 3-24-2015)  
16.03.020 - Permit. 
All temporary signs, unless otherwise noted herein, require the issuance of a temporary sign permit (which may require issuance of an encroachment permit). 
(Ord. No. 897B , § 2(Exh. A), 3-24-2015)  
16.03.030 - Temporary signs. 
Unless otherwise stated, the following regulations apply on a per-lot basis: 
(1)  Real Estate Signs. Real estate signs for the sale or lease of property are exempt from the fee and permit provisions of this title, provided however, real estate signs shall comply with the following regulations: 
a.  Individual homes or a vacant lot for an individual home is permitted one on-site freestanding real estate sign not to exceed six square feet in area and six feet in height. One off-site freestanding real estate sign not to exceed six square feet in area and six feet in height is also permitted with the consent of the off-site real property owner. 
b.  All other property either developed or vacant is permitted one on-site freestanding real estate sign for every one thousand lineal feet of street frontage or portion thereof, not to exceed thirty-two square feet in area and six feet in height per sign. One off-site freestanding real estate sign for every one thousand lineal feet of street frontage or portion thereof, not to exceed thirty-two square feet in area and six feet in height per sign, is also permitted with the consent of the off-site real property owner. 
c.  Real estate signs shall be removed upon sale or lease of the property. 
(2)  Off-Site Real Estate Signs. Off-site open house directional signs within the scope of Civil Code 713 (real estate for sale, etc.) are exempt from the fee and permit provisions of this title provided the following requirements are complied with: 
a.  Such signs shall be displayed only while an open house is actually in progress, and a residence is actually open to prospective buyers at all times while the sign is displayed. Signs shall be removed by sunset of the day on which the open house is held. No such sign shall remain on display between sunset and sunrise. 
b.  Such signs shall be freestanding, and shall not exceed six square feet per face. Each sign may have a maximum of two faces. 
c.  Maximum height shall be four feet. 
d.  Signs shall not be located within the site distance triangle as denoted in the city's design criteria and procedures manual and the public facilities improvement standards. 
e.  No open house directional sign shall be placed on vehicles of any kind. 
f.  No temporary open house directional sign shall be placed on city property. 
(3)  Subdivision Identification and Directional Signs. On-site subdivision identification signs may be allowed with sign permit approval, in compliance with the following standards: 
a.  A maximum of three on-site signs may be located within the project boundaries; provided, no more than one sign for each street frontage is allowed, and multiple signs shall be separated by a minimum of seventy-five feet; 
b.  The area of each sign shall not exceed twenty-four square feet; 
c.  Sign height shall not exceed six feet; 
d.  The signs shall not be illuminated; and 
e.  The signs may be displayed only during the two years following date of recordation of the final map, or until all of the units have been sold, whichever first occurs. 
(4)  Subdivision Directional Signs, Off Site. Off-site signs providing directions to a new subdivision may be allowed with a sign permit, and shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  A maximum of three off-site signs may be located on private property (not within any public right-of-way); 
b.  The total area of each sign shall not exceed thirty-two square feet; 
c.  The height of each sign shall not exceed eight feet; 
d.  The signs shall not be illuminated; 
e.  The signs may be displayed only during the two years following date of recordation of the final map, or until all of the units have been sold, whichever occurs first; 
f.  The signs shall not affect pedestrian or vehicular safety; 
g.  The signs shall be removed when the last home within the subdivision is sold. Any sign found in violation of any provision herein may be removed by city personnel; and 
h.  The signs shall be located within five miles of the exterior boundary of the subdivision. 
(5)  On-Site Project Development Signs. Project identification signs of current and pending development applications are allowed with a sign area of up to thirty-two square feet and a six-foot height limit on the property to be developed. For purposes of this section, project development signs mean the name of the development, location, and way finding directions. 
(6)  Field Sponsorship Signs. Temporary sponsorship signs located on city recreation fields and facilities. 
a.  The purpose of field sponsorship is to provide the City of Lincoln and other local nonprofit youth organizations a means to generate revenue by selling sponsorship banners for display at the facilities they predominately use for their programs and play a role in maintaining. 
b.  Sponsorship under this program will include the placement of banners expressly set forth herein, but shall in no way entitle the sponsor or permitted organization to additional rights of use or access, or ownership in any way, of any facility. 
c.  By permitting temporary field sponsorship signs at city-owned or operated recreation fields or facilities, the city is not creating an unlimited public forum for free expression or speech at these locations. Any and all temporary field sponsorship signs located and permitted at city-owned or operated recreation fields or facilities shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The signs shall be reasonably suitable for viewing by all ages; 
2.  The signs shall not contain nudity; 
3.  The signs shall not contain sexual images; 
4.  The signs shall not contain depictions of violence; 
5.  The signs shall not advertise businesses primarily associated with adult-related products or services, such as tobacco products, alcohol products, or adult-oriented businesses; 
6.  The signs shall not contain any obscene, indecent or profane images or language, including, but not limited to, those indecent words that were the subject of the case F.C.C. v Pacifica Foundation, 438 U.S. 726 (1978) 
d.  General provisions. 
1.  No individual, including sponsors, shall have the authority to move or otherwise alter a displayed banner in any manner unless that individual is acting under the direction of the City of Lincoln. 
2.  Banners displayed at ball fields shall be limited to outfield fencing facing the field of play and to backstop areas. Banners displayed at other permitted locations shall be limited to fencing that faces the programming area. 
3.  No banner shall exceed thirty-two square feet. 
e.  Permitted locations. 
1.  Wilson Park softball fields. 
2.  Larry Costa Field at McBean Park. 
3.  Foskett Regional Park softball fields. 
4.  McBean Pool. 
(7)  Temporary Business Advertising Signs. Temporary business advertising signs will be allowed to be placed on a business for a maximum timeframe of ninety days. 
a.  Businesses shall be limited to two advertising signs per business. 
b.  A temporary business advertising sign shall not be freestanding and shall only be affixed to the façade of the building, including canopies or awnings. Banner signs shall not be affixed to any other permanent or temporary structures, including freestanding walls, fences, and utility poles. 
c.  Banner signs shall not extend above the roofline or parapet of the building. 
d.  The total maximum square footage allowed for a temporary business advertising sign is thirty-two square feet. 
(8)  A-frames and Portable Sidewalk Signs. A-frame and portable sidewalk (hereinafter known as 'portable signs') signs shall not be located in such a manner as to create a traffic safety issue by blocking sight visibility from a city street or private driveway and be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  One portable sign shall be permitted per business. 
b.  Each portable sign shall not exceed a width of thirty inches. Portable sign height shall be limited to forty-eight inches. Portable sign height shall be measured perpendicular from the placement surface to the highest point of the portable sign. Both sides of the portable sign will be permitted display surface. 
c.  The portable sign shall be constructed of professional quality materials (stenciled plywood is prohibited). 
d.  Portable signs shall be located on private property (or in the public right-of-way as noted under subsection e. of this section), which may include privately owned commercial property landscape setbacks. Portable signs are prohibited in the public right-of-way, including medians and sidewalks, and shall not block accessible paths of travel or inhibit sight distance for ingress and egress. 
e.  Portable signs in the public right-of-way - the applicant shall procure an encroachment permit and furnish and maintain in full force and effect throughout the term hereof, a policy or policies of liability and property damage insurance, with a reputable insurance company. Such insurance shall be approved by the director as to limit, form, and amount. The applicant shall provide the city with a certificate of said insurance coverage, naming the city as an additional insured and provide coverage in the amount as established by the city. Failure to maintain the appropriate insurance will be grounds for the revocation of the permit authorizing the placement of signage within the public right-of-way. 
f.  The city engineer reserves the right to change any permitted portable sign location that in his/her opinion is a sight visibility problem. 
(9)  Political Signs. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, temporary political signs pertaining to an election to any public office or ballot measure shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  No sign shall exceed thirty-two square feet. 
b.  No sign shall be place on public property or within any public right-of-way. 
c.  No sign shall be erected earlier than sixty days prior to the election to which it pertains, and shall be removed within twenty-one days after such election. 
d.  No sign shall be placed on private property without the permission of the property owner. Signs with areas sixteen square feet or larger will require written permission from the property owner, and the property owner shall also provide written permission to allow the city to enter the property and remove the sign(s), if the responsible person on organization fails to do so. For signs sixteen square or larger, if the property owner is absentee, written permission will not be required provided the sign is placed based on verbal agreement of the property owner or authorized designee, and the person placing the sign(s) provides the city with the name and contact information of the person giving permission and the date the permission was obtained. 
e.  No signs shall be erected until the responsible person or organization has placed a two hundred fifty dollar refundable deposit with the city clerk's office. This deposit, less any charges for removal of unlawfully placed signs, shall be refunded if the signs are removed within twenty-one days after the election for which the signs were erected. For signs sixteen square feet or larger, at the time the deposit is made, the responsible person or organization shall provide the city clerk's office with a map showing the locations of the signs and provide copies of the private property owner's written permission for the erections and removal of the signs or the information required based on verbal agreement to place the signs. The map shall be updated within three working days if additional signs are placed. 
f.  Private businesses, whose business is placing political signs, shall acquire a business license from the City of Lincoln before placing any signs within the city limits. Private businesses hired to place signs within the city limits are required to follow the terms of this title. Private businesses that do not obtain a business license or violate the terms of this title may be subject to fines of up to one thousand dollars. 
(Ord. No. 897B , § 2(Exh. A), 3-24-2015)  
CHAPTER 16.04 - DEFINITIONS 
 
16.04.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given below: 
"A-frame sign" means a sign that is designed to be moveable and is not structurally attached to the ground, a building or any other sign; and generally has an "A" shape, or vertical orientation with a base. 
"Abandoned sign" means a sign whose message describes the availability of goods or services at a location where such goods or services are no longer available and have ceased to be available for a period of at least sixty days; or in the alternative a sign which is noncommercial in nature and the content of the sign pertains to a time, event or purpose which has elapsed or expired in the preceding sixty days. Such abandonment shall include negligent or intentional conduct such as failure to pay taxes or permit fees, or failure to maintain the sign. 
"Advertising statuary" means a structure or device of any kind or character for outdoor advertising purposes which displays or promotes a particular product or service, but without name identification or letters. 
"Air dancer sign" means an inflatable device comprising a long tube attached to a fan which causes the tube to move in a dancing or flailing motion. Airdancers are generally called an inflatable tube or a moving figure, such as "windyman", "skydancer", "tube man", and "flyguy". 
"Animated sign" means any sign which uses mechanical or electrical movement or change of lighting, either natural or artificial to depict action or create visual motion or the appearance of visual motion. Animated signs include mannequin signs. 
"Area of window" means the total square footage of all glass areas of a storefront. This would include all areas of glass windows, doors, side lights and transoms, fixed or operable, located on any elevation of the building. 
"Balloon sign" means a sign made of flexible material or fabric that is made to take on a three-dimensional shape (to blow up like a balloon) when filled sufficient volume of air or gas. Commonly used as a temporary sign for special events or promotions. 
"Banner sign" means a temporary sign made of nonrigid material such as fabric, canvas, plastic or paper, and without an enclosing rigid framework. 
"Billboard" means a sign which meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  A permanent sign structure which is used for the display of off-site commercial messages; 
(2)  A permanent sign structure which constitutes a principal, separate, or secondary use, as opposed to an accessory use of the parcel on which it is located; 
(3)  An outdoor sign used as advertising for hire, e.g., on which display space is made available to parties other than the owner or operator of the sign or occupant of the parcel (not including those who rent space from the sign owner, when such space is on the same parcel or in the same development as the sign), in exchange for a rent, fee, or other consideration; or 
(4)  An off-site outdoor advertising sign on which space is leased or rented. 
"Building sign" means a sign attached to a building and includes, but is not limited to, wall signs, banners, under-canopy signs, projecting signs, awning signs, and window signs. 
"City property" means real property owned by the city which may include parks, developed or undeveloped properties, easements, dedications and rights-of-way. 
"Commercial sign" means any sign, wording, logo, or other representation that advertises a business, location, product, service, or other commercial activity. 
"Commercial speech" is speech expressed on behalf of a company or individual for the intent of making a profit. It is economic in nature and usually has the intent of convincing the audience to partake in a particular action, often purchasing a specific product. 
"Community sign" means a multi-sided sign structure with a unified design theme accommodating individual directional sign panels; also referenced as a "kiosk." 
"Community event" means an event that is open to the public and occurs at a specific place, time, and date(s), hosted by a public agency or a community service organization, which occurs within the area established by the adopted City of Lincoln Sphere of Influence. 
"Community service organization" means a nonprofit organization which holds events that are open to the public and located within the city's sphere-of-influence. 
"Content neutral" means time, place and manner regulations: consistently applicable nondiscriminatory sign regulations that specify, without reference to the content of the message, when, how and where a sign can be displayed, with physical standards, such as but not limited to height, size and location, that allow the sign to be readable. 
"Developed lot" means a lot or parcel containing a structure intended for occupancy. 
"Directional sign" means any sign that is designed and erected for the purpose of providing direction and/or orientation for pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
"Director" means the community development director of the City of Lincoln or designated representative. 
"Electronic message center or sign (EMC)" means an electrically activated, changeable sign whose variable message and/or graphic presentation capability can be electronically programmed by computer from a remote location. Also known as an EMC. EMCs typically use light emitting diodes (LEDs) as a lighting source. 
"Feather sign, feather banner," or "feather banner sign" means a flexible or rigid pole to which one side of a flexible fabric, generally in the shape of a feather or similar shape, is attached, and which is used for the primary purpose of advertising or attention-getting by the public display of visually communicative images. Such banners are also known and sold under names which include, but are not limited to, "quill sign," "banana banner," "blade banner," "flutter banner," "flutter flag," "bowflag," "teardrop banners," and others. The definition includes functionally similar display devices. 
"Flag" means a piece of fabric or other flexible material, usually rectangular, of distinctive design, used as a symbol. Includes, but is not limited to, pennants, which are generally triangular in shape. 
"Flashing sign" means an illuminated sign in which artificial or reflected light is not intended to be maintained in a stationary or constant intensity. This includes an electronic reader board. 
"Freestanding sign" means a sign which is self-supporting in a fixed location or supported on the ground by poles or braces, and not attached to a building or other structure. 
"Freeway interchange" means the right-of-way line of freeway ramps. Where improvements are proposed to the interchange, at the discretion of the city engineer, the right-of-way of the proposed interchange may be used for determining eligibility and location for freeway pole signs. 
"Illegal sign" means a sign which is not a nonconforming sign and does not meet the requirements of this title. 
"Illuminated sign" means any sign utilizing an artificial source of light (internal or external) to enhance its visibility. 
"Institutional uses" means a nonprofit, educational, hospital, museum, public, or religious use (for example, church, public or private library, or school) or a government-owned or operated land use or structure used for a public purpose. 
"Mobile messaging sign" or "mobile messaging billboard" means any off-site sign which is attached to or painted on a vehicle, the principal purpose of which is general advertising, directing people to a business or activity. This section is not intended to apply to standard identification practices where such signs are temporarily or permanently attached to business vehicles that are in working conditions and are used regularly in the business or activity. 
"Noncommercial sign/message" means any sign with a message that is not commercial in nature and which is designed to express political speech, religion, arts, science, the environment, and commentary on governmental policy. Noncommercial signs shall also include community event signs. 
"Nonresidential sign" means any sign that is not residential in nature. Such signs may relate to a church (churches are allowed in R-districts) sign either on the building or freestanding. 
"Nonconforming sign" means a sign which, though lawful when erected, would be prohibited under later-enacted changes to the regulations applicable to it. 
"Obscene sign" means a sign that contains "obscene matter" as defined by Penal Code Section 311. 
"Off-site sign" means any sign which advertises goods, products, services, establishment or facilities not sold or offered at the property on which the sign is located. 
"Owner" means the holder of the legal title to the property and all parties and persons holding a present right to possession, control or use of the property. 
"Portable sign" means all of the following within this definition: 
(1)  Any sign not permanently attached or designed to be permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure; 
(2)  Any A-frame signs; 
(3)  Menu and sandwich board signs; or 
(4)  The functional equivalent of any of these categories. Commercial mascots are not within this definition. 
"Projecting sign" means a sign which uses a building or structure as its main source of support and contains copy that is perpendicular or at an angle to the building face. Also called blade sign. 
"Public forum" means city-owned parks, the surfaces of city-owned streets and, subject to the limitations set forth herein, sidewalks forming the city's vehicular and pedestrian circulation system. Sidewalks and associated rights-of-way located along the outside perimeter of the city hall complex are included within this definition. Specifically excluded from this definition, and in no way to be construed as a traditional public forum, is the interior of the city hall complex. As of the effective date of this title, the city hall complex consists of three buildings, internal roads and sidewalks, parking lots, a parking structure, adjacent recreation areas (inclusive of Memorial Park located east of the historic city hall), and pedestrian grounds. 
"Real estate sign" means a sign advertising that real property is for sale, lease, or exchange by the owner or his agent, giving directions to the property, and giving the owner's or agent's name, address, and telephone number. 
"Right-of-way" means the area or those areas dedicated for public use for public streets and sidewalks, including but not limited to, roadways, parkways, alleyways, sidewalks, medians, and landscape planter areas. 
"Roofline" means the line formed by the junction of the top surface of the roof and the outside wall of any building, excluding any structure constructed solely as an architectural feature to extend height or to screen equipment. 
"Roof sign" means a sign placed upon, projecting from or extending above the eaves of the roof or the roof itself. A sign hanging from and below the eave is not a roof sign. 
"Service club signs" means community signage, such as community bulletin boards, service club signs, and information sign kiosks which the design and locations are determined by the director. 
"Sign" means a temporary or permanent public display of visible images which, either directly or indirectly, advertises, informs or identifies persons, businesses, commodities, services or ideas by the display of any communicative image or graphic, that attracts attention, when such is visible from any portion of the public right-of-way or from a private right-of-way that is open to public use, or any exterior place which is open to the public. The word "sign" includes, but is not limited to, all writing, trademarks, graphic illustrations, and lighting primarily directed at facilitating communication, as well as supporting structures within sign area. Notwithstanding the generality of the foregoing, as applied to this title and Chapter 16.02, the following are not within the definition of sign: 
(1)  Aerial signs or banners towed behind aircraft; 
(2)  Architectural features: Decorative or architectural features of buildings (not including lettering, trademarks or moving parts), which do not perform a communicative function; 
(3)  Fireworks, etc.; 
(4)  Foundation stones and cornerstones; 
(5)  Grave markers, gravestones, headstones, mausoleums, shrines, and other markers of the deceased; 
(6)  Historical plaques; 
(7)  Holiday and cultural observance decorations on private property which are on display in season for not more than forty-five calendar days per year (cumulative, per parcel or use) and which do not include commercial advertising messages; 
(8)  Manufacturers' marks. Marks on tangible products, which identify the maker, seller, provider or product, and which customarily remain attached to the product even after sale; 
(9)  Mass transit graphics. Graphic images mounted on duly licensed and authorized mass transit vehicles that legally pass through the city; 
(10)  News racks and newsstands; 
(11)  Personal appearance. Items or devices of personal apparel, decoration or appearance, including tattoos, makeup, wigs, costumes, masks etc. (but not including commercial mascots or handheld signs); 
(12)  Shopping carts, golf carts, horse-drawn carriages, and similar devices; any motorized vehicle which may be legally operate upon a public road is not within this exclusion; 
(13)  Symbols embedded in architecture. Symbols of noncommercial organizations or concepts including, but not limited to, religious or political symbols, when such are permanently integrated into the structure of a permanent building which is otherwise legal; by way of example and not limitation, such symbols include stained glass windows on churches, carved or bas relief doors or walls, bells, religious statuary etc.; 
(14)  Temporary business advertising sign. A banner sign that is relocatable, removable, and otherwise not permanent or affixed to a structure when used only for grand openings, promotional events, sales or advertising for a limited duration. This does not include the use of balloon signs, flags or pennants. 
(15)  Vehicle and vessel insignia. On-street legal vehicles and properly licensed watercraft: license plates, license plate frames, registration insignia, noncommercial messages, and messages relating to the proposed sale, lease or exchange of the vehicle or vessel; 
(16)  Vending machines, automated intake devices, and product dispensing devices which do not display offsite commercial messages or general advertising messages; 
(17)  Window displays. The display of merchandise in a store window, when such merchandise is offered to the public for sale. 
"Sign area" means the area of a sign with borders and/or background is measured by a single continuous perimeter enclosing the exterior limits of the border or background. The necessary supports, uprights or base upon which the sign is placed shall be excluded from the sign area. The sign area of an individually lettered sign without background is measured by enclosing the entire sign with a set of parallel vertical and horizontal lines. 
"Sign height" means the vertical distance measured from the highest point of the sign to the upper surface of the grade beneath the sign. Unless otherwise defined herein. 
"Special event sign" means any sign which is erected on a temporary basis and advertises the sale of new products, new management, new hours, new service, promoting a special sale/event, including grand openings/closings, promotional sales, change of business address, change of ownership or lessee, business anniversaries, seasonal events, and/or holiday-oriented sales. 
"Street frontage" means the horizontal distance of a lot or portion thereof which abuts a public or private street. 
"Temporary sign" means a sign intended to display either commercial or noncommercial messages of a transitory or temporary nature, which by virtue of its construction from lightweight materials, and its installation with ordinary hand tools, is not physically suitable or intended for long-term display. 
"Tenant building frontage" means the horizontal distance of a building or portion thereof occupied by a tenant measured along a wall facing a street, parking area, open space or pedestrian walkway. 
"Under canopy sign" or "under marquee sign" means a sign attached to the underside of a canopy or marquee. 
"Useful life" means the period of time over which a sign may reasonably be expected to be useful to the owner of a sign in his or her trade or business or in the production of income. Signs within the scope of Business and Professions Code Section 5490 are presumed to have a useful life of fifteen years. For all other permanent signs, when a sign manufacturer's estimate of useful life is available, that may be presumed to be accurate, unless there is contrary evidence. 
"Wayfinding sign" means destination and directional signage to guide visitors to primary and secondary attractions in the city and the placement and design of such signs is determined by the director. 
"Window sign" means a sign attached to, placed or painted upon, or placed within eighteen inches of, the window or glass door of a building, and/or is solely intended for viewing from the exterior of such building. 
(Ord. No. 897B , § 2(Exh. A), 3-24-2015)  
Title 17 - SUBDIVISIONS  
CHAPTER 17.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
17.04.010 - Supplemental to state provisions—Title of ordinance. 
The ordinance codified in this title is adopted to supplement and implement the Subdivision Map Act set forth in Division 2, Title 7 of the Government Code of the state of California and may be cited as the "Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Lincoln." 
(Ord. 324B §1-1, 1977)  
17.04.020 - Purposes. 
The city council has, in the interest of protecting the health, safety and general welfare of the people of the city, adopted the ordinance codified in this title to carry out the following purposes: 
(1)  To implement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act (Title 7, Division 2, Government Code); 
(2)  To provide policies, standards, requirements and procedures to regulate and control the design and improvement of all subdivisions within the city; 
(3)  To implement the programs, policies and objectives of the general plan; 
(4)  To direct the growth of the city and to preserve the essential characteristics of the city. 
(Ord. 324B §1-2, 1977)  
17.04.030 - Other ordinances unimpaired. 
Neither the approval nor conditional approval of a subdivision map pursuant to this title shall constitute or waive compliance with any other applicable provision of any ordinance of the city or other regulation adopted by the city; nor shall any such approval authorize or be deemed to authorize a violation or failure to comply with other applicable ordinances of the city. Nothing in this title shall be construed to permit the premature or haphazard subdivision of land in derogation of the zoning ordinance or the general plan as they relate to open space. 
(Ord. 324B §1-3, 1977)  
CHAPTER 17.08 - DEFINITIONS 
 
17.08.010 - State definitions adopted. 
Except as otherwise set forth in this title, words and phrases used in this title shall have the same meaning attributed to them in the Subdivision Map Act, and definitions contained in the Subdivision Map Act are incorporated herein and shall apply as though set forth in this title. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4(part), 1977)  
17.08.020 - "Includes" not to limit. 
"Includes" shall not limit a term to the specific examples, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.1, 1977)  
17.08.030 - Access, approved. 
"Approved access" means the right of vehicular travel to a public street, as shown on a final subdivision map or final parcel map and as approved by the commission. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.2, 1977)  
17.08.040 - Advisory agency. 
"Advisory agency" means the planning commission of the city. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.3, 1977)  
17.08.050 - Alley. 
"Alley" means a public thoroughfare less than 30 feet in width, which affords only a secondary means of access to an abutting property. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.4, 1977)  
17.08.060 - Certificate of compliance. 
"Certificate of compliance" means a certificate recorded by the city in the office of the county recorder which determines that the subdivision of real property complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and the city ordinances enacted pursuant thereto. A recorded final map or parcel map shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to parcels of real property described therein. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.5, 1977)  
17.08.070 - Commission. 
"Commission" means the planning commission of the city. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.7, 1977)  
17.08.080 - Design. 
"Design" means the following: 
(1)  Street alignments, grades and widths; 
(2)  Drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities, including alignments and grades thereof; 
(3)  Rights-of-way; 
(4)  Fire roads and fire breaks; 
(5)  Lot size and configuration; 
(6)  Traffic access; 
(7)  Grading; 
(8)  Land to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes; 
(9)  Such other specific requirements in the plan and configuration of the entire subdivision as may be necessary or convenient to insure conformity to or implementation of the general plan or an adopted specific plan of the city. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.10, 1977)  
17.08.090 - Flood hazard. 
"Flood hazard" means a hazard to land or improvements due to seasonal inundation or to overflow water having sufficient velocity to transport or deposit debris, scour the surface soil, dislodge or damage buildings, or erode the banks of watercourses. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.11, 1977)  
17.08.100 - Freeway. 
"Freeway" means a highway defined as a "freeway" in section 23.5 of the Streets and Highways Code of the state of California. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.12, 1977)  
17.08.110 - Frontage road. 
"Frontage road" means a street aligning adjacent and approximately parallel to and separated from a freeway or other public street and which affords access to abutting property. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.13, 1977)  
17.08.120 - General plan. 
"General plan" means the general plan of the city of Lincoln. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.14, 1977)  
17.08.130 - Geological hazard. 
"Geological hazard" means any hazard inherent in the crust of the earth, or artificially created, which is dangerous or potentially dangerous to life, property or improvements due to the movement, failure or shifting of earth. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.15, 1977)  
17.08.140 - Improvement. 
"Improvement" means: 
(1)  Such street work and utilities to be installed, or agreed to be installed, by the subdivider on the land to be used for public or private streets, highways, ways and easements that are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final map thereof; 
(2)  Such other specific improvements or types of improvements, the installation of which, either by the subdivider, by the public agencies, by public utilities, by any other entity approved by the local agency or a combination thereof, is necessary or convenient to ensure conformity to or implementation of the general plan or an adopted specific plan of the city. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.16, 1977)  
17.08.150 - Improvement standards. 
"Improvement standards" means standards and specifications for public improvements adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.17, 1977)  
17.08.160 - Lot. 
"Lot" means a parcel of land which is identified with a separate and distinct number or letter on a final map or parcel map recorded in the office of the county recorder. A parcel of land which is shown as a separate lot on a subdivision map, record of survey or other map filed for record is not a buildable lot unless it meets the size and configuration requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.18, 1977)  
17.08.170 - Lot width, average. 
"Average lot width" means the sum of the lengths of the front and rear lot lines divided by two. In the case of irregularly shaped lots having four or more sides, "average lot width" is the sum of the length of two lines drawn perpendicular to one side line at the widest and narrowest portions of the lot, divided by two. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.19, 1977)  
17.08.180 - Lot depth, average. 
"Average lot depth" means the sum of the length of the two side lines of the lot divided by two. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.20, 1977)  
17.08.190 - Lot line, front. 
"Front lot line," in the case of an interior lot, means a line separating the lot from the street; and in the case of a corner lot, a line separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street, except in those cases where the latest recorded tract deed restrictions, approved as part of subdivision approval, specify another line as the front lot line. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.32, 1977)  
17.08.200 - Lot line, rear. 
"Rear lot line" means a lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line and, in the case of a triangular or other irregular lot, the line within the lot most nearly parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line, having the length of at least ten feet. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.22, 1977)  
17.08.210 - Lot line, side. 
"Side lot line" means any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.23, 1977)  
17.08.220 - Map, final. 
"Final map" means a map prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and presented for recording, which conforms to an approved tentative subdivision map, the Subdivision Map Act and the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.24, 1977)  
17.08.230 - Map, parcel. 
"Parcel map" means a map prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and presented for recording which conforms to an approved application for parcel map, with the Subdivision Map Act and the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.25, 1977)  
17.08.240 - Map, preliminary. 
"Preliminary map" means a map presented to the subdivision committee or the commission or both for recommendations prior to submission of a tentative map or parcel map. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.26, 1977)  
17.08.250 - Map, tentative. 
"Tentative map" means a map presented to the subdivision committee or commission for approval of land divisions which require a final map, or parcel map when a tentative map is required by this title. A "tentative map" need not be based upon a detailed or accurate survey of the property. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.27, 1977)  
17.08.260 - Model home. 
"Model home" means a single-family or two-family residential structure, including individual residential structures in condominium or community apartment projects, which is built for the purpose of display, advertising, promotion or sales of other substantially identical structures in the same or contiguous subdivisions and for which construction is commenced with the approval of the council prior to the completion and acceptance of all required subdivision improvements. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.28, 1977)  
17.08.270 - Notice of violation. 
"Notice of violation" means a certificate recorded by the city which determines that real property has been divided or has resulted from a division in violation of this title, predecessor ordinances or the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.29, 1977)  
17.08.280 - Parcel. 
"Parcel" means all contiguous property under the same ownership not divided by a recorded certificate of compliance, parcel map or final map. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.30, 1977)  
17.08.290 - Parkway. 
"Parkway" means the area between the curbline and property line. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.31, 1977)  
17.08.300 - Planning director. 
"Planning director" means that person designated as "planning director" for the city. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.32, 1977)  
17.08.310 - Private road easement. 
"Private road easement" means a parcel of land not dedicated as a public street, over which a private easement for road purposes is proposed to be or has been granted to the owners of property contiguous or adjacent thereto, which intersects or connects with a public street or a private street; in each instance, the instrument creating such easement shall be or shall have been duly recorded or filed in the office of the county recorder. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.33, 1977)  
17.08.320 - Public way. 
"Public way" means any street, highway, alley, pedestrian way, equestrian or hiking trail, biking path, channel, viaduct, subway, tunnel, bridge, easement, right-of-way or other way which the public has the right to use. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.34, 1977)  
17.08.330 - Street, collector. 
"Collector street" means a street which collects traffic from local streets for distribution onto major and minor arterials. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.35, 1977)  
17.08.340 - Street, cul-de-sac. 
"Cul-de-sac" means a street which connects to another street only at one end and has a provision for a turnaround at its other end. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.36, 1977)  
17.08.350 - Street, local. 
"Local street" means a street which is used primarily for access to abutting properties. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.37, 1977)  
17.08.360 - Street, major. 
"Major street" means any street which carries traffic on four or more moving lanes between different areas of the city, and traffic entering from secondary streets. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.38, 1977)  
17.08.370 - Street, secondary. 
"Secondary street" means a street which routes traffic from a collector street or other area to a major street. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.39, 1977)  
17.08.380 - Subdivider. 
"Subdivider" means a person who proposes to divide, divides or causes to be divided real property into a subdivision for himself or for others. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.40, 1977)  
17.08.390 - Subdivision. 
"Subdivision" means the division by any subdivider of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future, except for lease of agricultural land for agricultural purposes. Property shall be considered as contiguous units even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easements or railroad rights-of-way. "Subdivision" includes a condominium project as defined in section 1350 of the Civil Code or a community apartment project, as defined in section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code. 
(Ord. 347B §1, 1978: Ord. 324B §1-4.41, 1977)  
17.08.400 - Subdivision Map Act. 
"Subdivision Map Act" means the Subdivision Map Act of the state of California (Government Code, Title 7, Division 2, Subdivisions, commencing with section 66410) and all amendments or additions thereto. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.42, 1977)  
17.08.410 - Zoning ordinance. 
"Zoning ordinance" means the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. 324B §1-4.43, 1977)  
CHAPTER 17.12 - ADMINISTRATION 
 
17.12.010 - Advisory agency designated. 
The planning commission of the city is designated as the advisory agency as that term is used in the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 324B §2-1, 1977)  
17.12.020 - Powers and duties of commission. 
For purposes of this title the commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To make investigations and reports on the design and improvement of all proposed subdivisions of land; 
(2)  To approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the design of proposed subdivisions and the kinds, nature and extent of on-site and off-site improvements required in connection therewith; 
(3)  To recommend modifications of the requirements of these regulations in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.44, Modification of Requirements; 
(4)  To approve, conditionally approve or disapprove a tentative map of any proposed subdivision of land; 
(5)  To review and make recommendations concerning proposed subdivisions in the unincorporated territory of the county in accordance with section 66453 of the Subdivision Map Act; 
(6)  Such additional powers and duties as may be prescribed by law and this title. 
(Ord. 324B §2-2, 1977)  
17.12.030 - Subdivision committee—Established—Composition. 
There is created a subdivision committee, to consist of the city administrator, the city engineer, one member of the planning commission appointed by the chairman and such other persons as may be designated by the city administrator. 
(Ord. 324B §2-3, 1977)  
17.12.040 - Subdivision committee—Powers and duties. 
The subdivision committee shall review each tentative map, or parcel map for which a tentative was not required, for the purpose of identifying any major problems concerning the proposed use of the land, the proposed design and improvements, and conflicts with the general plan or zoning ordinance, and to indicate to the subdivider and/or his surveyor and engineer the existence of any problems or conflicts and any additional information which may be required prior to consideration of the map by the commission. The committee shall exercise such other duties as may be assigned by the commission or the city council. 
(Ord. 413B §1, 1982: Ord. 324B §2-4, 1977)  
17.12.050 - Findings required for map approval. 
The condition or council shall not approve a map unless it finds that: 
(1)  The proposed subdivision, together with the provisions for its design and improvement, is consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan; 
(2)  The site is physically suitable for the types of development proposed; 
(3)  The site is physically suitable for the proposed density of development; 
(4)  Neither the design of the subdivision nor the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat; 
(5)  The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is not likely to cause serious public health problems; 
(6)  The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will not conflict with public easements for access or use of property within the proposed subdivision; 
(7)  The proposed waste discharge will not result in or add to violation of requirements of the Regional Water Quality Control Board; 
(8)  A finding that at least one of the findings in Section 15.32.260 of the municipal code is satisfied. 
(Ord. 324B §1-5, 1977; Ord. No. 913B , § 4(Exh. B), 6-28-2016)  
17.12.060 - Disapproval of maps—Grounds. 
The commission or council shall disapprove a map for failure to meet or perform any of the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act or this title or conditions imposed pursuant thereto. A final map shall be disapproved only for failure to meet or perform requirements or conditions which were applicable to the subdivision at the time of approval of the tentative map. The commission or council, when disapproving a map, shall make a finding identifying the requirements or conditions which have not been met or performed. 
(Ord. 324B §2-5(part), 1977)  
17.12.070 - Disapproval of maps—Waiver. 
The provisions of Section 17.12.060 may be waived when the failure of the map is the result of a technical and inadvertent error which does not materially affect the validity of the map. The subdivider may request such a determination by written request filed with the city engineer. The council shall determine whether such a waiver shall be granted, after consideration of the recommendations of the city engineer. 
(Ord. 324B §2-5.1, 1977)  
CHAPTER 17.16 - TENTATIVE MAP 
 
17.16.010 - Required. 
Except as otherwise provided in this title the subdivider shall file with the city for every subdivision a tentative map prepared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 324B §3-1, 1977)  
17.16.020 - Preparation. 
The tentative map shall be clearly and legibly drawn by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The scale of the map shall be at least one inch equals 100 feet. If necessary to provide the proper scale, more than one sheet may be used, but the relation of the several sheets shall be clearly shown on each. No single sheet shall exceed 72 inches in length and 54 inches in width. The minimum size map shall be 18 inches in width and 26 inches in length. 
(Ord. 324B §3-2, 1977)  
17.16.030 - Contents. 
The tentative map shall contain the following information in addition to such information as may be required by the Subdivision Map Act: 
(1)  Proposed subdivision name, if any, and tract number, if applicable; 
(2)  Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the record owner and subdivider of the land; 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of the person that prepared the map, and the applicable registration or license number; 
(4)  A vicinity or key map of appropriate scale and covering sufficient adjoining territory so as to clearly indicate nearest street intersections, major access streets, property lines of other adjacent properties in the subdivider's ownership, and other significant features which will have a bearing on the proposed subdivision and its location in relationship to surrounding areas; 
(5)  Date of preparation, north point and scale of the map. If based on a survey, the date of the survey; 
(6)  Boundaries of the subdivision with sufficient information to locate the property; 
(7)  The boundaries and dimensions of all lots, with all lots consecutively numbered. In subdivisions of four or less lots, the square footage or acreage of each lot shall be stated. In subdivisions of five or more lots, the minimum, maximum and average lot sizes shall be stated; 
(8)  Subdivision name and tract numbers of adjacent subdivisions, if any, and property lines sufficient to show their relationship to the proposed subdivision; 
(9)  Contour lines at intervals of not more than two feet unless waived by the city engineer prior to submission. Topographic information shall be sufficient to fully show the configuration of the land and any and all depressions that may present drainage problems, and shall extend beyond the tract boundaries where necessary to show drainage conditions on surrounding property which may affect the subdivision. Residential lots exceeding a 25-percent slope shall be so noted; 
(10)  The location of all railroad rights-of-way and grade crossings; approximate locations of all existing wells, abandoned wells and sumps, including septic systems or other underground systems; active or abandoned quarries; and an indication of any physical restrictions or conditions in the subdivision which affect the use of the property; 
(11)  All structures, including fences and signs, within the subdivision, dimensioned and distanced to other structures and to existing and proposed street and lot lines; present and future use of all structures is to be noted; 
(12)  The locations, widths and purposes of all existing and proposed easements for utilities, drainage and other public purposes, whether public or private, shown by dashed lines, within and adjacent to the subdivision, including proposed building setback lines; 
(13)  Statement of proposed utility services; 
(14)  The locations of all potentially dangerous areas, including geologically hazardous areas, and areas subject to inundation or flood hazard adjacent to the property involved; and the proposed method of providing stormwater drainage and erosion control. In addition, projects within the areas designated as special flood hazard areas in the flood insurance study shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 15.32 of this code; 
(15)  Locations of all streams and tributaries and their respective floodplains, ponds, reservoirs and riparian areas; 
(16)  The approximate location and general description of any trees of a diameter of six inches or greater and shrubs, with notations as to their retention or destruction. Additionally, where groves of trees exist, the perimeter of the canopy shall be shown symbolically on the map; 
(17)  The locations of any significant natural features and/or possible historical or archaeological sites or remains, including but not limited to natural springs, caves, Indian grinding rocks, petroglyphs, burial sites, historical buildings and/or their ruins, and significant rock outcroppings; 
(17)  The location, width and names or designations of all existing or proposed streets, alleys, pedestrian ways and other rights-of-way, whether public or private; 
(18)  The boundaries and dimensions of all lots, and a number assigned to each lot; the total number of lots; and the area of the average lot; 
(19)  The location, width and existing or proposed names or designations of all existing or proposed streets, alleys, pedestrian way and other rights-of-way, including but not limited to bikeways, paths, etc., whether public or private. Any change in existing street names shall be specifically requested in writing; 
(20)  The boundaries of existing and proposed public areas, including but not limited to parks, public libraries and fire stations, in and adjacent to the subdivision, with the nature of each indicated thereon. If land is to be offered for dedication for park or recreation purposes or for purposes of providing public access to natural resources, it shall be so designated; 
(21)  Any modification being requested in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.44, Modification of Requirements, which is shown on the tentative map shall be clearly labeled and identified as to nature and purpose; 
(22)  If separate final maps are to be filed on portions of the property shown on the tentative map, the subdivision boundaries which will appear on the final maps, and the sequence, if any, in which the final maps will be filed. 
(Ord. 403B §1, 1978; Ord. 324B §3-3, 1977)  
17.16.040 - Data to accompany. 
The following drawings, statements and other data shall be filed on or with the tentative map: 
(1)  Two copies of a preliminary title report on the property proposed to be subdivided; 
(2)  A statement of existing and proposed zoning and existing and proposed uses of the property; 
(3)  Where a tentative and final map are required, a preliminary soil report by a registered civil engineer, based on adequate test borings, unless such report is waived by the city engineer on the basis of his knowledge of soil conditions in the proposed subdivision; 
(4)  When requested by the city engineer, a preliminary grading plan; 
(5)  A statement of any proposed phasing of development; 
(6)  Application for any modification that may be proposed, together with supporting drawings and statements and other data as may be required by the provisions of Chapter 17.44; 
(7)  A final environmental impact report, negative declaration or notice of exemption for which the time for appeal has elapsed. The report, declaration or notice shall have been prepared and approved in accordance with regulations adopted by the city council; 
(8)  Any other data required as a prerequisite to approval of the tentative map, including plans, reports, fees or other requirements. 
(Ord. 324B §3-4, 1977)  
17.16.050 - Filing. 
The subdivider shall file with the director a sepia of the tentative map and 12 additional copies thereof, together with supporting data required by this title. A tentative map shall not be considered as having been filed until it complies with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 324B §3-5(part), 1977)  
17.16.060 - Application for approval. 
An application for approval of the tentative map shall be filed with the director on a form provided by the city. The application shall be signed by the owner(s) of the property to be subdivided or his (their) representative pursuant to written authorization. The application shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  A map drawn to scale showing the exterior property lines of all properties within a 300-foot radius of the exterior boundaries of the proposed subdivision with the parcel numbers noted thereon; 
(2)  A list of the names and addresses of the owners of such properties as shown on the last equalized assessment roll; 
(3)  Environmental questionnaire; 
(4)  Filing fee. 
(Ord. 324B §3-5.1, 1977)  
17.16.070 - Waiver of action deadline. 
Whenever it is determined that an environmental impact report will be required, or whenever the application for a tentative map is filed concurrently with an application for a planned development, specific plan, variance, conditional use or amendment of the zoning ordinance, the applicant shall be requested to waive the statutory time for action on the tentative map by the commission. 
(Ord. 324B §3-5.2, 1977)  
17.16.080 - Soils investigation. 
If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soil or other soils problems, a soils investigation of each lot in the subdivision may be required by the city engineer as a condition precedent to consideration of the tentative map by the commission. The soils investigation shall be done in the manner provided in Government Code section 66491. 
(Ord. 324B §3-5.3, 1977)  
17.16.090 - Incomplete or incorrect information. 
If, at any time during the processing of the tentative map, the map or accompanying data are found to be incomplete or incorrect with respect to pertinent required information, the subdivider shall be promptly advised in writing by mail of the changes or additions that must be made before further action may be taken on the tentative map. Failure to provide the omitted or inaccurate information or the soils investigation of each lot within the time specified in the written notice requesting its submission shall be cause for recommendation of disapproval of the tentative map, unless an extension of time for acting upon the map is mutually agreed upon by the subdivider and the commission. 
(Ord. 324B §3-5.4, 1977)  
17.16.100 - Referral to other agencies. 
The director shall transmit copies of the tentative map and other applicable data to other public or private agencies or departments that may be affected by the proposed subdivision for a report and recommendation to the commission. 
(Ord. 324B §3-6(part), 1977)  
17.16.110 - Notice to school district. 
Within ten days of the filing of a tentative map the planning director shall send a notice of the filing of the tentative map to the governing board of any elementary, high school or unified school district within the boundaries of which the subdivision is proposed to be located, as provided by section 66455.7 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 324B §3-6.1, 1977)  
17.16.120 - Subdivision committee action. 
The subdivision committee shall: 
(1)  Advise the commission in its review of the tentative map on the conformance of the tentative map to the standards, rules and regulations adopted by the commission and to the requirements of all applicable plans and ordinances of the city; 
(2)  Advise the commission of the requirements, if any, of other city departments and of county, special district, state or other public and private agencies affected by the proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. 324B §3-7(part), 1977)  
17.16.130 - Staff report to commission. 
Any staff report to the commission shall incorporate within the report the recommendations made by the subdivision committee. A copy of this report shall be served on the subdivider by mail or personal delivery at least three calendar days prior to the date set for consideration of the tentative map by the commission. 
(Ord. 324B §3-7.1, 1977)  
17.16.140 - Hearing before commission—Deadline. 
Within 50 days after the tentative map has been filed, unless such time has been waived, or extended by mutual agreement between the subdivider and the city, the commission shall consider the tentative map during a public hearing. 
(Ord. 324B §3-8(part), 1977)  
17.16.150 - Hearing before commission-Notice. 
The secretary to the commission shall give notice of the public hearing as required by section 66451.3 of the Government Code. In addition, mailed notices of the time and place of the hearing, and a general description of the location of the subdivision, shall be given to the owners of real property lying within 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, as their names appear on the last equalized assessment roll. 
(Ord. 324B §3-8.1, 1977)  
17.16.160 - Hearing before commission—Conduct—Approval or disapproval. 
(a)  At the public hearing the commission shall consider the report of the subdivision committee, and hear the testimony of the subdivider and any other interested person desiring to testify relative to the tentative map. Upon closing the public hearing the commission shall recommend to the council approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the tentative map. 
(b)  The commission shall base its action on the conformity of the tentative map to the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this title, the zoning ordinance, the general plan, and any specific plans of the city. The commission shall report its action in writing to the council. The city clerk shall serve a copy of the report on the subdivider by mail or personal delivery at least five days prior to consideration of the tentative map by the council. 
(c)  If disapproval of the map is recommended, the report of the commission shall contain a statement of the reasons for such disapproval. If conditional approval of the map is recommended, the report shall state conditions of approval. 
(Ord. 324B §3-8.2, 1977)  
17.16.170 - Withdrawal. 
A request for withdrawal of a tentative map shall be submitted to the commission in writing in advance of the hearing unless the request is made at the public hearing on the tentative map. On the receipt of any such request, the commission shall notify all concerned parties of the withdrawal. No refund of the filing fee shall be made for any such withdrawn map unless such request is made prior to the distribution of copies of the tentative map. 
(Ord. 324B §3-9, 1977)  
17.16.180 - Action by council. 
At its first regular meeting following receipt of the commission's written recommendations, the council shall fix a date within 30 days thereafter for consideration of the tentative map. 
(1)  On the meeting date set by the council for consideration of the map, the council shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative map. In all instances of approval, conditional approval or disapproval, the council shall make such findings as are required by law and shall state those facts which support such findings. 
(2)  Within five working days after consideration of the tentative map, the city clerk shall report the council's action in writing to the subdivider or person filing the tentative map, indicating any conditions of approval and including a copy of the approved tentative map. 
(3)  The approval or conditional approval of a tentative map shall not constitute an approval of any exception or deviation from the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. 324B §3-10, 1977)  
17.16.190 - Term of approval—Extensions. 
(a)  The approval or conditional approval of a tentative subdivision map shall be valid for 24 months, within which time a final map may be presented to the council for acceptance and recordation. 
(b)  The council may extend its approval for an additional time period not to exceed 24 months, if the approval for extension of time is granted prior to the original expiration date. 
(c)  Applications for extensions of time shall be reviewed by the commission, which shall determine whether the map presently conforms to the requirements for a tentative subdivision map. The commission shall recommend that the request for extension of time be approved, approved with conditions (to include those conditions which cause the map to conform to present requirements) or disapproved. It shall also recommend an appropriate period for an extension of time, should approval be granted. 
(d)  In the event that an approved tentative map is revised and subsequently approved by the council, the most recently approved tentative map shall constitute the only recognized tentative map for further action and consideration of filing of a final map. 
(Ord. 405B §§1, 2, 1982; Ord. 388B §1, 1981; Ord. 360B §§1, 2, 1979; Ord. 324B §3-11, 1977)  
CHAPTER 17.18 - VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS 
 
17.18.010 - Authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1 of the Government Code of the State of California) (the "Vesting Tentative Map Statute"). The purpose of this chapter is to establish appropriate local procedures for the implementation of the Vesting Tentative Map Statute. 
To accomplish this purpose, the regulations contained in this chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, and for the promotion of orderly growth and development. 
(Ord. 644B §1(part), 1997)  
17.18.020 - Consistency. 
No land shall be approved and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the general plan or any applicable specific plan or which is not permitted by Title 18 (Zoning) or any other applicable provisions of this code. A subdivider may file an application for a vesting tentative map for a subdivision which is inconsistent with the general plan and a specific plan if said application is accompanied with an application to amend the general plan and/or specific plan that would eliminate the inconsistency. 
(Ord. 644B §1(part), 1997)  
17.18.030 - Definitions. 
A "vesting tentative map" means a tentative map for a subdivision that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "vesting tentative map" at the time it is filed in accordance with Section 17.18.040 and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. 644B §1(part), 1997)  
17.18.040 - Filing and processing. 
A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in the Lincoln Municipal Code for a tentative map except as hereinafter provided in this chapter. 
At the time a vesting tentative map is filed the subdivider shall also supply the following information: 
(1)  Preliminary utility, sewer, water, storm drain and road plans; 
(2)  Preliminary grading plans; 
(3)  Information on the uses to which the parcels will be put; 
(4)  Traffic circulation and impact; 
(5)  Flood control and impact; 
(6)  Information as specified in Government Code Sections 6596.5(d), (f) and 65850.2; 
(7)  Any other matters deemed necessary by the director of community development. 
(Ord. 644B §1(part), 1997)  
17.18.050 - Fees. 
Upon filing a vesting tentative map the subdivider shall pay fees required by either city ordinance or resolution for filing and processing of a tentative map. 
(Ord. 644B §1(part), 1997)  
17.18.060 - Expiration. 
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same extensions, established by the Lincoln Municipal Code for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map and those provisions for expiration and extension set forth in Government Code Section 66452.6. 
(Ord. 644B §1(part), 1997)  
17.18.070 - Rights of a vesting tentative map. 
(a)  The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer the rights as provided for in Government Code Section 66498.1. These rights shall apply to residential, commercial and industrial parcels. 
(b)  The rights conferred by a vesting tentative map shall continue for a two-year period after the recording of the final map. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, the two-year initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded. All of said final maps must be recorded within the time period set forth in Section 17.18.060 or the vesting tentative map approval shall expire for those maps for which final maps are not timely recorded. 
(c)  The two-year initial time period set forth in subsection B of this section shall be automatically extended for any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit, if one is required, or for any required design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds 30 days from the date a complete application is filed. 
(d)  A subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before the expiration of the initial two-year time period. 
(Ord. 644B §1(part), 1997)  
CHAPTER 17.20 - PARCEL MAP 
 
17.20.010 - Required when. 
Except as provided in this chapter, a parcel map shall be filed and recorded for any subdivision for which a tentative and final map is not required by the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 324B §4-1, 1977)  
17.20.020 - Not required when. 
The chapter shall not apply to any conveyance or agreements made solely for the purpose of correcting, confirming or relocating a boundary common to abutting lots or parcels, if: 
(1)  The resulting lots comply with the provisions of this chapter and the zoning ordinance of the city; 
(2)  No additional lot is created; 
(3)  The lot line adjustment is approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 720B §1, 2002: Ord. 324B §4-2, 1977)  
17.20.030 - Exceptions by resolution—Grounds. 
The council may, by resolution, waive the requirement for a parcel map in the following instances: 
(1)  Where the land to be divided consists of a lot or parcel shown on a recorded parcel map or final map and the full street improvements have been constructed or monumentation is evident; 
(2)  Where the lots, after division, will each have a gross area of 40 acres or more or each of which is a quarter-quarter section or larger; 
(3)  Where land is conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity or public utility or to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such public utility for rights-of-way, unless a showing is made in the individual case, upon substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates such a parcel map. 
(Ord. 405B §3, 1982; Ord. 324B §§4-2-4-2.4, 1977)  
17.20.040 - Exceptions by resolution—Council findings. 
If the council determines that a parcel map is not required, it shall find and record in writing that the proposed subdivision of land complies with such requirements as may have been established by the Subdivision Map Act or this title or any city ordinance as to area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate approved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water and environmental protection, and that the other requirements of this title relating to the division of land have been satisfied. 
(Ord. 405B §4, 1982: Ord. 324B §4-2.5, 1977)  
17.20.050 - Tentative map required. 
A tentative map shall be submitted for all land to be divided by a parcel map. Except as provided in this chapter, the tentative map shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.16. 
(Ord. 324B §4-3, 1977)  
17.20.060 - Improvements when less than five lots involved. 
In the case of a division of land which is not a subdivision of five or more lots, dedications and improvements, except for the dedication of land or fee in lieu thereof for parks and recreation purposes, required in connection with the approval of a tentative map, shall be limited to the dedication of rights-of-way and easements and the construction of reasonable off-site and on-site improvements for the parcels being created. 
(Ord. 324B §4-4(part), 1977)  
17.20.070 - Improvements construction. 
(a)  Requirements for the construction of improvements shall be noticed by certificate on the parcel map, in the resolution waiving the parcel map, or by separate instrument and shall be recorded on, concurrently with or prior to the parcel map or resolution approving the parcel map being filed for record. 
(b)  (1)  Construction of such improvements shall not be required until such time as a permit or approval for development of the parcel is granted, or until such time as is required pursuant to an agreement between the city and sub-divider, unless, in the absence of such an agreement, the council determines that construction of such improvements is necessary for reasons of: 
a.  The public health and safety; or 
b.  The required construction is a necessary prerequisite to orderly development of the surrounding area. 
(2)  Upon making such findings as are contemplated in subdivision (1) of this subsection, the council may fix a reasonable time within which such improvements shall be constructed. 
(Ord. 347B §2, 1978: Ord. 324B §4-4.1, 1977)  
17.20.080 - Recording deadline. 
Within 24 months of the date of approval or conditional approval of a tentative map, the subdivider may cause a parcel map to be prepared and recorded in accordance with the tentative map as approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 405B §5, 1982: Ord. 324B §4-5, 1977)  
17.20.090 - Failure to file. 
Failure to file a parcel map within 24 months of the date of approval or conditional approval of a tentative map, or within any extended period of time granted by the council in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, shall terminate all proceedings. Before a parcel map may thereafter be recorded, a new tentative map shall be filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 405B §6, 1982: Ord. 324B §4-6, 1977)  
17.20.100 - Extension of recording deadline. 
The council may grant an extension of time up to but not exceeding 24 months beyond the 24 months allowed for recording a parcel map. Applications for time extension shall be made in writing to the city administrator not less than 30 days prior to the expiration of the initial 24-month period. Time extensions may be granted subject to the condition that the parcel map shall be prepared and improvements shall be constructed and installed in compliance with the requirements in effect at the time such extension is considered by the city council. 
(Ord. 405B §7, 1982: Ord. 360 §3, 1979: Ord. 324B §4-7, 1977)  
17.20.110 - Preparation—General configuration. 
The parcel map shall be prepared by, or under the direction of, a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and shall conform to the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and to the following: 
(1)  General form and layout of the map, including size and type of lettering, drafting and location of acknowledgements, etc., shall be as determined by the city engineer. 
(2)  The scale of the map shall be one inch equals 50 feet, unless otherwise permitted by the city engineer, but in any case the map shall show clearly all details of the subdivision. 
(3)  All dimensions shall be shown in feet and hundredths of a foot. No ditto marks shall be used. 
(4)  If more than three sheets are necessary to show the entire subdivision, an index map shall be included on one of the sheets. 
(5)  Parcel map number, scale and north point shall be shown on each sheet. 
(6)  A title sheet, designated as page number one of the parcel map, shall be provided; except, that where the size of the subdivision permits, the information required to be shown thereon may be shown on the same sheet as the map of the subdivision. 
(7)  The parcel map shall be so made and shall be in such condition when filed that legible prints and negatives can be made therefrom. 
(Ord. 324B §4-8, 1977)  
17.20.120 - Title sheet requirements. 
The title sheet shall include the following information: 
(1)  Title, comprising the parcel map number as secured from the director, placed at the top of the sheet, followed by the words, "City of Lincoln"; 
(2)  Below the title shall be a subtitle consisting of a description of all the property being divided by reference to the map, or maps, final judgment in any action in partition, maps previously filed under authority of the Subdivision Map Act, or by reference to any plat of any United States survey, whichever of the above are applicable; 
(3)  References to tracts and subdivisions and the description must be worded identically with original records. References to a book and page(s) of record must be complete; 
(4)  Affidavits, certificates, acknowledgements, endorsements, acceptances and notarial seals required or authorized by the Subdivision Map Act and/or by this title. 
(Ord. 324B §4-9, 1977)  
17.20.130 - Contents. 
The parcel map shall substantially conform to the tentative map approved or conditionally approved by the council including any approved modifications, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The boundary line of the subdivision shall be designated by an appropriate one-eighth-inch border of light blue ink applied on the reverse side of the tracing and inside the boundary line. Such border shall be of such density as to appear on the blue line print of the map without obliterating any figures, lines or other data; 
(2)  If a field survey is required, all survey data and information required; 
(3)  All lots or parcels intended for sale or reserved for private purposes with all dimensions, boundaries and courses clearly shown and defined in each case; 
(4)  Each parcel, identified by a number, and its relationship to surrounding surveys. The location of any remainder of the original parcel having a gross area of five acres or more shall be indicated but need not be indicated by survey; the location of such remainder parcel may be indicated by deed reference to the existing remainder boundaries; 
(5)  The location and width of streets, alleys, pedestrian ways and other easements and the portions thereof dedicated or offered to dedication to the city, including the recording references and the names of the streets; 
(6)  The lines of public easements to which the lots are subject shown in dashed line; the lines and dimensions, and bearings of easements deeded to the city; 
(7)  All limitations on rights of access to and from streets and lots and other parcels of land. 
(Ord. 324B §4-10, 1977)  
17.20.140 - Accompanying data and fee. 
The following data, in sufficient copies as required by the city engineer, shall be filed with the parcel map: 
(1)  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the record owners, subdivider and persons preparing the parcel map; 
(2)  A filing fee as determined by the council by resolution; 
(3)  Any applicable irrevocable offer of dedication of property for streets, alleys, pedestrian ways, equestrian or hiking trails, drainage channels, sewers or other easements for any public purpose when the dedication is made by certificate on the parcel map. The offer shall be on a form approved by the city attorney; 
(4)  A guarantee of title or letter from the title company, certifying that the signatures of all persons signing offers of dedication and the certificates required by subdivision F of section 66445 of the Subdivision Map Act and signing all acknowledgements thereto appear and are correctly shown; 
(5)  If a field survey has been made, the engineer or surveyor under whose supervision the survey was made shall furnish the city engineer field notes or such other information as the city engineer may require; 
(6)  The plans, profiles, cross-sections, specifications and applicable permits for the construction and/or installation of improvements as specified by the city engineer; 
(7)  A final grading plan, if required by the city engineer; 
(8)  The agreement to make improvements and the security for such improvements as required by Chapter 17.40; 
(9)  All protective covenants, conditions or restrictions of the subdivision, in the form in which they are to be recorded; 
(10)  All other data required by law or as a condition of approval of the tentative map, and such other information as is required by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 324B §4-11, 1977)  
17.20.150 - Field survey required when. 
If the subdivision creates four parcels or less, the city engineer may authorize that the parcel map be compiled from available records data when the location of any boundary on the parcel map, either by monument or possessory lines, is certain. All other parcel maps shall be based upon a field survey made in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. 
(Ord. 324B §4-12, 1977)  
17.20.160 - Surveyor's certificates—Filing map—Offers of dedication. 
The subdivider shall cause the surveyor's certificate to be executed and shall file with the city engineer as many prints of the parcel map as the city engineer requires. All offers of dedication of land to be made in conjunction with the parcel map shall be transmitted at the time of transmission of the map. 
(Ord. 324B §4-13, 1977)  
17.20.170 - Review by city engineer—Recording. 
Upon receipt of the parcel map and accompanying data, the city engineer shall examine them and determine if the parcel map is in substantial conformity with the approved tentative map, its conditions, the Subdivision Map Act and other requirements of this title. If he so finds he shall certify the parcel map and within 20 days of submission or resubmission present the map to the county recorder for recording in the official records of the county. 
(Ord. 324B §4-14, 1977)  
CHAPTER 17.24 - FINAL MAP 
 
17.24.010 - Required when. 
A final map is required for all subdivisions for which a tentative map has been filed except those subdivisions for which a parcel map has been filed in accordance with Chapter 17.20. 
(Ord. 324B §5-1, 1977)  
17.24.020 - Deadline to prepare and record. 
Within 24 months of the date of approval or conditional approval of the tentative map, or within such additional time as may be granted by the city council, the subdivider may cause the proposed subdivision or any part thereof to be surveyed and a final map to be prepared and recorded as provided in this chapter and in the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 405B §8, 1982: Ord. 360 §4, 1979: Ord. 324B §5-2, 1977)  
17.24.030 - Failure to record—Extensions. 
Failure to record a final map within the time specified in Section 17.24.020 shall terminate all proceedings, unless an extension of time to file has been granted by the city council. The council may grant an extension up to but not exceeding an additional 24 months. Applications for time extensions shall be made in writing and sent to the commission not less than 30 days prior to the expiration of the initial 24-month period. Any extension to be granted shall be subject to the conditions that the final map shall be prepared and improvements shall be constructed and installed in compliance with the requirements at the time such extension is considered by the council. A fee for processing any such extension of time shall be required in an amount determined by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 405B §9, 1982: Ord. 360 §5, 1979: Ord. 324B §5-3, 1977)  
17.24.040 - Preparation—General form and layout. 
The final map shall be prepared by, or under the direction of, a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor in the manner required by the Subdivision Map Act, and shall conform to all of the following: 
(1)  The general form and layout of the map, including size and type of lettering, drafting and location of acknowledgements, etc., shall be determined by the city engineer. 
(2)  The scale of the map shall be one inch equals 100 feet, unless otherwise permitted by the city engineer, but in any case the map shall show clearly all details of the subdivision. 
(3)  All dimensions shall be shown in feet and hundredths of the foot. No ditto marks shall be used. 
(4)  If more than three sheets are necessary to show the entire subdivision, an index map shall be included on one of the sheets. 
(5)  The subdivision designation, tract number, scale and north point shall be shown on each sheet. 
(6)  A title sheet, designated as page one of the final map, shall be provided unless the size of the subdivision permits all of the information to be shown on the same sheet. 
(7)  The final map shall be in such condition when filed that legible prints and negatives can be made from it. 
(Ord. 324B §5-4, 1977)  
17.24.050 - Title sheet contents. 
The title sheet shall contain the following: 
(1)  Title, comprising the tract number as secured from the city engineer's office, followed by the words, "City of Lincoln"; 
(2)  Below the title shall be a subtitle consisting of a description of all property being subdivided with reference to such maps, final judgments, previous subdivision maps and plats of the United States survey; 
(3)  The subtitle of final maps filed for the purpose of reverting subdivided land to acreage shall consist of the words, "A Reversion to Acreage of" (insert a legal description, by reference to title and date of approval of prior approved subdivision map); 
(4)  References to tracts and subdivisions in the description shall be worded identically with original records, and references to book and page of record must be complete; 
(5)  Affidavits, certificates, acknowledgements and endorsements, etc., required by law and by these regulations; 
(6)  The basis of bearings used in the field survey, making reference to some recorded subdivision map or other record acceptable to the city engineer. 
(Ord. 324B §5-5, 1977)  
17.24.060 - Contents of map. 
The final map shall substantially conform to the tentative map approved or conditionally approved by the council, including any approved modifications, and shall include the following: 
(1)  The boundary line of the subdivision shall be designated by heavy colored border line; 
(2)  All areas shown on the map which do not constitute a part of the subdivision shall be labeled "not a part of this subdivision" or "N.A.P.O.T.S."; all lines delineating such areas shall be dashed; 
(3)  All survey data and information; 
(4)  All lots or parcels intended for sale or reserved for private purposes and for all parcels offered for dedication to the city or any other public agency with all dimensions, boundaries and courses clearly shown and defined in each case; 
(5)  All lots shall be numbered consecutively without omissions or duplications, throughout the subdivision, starting with the number 1, except units of a total development which shall be numbered consecutively throughout the entire development. Only parcels offered for dedication other than for streets and easements shall be designated by letters. Each numbered lot shall be shown entirely on one sheet; 
(6)  The location and total width of all streets, alleys, pedestrian ways, equestrian hiking trails and biking trails; the names of streets and the width of each side or centerline of each street, the width of each street, alley, pedestrian way, equestrian or hiking trail and bike path being dedicated; 
(7)  The location and widths of any other rights-of-way within the subdivision; 
(8)  Building setback lines; 
(9)  All necessary data, including widths and boundaries relating to all public easements, which shall be clearly labeled and identified as to nature and purpose. Previously recorded easements shall be identified by reference to record data. Any easement not definitely located of record shall appear in the title sheet. Easements shall be denoted by fine, dashed lines; 
(10)  All limitations on rights of access to and from streets and lots and other parcels of land; 
(11)  The lines of any natural watercourse, channel, stream, creek or body of water in or adjacent to the subdivision; 
(12)  All limitations on rights of access to, or use of, any natural watercourse, channel, stream, creek or body of water in or adjacent to the subdivision; 
(13)  Any city boundary crossing or adjoining the subdivision shall be clearly designated and identified; 
(14)  All subdivisions which are in areas designated as special flood hazard areas pursuant to the Chapter 15.32 shall include the elevations of proposed structure(s) and pad(s), as well as any other information required by Chapter 15.32, Flood Damage Prevention, of this code. 
(Ord. 403B §2, 1981; Ord. 324B §5-6, 1977)  
17.24.070 - Accompanying information. 
The following data, in as many copies as required by the city engineer, shall be filed with the final map: 
(1)  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the record owners, subdivider, and persons preparing the final map; 
(2)  A guarantee of title, or a letter from a title company, certifying that the signatures of all persons whose consent is necessary to pass a clear title to the land and all acknowledgements thereto appear and are correctly shown on the proper certificates, and are correctly shown on the final map, both as to the consents for the making thereof and the affidavit of dedication; 
(3)  The agreement to make improvements and the security for such improvements as required by Chapter 17.40 of this code; 
(4)  The city engineer may require the following information: 
a.  A traverse sheet in a form to be approved by him and complete plans, profiles and cross-sections for the construction and installation of the improvements required by this title, 
b.  A final grading plan; 
(5)  All protective covenants, conditions and restrictions in the form in which they are to be recorded; 
(6)  All offers of dedication, whether they are by separate instrument or are part of the final map; 
(7)  All other data required by law or imposed as a condition of approval of the tentative map. 
(Ord. 324B §5-7, 1977)  
17.24.080 - Fee to accompany. 
A filing fee in an amount to be determined by the council by resolution shall accompany the final map. 
(Ord. 324B §5-8, 1977)  
17.24.090 - Certificate execution—Filing—Review by city engineer. 
The subdivider shall cause all certificates to be executed except those to be executed by the city engineer, the city clerk and the county recorder, and shall file with the city engineer the original tracing of the final map and as many prints thereof as the city engineer may require. The city engineer shall examine the map and, if he finds it to be in substantial conformity with the approved tentative map and with improvement plans and specifications in compliance with the requirements of this title, and such other plans that are pertinent, he shall execute the city engineer's certificate on the map. He shall file the map with the city clerk. Should the map or other accompanying documents be found to be incomplete or incorrect, the city engineer shall notify the subdivider in writing by mail of the changes or additions that must be made before the map may be certified. The city engineer shall act on the final map within 20 days from the time the final map is submitted to him by the subdivider for approval. 
(Ord. 324B §5-9, 1977)  
17.24.100 - City council approval or disapproval. 
The council shall, within a period of ten days after the filing of the final map with the city clerk for approval, or at its next regular meeting after the meeting at which it receives the map from the city clerk, whichever date is later, approve the map if it conforms to all the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. It shall disapprove a map if it does not conform as provided above. If at the time of approval of the final map all public improvements required in the particular subdivision have not been completed and accepted in accordance with the provisions of this title the council shall, as a condition precedent to the approval of the final map, require the subdivider to enter into an agreement as provided by Section 17.40.090. The agreement shall be in a form approved by the city attorney, and shall be secured by improvement security as provided by Sections 17.40.100 and 17.40.110. 
(Ord. 324B §5-10, 1977)  
17.24.110 - Condominium and community apartment project conversions. 
Approval of a final map for a subdivision resulting from the conversion of residential real property into a condominium project or community apartment project shall be subject to the provisions of section 66427.1 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 324B §17-2, 1977)  
CHAPTER 17.28 - DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
17.28.010 - Density and use conformity with general and specific plans. 
The size, design, character, grade, location, orientation and configuration of lots within the proposed subdivision and improvements required in connection therewith shall be consistent with the density and uses authorized for the area by the general plan and zoning ordinance and any applicable specific plans. 
(Ord. 324B §6-1 (part), 1977)  
17.28.020 - Restriction of density, timing or sequence of development. 
The density, timing or sequence of development may be restricted by considerations of safety, traffic access or circulation, the slope of the terrain, the physical suitability of the site (including soil conditions), the nature and extent of existing development, the availability of public utilities, or other provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 324B §6-1(part), 1977)  
17.28.030 - Zoning conformity. 
Except as provided in Sections 17.28.210, 17.28.220, 17.28.230 and 17.28.250, which shall govern in the case of any conflict with provisions of the zoning ordinance, all subdivisions shall result in lots which comply with the requirements set forth for the particular uses in the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. 360B §6, 1979: Ord. 324B §6-2, 1977)  
17.28.040 - Flood damage prevention ordinance conformity. 
All subdivisions, and the improvements required in connection therewith, located within areas of special flood hazard as designated in the flood insurance study for the city of Lincoln, shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15.32, Flood Damage Prevention. If a provision of this title and Chapter 15.32 conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent requirements or restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. 403B §3, 1981: Ord. 324B §6-3, 1977)  
17.28.050 - Routes of access. 
Each local street providing access to lots within a subdivision shall connect directly or through one or more local streets to a collector street or major street. Each route of access to collector streets or major streets and its point of connection therewith shall be adequate to safely accommodate the composition and volume of vehicular traffic generated by the land uses it serves. In determining the adequacy of a route of access, the deployment of fire equipment or other emergency services shall be considered by the commission and the council. A tentative map which makes use of local streets which pass through a predominantly residential neighborhood as a route of access to industrial, commercial or other subdivisions, generating traffic which would conflict with a residential character of the neighborhood, may be denied. 
(Ord. 324B §6-10, 1977)  
17.28.060 - Alignment with other streets—Dead ends. 
(a)  Proposed streets shall be aligned to conform to the alignment of existing streets in adjoining subdivisions and to the logical continuation of existing streets where the adjoining land is not subdivided. 
(b)  Dead-end streets (except culs-de-sac) are prohibited. When a street is temporarily dead-ended, a barricade or temporary turning area or temporary connection to another street shall be required unless waived in writing by the commission upon recommendation of the city engineer. The commission or council may require, at the end of a dead-end street, that a turnaround be provided when the future extension of the street is remote. 
(Ord. 324B §6-11, 1977)  
17.28.070 - Waivers of access rights. 
A frontage road, reverse frontage or other type of limited access may be required where a subdivision adjoins or contains an existing or proposed freeway or major street. To accomplish the purpose of this section, waivers of vehicular and pedestrian access rights to the freeway or major street shall be required unless waived in writing by the commission upon recommendation of the city engineer. Waivers of access rights may also be required to prevent a local or collector street which passes through a predominantly residential neighborhood from being used as a route of access to industrial, commercial or other subdivisions generating traffic which would conflict with the residential character of the neighborhood, unless waived in writing by the commission upon recommendation of the city engineer. 
(Ord. 324B §6-12, 1977)  
17.28.080 - Intersections. 
Streets shall intersect at a right angle or as nearly thereto as is practical. Radius of curvature, where the property lines intersect, shall be a minimum of 15 feet, except as to major streets or expressways, where the minimum is 25 feet. Freeway or T intersections are preferable to four-way intersections on local streets, but the centerline of T street intersections shall not be located closer than 200 feet to the centerline of any other intersection. Four-way intersections shall not be located closer than 200 feet to the centerline of any other intersections. Four-way intersections shall not be located closer than 200 feet to any other intersection, measured from the nearest right-of-way lines. 
(Ord. 360B §7, 1979: Ord. 324B §6-13, 1977)  
17.28.090 - Local street layout. 
Local streets shall be laid out to discourage through traffic. Curvilinear streets shall be encouraged. Maps of proposed subdivisions containing excessively long, straight residential streets conducive to high-speed traffic may be denied. 
(Ord. 324B §6-14, 1977)  
17.28.100 - Cul-de-sac streets. 
A cul-de-sac street created by a proposed subdivision shall not exceed 500 feet in length. A proposed cul-de-sac may be reduced in length or may be eliminated in order to provide for the efficient circulation of traffic, the future development of the neighborhood street system, or for the deployment of emergency services. 
(Ord. 360B §8, 1979: Ord. 324B §6-15, 1977)  
17.28.110 - Street standards. 
All streets shall conform to the provisions of this title and to standards and specifications set forth in adopted improvement standards. 
(Ord. 324B §6-16, 1977)  
17.28.120 - Conformity of rights-of-way with improvement. 
All street and alley rights-of-way and the location of improvements therein shall be designed to conform to the requirements of the improvement standards, except where a modification is expressly permitted by Chapter 17.44, Modification of Requirements, or where a special cross-section is required to conform to an adopted planned street line or an applicable specific plan. 
(Ord. 324B §6-17, 1977)  
17.28.130 - Street grades. 
Grades of all streets shall be consistent with adequate surface-drainage requirements and the approved grading plan of the proposed subdivision if one is required. The maximum permitted grade is six percent;provided, however, that when topography makes a six percent grade impractical, the city council, after the approval of the city engineer, may permit a grade not to exceed ten percent. The city engineer shall determine the minimum grade authorized. 
(Ord. 360B §9, 1979: Ord. 324B §6-18, 1977)  
17.28.140 - Curve radii of streets. 
All curves shall have sufficient length to avoid the appearance of an angled point. Reverse curves shall be connected by tangents of a length approved by the city engineer. The centerline radii of curves shall be as great as possible but not less than the following: major streets, 1,500 feet; secondary streets, 1,000 feet; collector streets, 100 feet. 
(Ord. 360B §10, 1979: Ord. 324B §6-19, 1977)  
17.28.160 - Pedestrian ways. 
Improved pedestrian ways, as specified in the improvement standards, may be required where needed for traffic safety, access to schools, playgrounds, shopping facilities, other community facilities or scenic easements. 
(Ord. 324B §6-36, 1977)  
17.28.170 - Equestrian, hiking, bike and similar trails. 
Equestrian trails, hiking trails, biking paths and similar trails shall be provided in locations established by the general plan and specific plans of the city. Adequate access shall be provided for public maintenance vehicles, emergency vehicles and parking facilities. 
(Ord. 324B §6-37, 1977)  
17.28.180 - Easements. 
(a)  Easements for utilities, street lighting, street trees, storm drains, flood control channels, slope rights and other public uses shall be provided at such locations as determined necessary by the commission and of such widths as set forth in the improvement standards. The commission shall be guided by the recommendation of the city engineer. 
(b)  Open space, public access and scenic easements shall be provided at such locations and to such widths as are necessary to accomplish the objectives, policies and programs of the general plan and specific plans in accordance with the purposes and policies of this title and the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 324B §6-38, 1977)  
17.28.190 - Block size. 
Blocks shall be designed to allow for adequate building sites for the type of use proposed, to allow for convenient pedestrian and vehicular circulation, access, traffic control and safety with regard to limitations created by topography. The width of blocks shall ordinarily be sufficient to allow for two tiers of lots with rear easements as required. Block lengths shall not exceed 1,500 feet unless unusual topographic or other conditions exist. 
(Ord. 360B §11, 1979: Ord. 324B §6-50, 1977)  
17.28.200 - Block corners. 
At intersections, all block corners shall have a minimum 20-foot-radius curve at property lines. Greater radii or cutoffs may be required where necessary for traffic safety. 
(Ord. 360B §12, 1979: Ord. 324B §6-50.1, 1977)  
17.28.210 - Lot width. 
The minimum width for each lot shall be as follows: 
(1)  Corner lot: 60 feet at the front building setback line. For corner lots, either street frontage may constitute the front lot line if the lot is consistent with the applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance; 
(2)  Interior lot: 60 feet at the front building setback line; 
(3)  Cul-de-sac lot: 35 feet at the street right-of-way. 
(Ord. 360B §13, 1979: Ord. 324B §6-51, 1977)  
17.28.220 - Lot area—Minimums. 
The minimum area for each lot shall be as follows: 
(1)  Single-family residential interior lot: 6,000 square feet; 
(2)  Single-family residential corner lot: 6,000 square feet; 
(3)  Family residential unit on an interior lot: 7,500 square feet for a two-family unit plus an additional 1,000 square feet for each additional unit; 
(4)  Family residential unit on a corner lot: 7,500 square feet for a two-family unit plus an additional 1,000 square feet for each additional unit. 
(Ord. 360B §14(part), 1979: Ord. 324B §6-51.1, 1977) 
(Ord. No. 971B , § 4, 7-10-2018)  
17.28.230 - Lot area—Transmission line easements. 
In determining the minimum lot area, all public utility transmission line easements may be required to be excluded for the purpose of computing land areas, even though such easements are included in the subdivision design. 
(Ord. 360B §14(part), 1979: Ord. 324B §6-51.2, 1977)  
17.28.240 - Lot area—Drainage easements. 
In the computation of required lot area minimums, no portion of any lot covered by a drainage easement shall be used in calculating the width, depth or area of the lot. 
(Ord. 324B §6-54, 1977)  
17.28.250 - Side lot line orientation to street. 
Side lot lines shall be, normally, at right angles or radial to street lines. 
(Ord. 360B §14(part), 1979: Ord. 324B §6-51.3, 1977)  
17.28.260 - Lot depth. 
The minimum lot depth shall be 100 feet. 
(Ord. 324B §6-52, 1977)  
17.28.270 - Lot depth:width ratio. 
The maximum depth of any lot shall not be greater than three times the lot width. 
(Ord. 324B §6-53, 1977)  
17.28.280 - Lot size conformance to nearby lots. 
When determined to be necessary to promote the general welfare, or assure the orderly development of a community, residential lots within the proposed subdivision may be required to be increased in size to more closely conform to the size of existing nearby lots. 
(Ord. 324B §6-55, 1977)  
17.28.290 - Flag lots. 
Flag lots for any proposed usage shall be approved only where required by topographic conditions and where there is no reasonable alternative design for the development of the interior portion of excessively deep parcels. 
(Ord. 324B §6-56, 1977)  
17.28.300 - Reverse frontage lots. 
Lots proposed for single-family and two-family uses which have frontage on two parallel streets shall not be approved. 
(Ord. 324B §6-57, 1977)  
17.28.310 - Boundaries not to divide lots. 
No lot shall be divided by a city or county boundary line. 
(Ord. 324B §6-58, 1977)  
17.28.320 - Remnant lots. 
Remnants of property which do not conform to minimum lot requirements and which are not required for a public or private utility or other public use shall not be created by a subdivision. 
(Ord. 324B §6-59, 1977)  
17.28.330 - Lot drainage and erosion control. 
All lots shall be graded to provide adequate drainage. Provisions shall be made for proper erosion control, including the prevention of sedimentation or damage to off-site property. 
(Ord. 324B §6-60, 1977)  
17.28.340 - Open space dedication or designation. 
All areas within a subdivision designated or planned as open space for use for park or recreation purposes, whether public or private, shall be designated as a separate parcel or parcels and dedicated to the city, or shall be designated as a separate parcel or parcels and maintained as common open space within an approved condominium, community or apartment project, or planned development. 
(Ord. 324B §6-61, 1977)  
17.28.350 - Storm drain design. 
Storm drains shall be designed in conformance with the improvement standards. 
(Ord. 324B §6-70, 1977)  
17.28.360 - Model homes—Site. 
The commission may authorize lots to be designated as sites for the construction of model homes. Such sites shall be designated and approved on the tentative map. Each site shall be located so as to be easily accessible from existing improved streets during the construction of the model homes. Model home sites shall not be located more than 300 feet from the nearest existing source of water supply for firefighting purposes. 
(Ord. 324B §6-71, 1977)  
17.28.370 - Model homes—Reversion of converted garage. 
Any model home in which a garage is converted to an office or other use in conjunction with its use as a model home shall, upon termination of the use and prior to ultimate sale, lease or rental as a residence, revert the garage to its originally intended use or provide a garage as required by the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. 324B §6-72, 1977)  
CHAPTER 17.30 - NAMING AND RENAMING OF STREETS AND OTHER PUBLIC FACILITIES 
 
17.30.010 - Themes and names of streets and other public facilities. 
Requests for naming of new streets designated as collectors or major streets, renaming streets and establishing themes and the name or renaming of public buildings and facilities, parks and recreational facilities owned or controlled by the city, except proposals initiated by the city council or planning commission, shall be submitted in writing to the theme and naming committee (TANC) at the department of community development. 
(Ord. 769B §3, 2004: Ord. 557B §3(part), 1991)  
17.30.020 - Decision by theme and naming committee (TANC). 
All requests for naming of new streets designated as collectors or major streets, renaming streets and establishing themes and the naming or renaming of any public building or facility, park or recreational facility shall be referred to the TANC for determination. The TANC may approve the theme or name proposed, approve it with modifications or approve a different name. In reaching its decision, the TANC shall give consideration to the following guidelines: 
(1)  Any street which is a continuation of, or approximately the continuation of, any existing street should be given the same name as the already existing street, in absence of other overriding considerations; 
(2)  Streets and other public facilities should not be given names which would cause confusion with other streets or public facilities; 
(3)  Themes and names which achieve any of the following purposes should be promoted: 
a.  A theme or name which serves to identify the location of the subject by reference to distinct geographic, environmental or development features in the immediate area, 
b.  A theme or name which references the history of the subject site or its immediate area, 
c.  A theme or name which identifies a person(s) or family which made an extraordinary donation of land or funds to promote the construction or improvement of the subject public facility, 
d.  A theme or name which recognizes a person(s) or family who made a distinct, significant contribution to the well-being of the city, including past mayors, council members, board or commission members, officers or employees of the city, but not anyone who currently holds any such position. 
(Ord. 769B §4, 2004: Ord. 557B §3(part), 1991)  
17.30.030 - Public hearings. 
(a)  Prior to any change of name of an existing street, if the renaming would change the street address of one or more occupants of abutting property, the TANC shall hold a public hearing on the proposed street naming. The director of community development shall endeavor to mail or deliver written notice of the renaming to all such occupants at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing, but the failure of such affected occupant to receive such notice shall not invalidate any determination to change the name of the street made pursuant to this subsection. 
(b)  In cases other than those governed by subsection 17.30.030(a), the director of community development, the TANC, the planning commission or the city council may request that TANC hold a public hearing on any request for the naming or renaming of any street or other facility, subject to such notice as they deem appropriate. 
(Ord. 557B §3(part), 1991)  
17.30.040 - Review by council. 
(a)  Following the decision of the TANC under Section 17.30.020, the director of community development shall prepare a report of the TANC's action, summarizing the public input, if any, and the reasons for the TANC's decision. Such report shall be submitted to the city council at its first regular meeting occurring at least ten days after the TANC's action. The city council may affirm the TANC's decision, remand the matter back to the TANC for further consideration, or make its own decision on the matter. 
(b)  Any person who desires to express opposition to the TANC's decision may address the council prior to the council's action under this section or may subject such opposition in writing prior to such time. The director of community development shall provide notification of the date and approximate time of the council's action to any person who requests such notification. 
(Ord. 557B §3(part), 1991)  
17.30.050 - Street names. 
In the case of any subdivision in which the dedication and/or improvement of a new street, designated as collectors or major streets, or extension of a street (but excluding widening of existing streets) is proposed or required, the proposed name of such street, as designated on the tentative map or otherwise, shall be submitted for approval pursuant to Sections 17.30.010 through 17.30.040 of this chapter. The name of the street as designated on the parcel map or final map shall conform to the name(s) approved pursuant to the sections, notwithstanding any other designation on a previously approved tentative map. 
(Ord. 769B §5, 2004: Ord. 557B §3(part), 1991)  
CHAPTER 17.32 - PARK DEDICATION AND FEES 
 
17.32.010 - Authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Section 66477 of the Government Code of the state of California. The park and recreational facilities for which dedication of land and/or payment of the fee is required by this chapter are in accordance with the recreation element of the general plan. 
(Ord. 324B §7-1, 1977)  
17.32.020 - Dedication of land or fee in lieu required. 
As a condition of approval of a final subdivision map or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or both, at the option of the city, for park or recreational purposes at the time and according to the standards and formula contained in this chapter. The city engineer may accept dedications imposed as a condition of approval of a tentative parcel map. 
(Ord. 347B §3, 1978: Ord. 324B §7-2, 1977)  
17.32.030 - Determination whether land or fee is acceptable. 
(a)  Whether the council accepts land dedication or elects to require payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, shall be determined by the consideration of the following: 
(1)  Only the payment of fees shall be required in subdivisions containing 50 parcels or less; 
(2)  The recreation element of the general plan; 
(3)  Topography, geology, access and location of land in the subdivision available for dedication; 
(4)  Size and shape of the subdivision and land available for dedication; 
(5)  The feasibility of dedication; 
(6)  The location of suitable recreational facilities in the unincorporated area of the county; 
(7)  The availability and location of existing community parks. 
(b)  The determination of the council whether land shall be dedicated, or whether a fee shall be charged or a combination thereof, shall be final. 
(Ord. 324B §7-3, 1977)  
17.32.040 - Standards and formula for dedication of land. 
Principles and standards for park and recreational facilities have been designated in the recreation element of the general plan. The subdivider shall dedicate land for a local park sufficient in size and topography to serve the residents of the subdivision. The amount of land to be provided shall be determined pursuant to the following standards and formula: 
Average No. of Persons/Unit       ÷ 	1,000 population 
	park acreage std. 
 
(1)  The park acreage standard is five acres per 1,000 population. 
(2)  The following table of population density is to be followed: 
PARK LAND DEDICATION FORMULA TABLE 
Acreage/D.U. 
Types of Dwellings 	Average 
Density/D.U. 	Density 
Range 	Acreage/D.U. 
5 kAc Std. 
Single-family 	3.6 	3.3 and up 	.0108 
Duplex, Medium-low 	3.1 	3.0—3.2 	.0093 
Cluster, Medium 	2.8 	2.6—2.9 	.0084 
Cluster, Medium-high 	2.3 	2.2—2.5 	.0069 
Apartments 	1.8 	1.5—2.1 	.0054 
 
(Ord. 607B §1, 1993: Ord. 324B §7-4, 1977)  
17.32.050 - Amount of fee in lieu of land. 
Whenever a fee is required to be paid in lieu of land dedication, the subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the value of the land prescribed for dedication in Section 17.32.040 and in an amount determined in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.32.070. 
(Ord. 324B §7-5.1, 1977)  
17.32.060 - Both dedication and fee required when. 
In subdivisions of over 50 lots, the subdivider shall both dedicate land and pay a fee in lieu thereof in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  When only a portion of the land to be subdivided is proposed in the recreational element of the general plan as a site for a local park, such portion shall be dedicated for local park purposes and a fee, computed pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.32.070, shall be paid for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated pursuant to Section 17.32.040. 
(2)  When a major part of a park or recreational site to serve the subdivision has already been acquired by the city and only a small portion of land is needed from the subdivision to render the site adequate in size, such remaining portion shall be dedicated and a fee, computed pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.32.050, shall be paid in an amount equal to the value of the land which would otherwise have been required to be dedicated pursuant to Section 17.32.040. Such fees are to be used for the improvement of the existing park and recreational facility or for the improvement of other local parks and re-creational facilities in the area serving the subdivision. 
(Ord. 324B §7-6, 1977)  
17.32.070 - Valuation of land for fee determination. 
Where a fee is required to be paid in lieu of land dedication, the amount of such fee shall be based upon the fair market value of the amount of land which would other-wise be required to be dedicated pursuant to Section 17.32.040. Fees shall be paid pursuant to the provisions contained in Section 17.32.050. The fair market value shall be determined at the time of filing the tentative map or parcel map. 
(Ord. 324B §7-7, 1977)  
17.32.080 - Subdivisions not within the general plan. 
Where the proposed subdivision lies within an area not then, but to be, included within the city's general plan, the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or both, in accordance with the adopted park and recreational principles and standards of the general plan and in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. 324B §7-8, 1977)  
17.32.090 - Credit for private open space. 
(a)  No credit shall be given for private open space in a subdivision except as provided in this section. Whenever any subdivision of 50 or more lots is to be developed as a condominium project, stock cooperative or community apartment project, and private open space for park and recreation purposes is provided in the proposed subdivision and such space is to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision, partial credit, not to exceed to exceed 50 percent, may be given against the requirement of land dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof if the council, upon the recommendation of the commission and the parks and recreation commission, finds that it is in the public interest to do so and that all the following standards are met: 
(1)  That yards, court areas, setbacks and other open areas required to be maintained by the zoning and building ordinances and regulations shall not be included in the computation of such private open space; 
(2)  That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by recorded written agreement, conveyance or restrictions; 
(3)  That the use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenant, which runs with the land in favor of the future owners of property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the city or its successor; 
(4)  That the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access and location; 
(5)  That facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial accordance with the provisions of the recreational element of the general plan. 
(b)  Before credit is given, the council shall make written findings that the standards of subsection (a) of this section are met. 
(Ord. 324B §7-9, 1977)  
17.32.100 - Use of fees or land. 
The land, fees or combination thereof shall be used only for the purpose of providing park or recreational facilities reasonably related to serving the subdivision by way of the purchase and development of necessary land or, if the council determines that there is sufficient land available to serve the subdivision, for improving such land for park and recreational purposes. 
(Ord. 324B §7-5.2, 1977)  
17.32.110 - Time of determination, payment and dedication. 
At the time of approval of the tentative subdivision map or parcel map, the council shall determine pursuant to Section 17.32.030 the land to be dedicated and/or the fees to be paid by the subdivider. At the time of the filing of the final subdivision map or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate the land and/or pay the fees as previously determined. 
(Ord. 324B §7-10, 1977)  
17.32.120 - Commencement of development. 
At the time of approval of the final map, or parcel map, the council shall specify when development of the park or recreational facilities shall begin. 
(Ord. 324B §7-11, 1977)  
17.32.130 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to industrial subdivisions, nor do they apply to condominium projects which consist of the subdivision of air space in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are added, nor to parcel maps for a subdivision containing less than five parcels and not used for residential purposes. 
(Ord. 324B §7-12, 1977)  
CHAPTER 17.36 - RESERVATIONS 
 
17.36.010 - May be required for map approval. 
As a condition of approval of a map, the subdivider may be required to reserve sites, appropriate in area and location, for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses according to the standards and formula contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. 324B §8-1, 1977)  
17.36.020 - Specific and general plans to govern requirements. 
Where a park, recreational facility, fire station, library or other public use is shown in an adopted specific plan or the community facilities element, recreation and parks element and/or a public building element of the general plan, the subdivider may be required by the council to reserve sites as so determined by the city in accordance with the principles and standards contained in the specific plan or general plan. The reserved area shall be of such size and shape as to permit the balance of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in an orderly and efficient manner. The amount of land to be reserved shall not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible. The reserved area shall conform to the adopted specific plan or general plan and shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as to permit an efficient division of the reserved area in the event it is not acquired within the prescribed period. 
(Ord. 324B §8-2, 1977)  
17.36.030 - Agreement of public agencies to acquire. 
The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall, at the time of approval of the final map or parcel map, enter into a binding agreement to acquire such reserved area within two years after the completion and acceptance of all improvements, unless such period of time is extended by mutual agreement of the public agency and the subdivider. 
(Ord. 324B §8-3, 1977)  
17.36.040 - Price paid by public agencies. 
The purchase price to be paid by the local agency shall be the market value thereof at the time of the filing of such tentative map plus the taxes against such reserved area from the date of the reservation and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of such reserved area, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering such reserved area. 
(Ord. 324B §8-4, 1977)  
17.36.050 - Termination for lack of agreement. 
If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not enter into such a binding agreement, the reservation of such area shall automatically terminate. 
(Ord. 324B §8-5, 1977)  
CHAPTER 17.40 - IMPROVEMENTS 
 
17.40.010 - Construction or installation of necessary improvements required. 
The subdivider shall construct or install all improvements in streets, alleys, pedestrian ways, bike paths, channels, easements and other rights-of-way as are necessary for the general use of residents of the subdivision and to meet local traffic and drainage needs in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 324B §9-1, 1977)  
17.40.020 - Plan preparation, acceptance and fees. 
(a)  Improvement plans shall be prepared by or under the supervision of a registered civil engineer and shall conform to the improvement standards specified in this chapter and any other applicable improvement standards adopted by the council. The plans shall show full details of all improvements required to be installed and of all other improvements proposed to be installed by the subdivider within a street, alley, pedestrian way, easement or other public area or right-of-way. Full details shall include cross-sections, profiles, estimated costs and specifications. The form, layout, scale and other particulars of the plans and the number of copies to be provided shall be in accordance with the requirements of the city engineer. 
(b)  The final map shall not be deemed to be submitted for approval until the preparation of the plans is completed and the plans have been accepted by the city engineer. 
(c)  Standard engineering fees to be charged by the city for the checking of any plans by the city engineer shall be determined by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 324B §9-2, 1977)  
17.40.030 - Plan approval to precede work. 
The improvement plans shall have been approved by the city engineer prior to the commencement of any work or improvement. 
(Ord. 324B §9-3, 1977)  
17.40.040 - Undergrounding of utilities. 
Utility lines, including but not limited to electrical, natural gas, telephone, cable television and street lighting service lines shall be underground. Pertinent equipment such as transformers, terminal boxes and meter cabinets may be placed above ground when in the opinion of the city engineer it is impractical under the circumstances to place them underground. 
(Ord. 324B §9-4, 1977)  
17.40.050 - Temporary improvements. 
In addition to permanent improvements, temporary improvements may be required to be made prior to or concurrent with permanent improvements. 
(Ord. 324B §9-5, 1977)  
17.40.060 - Inspection requirements and fees. 
All improvements shall be constructed under the inspection of the city engineer. The subdivider shall pay the city a fee to defray the city's cost in making such inspections. The rate of the inspection fees shall be determined by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 324B §9-6, 1977)  
17.40.070 - Required improvements. 
The improvements required by this chapter shall consist of all of the following work unless otherwise provided herein, and such other work as may be required as a condition of approval of a tentative map. Construction of the improvements shall begin within a year of the approval of the final map: 
(1)  Construct and install all drains, drainage facilities, channeled improvements and other drainage works; 
(2)  Construct and install concrete curbs, gutters and sidewalks, and street paving; 
(3)  Install or provide for the installation of water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, necessary appurtenances and all laterals required to serve each lot as required by the tentative map; 
(4)  Relocate and provide for the relocation of any underground or overhead utility the relocation of which is caused by development of the subdivision; 
(5)  Install pavement for pedestrian ways and bike ways as required; 
(6)  Provide for the planting of trees in accordance with approved plans and specifications. Tree planting plans must show proposed and existing public improvements and shall include irrigation plans; 
(7)  Install all required street signs; 
(8)  Construct and install street barricades, guard rails, retaining walls and safety devices when required; 
(9)  Construct such acceleration and deceleration lanes and traffic channelization devices as are deemed necessary by the city engineer; 
(10)  Erect such fencing, screening or barriers as may be required for protection from hazardous facilities; 
(11)  Provide sound-reduction barriers as required for implementation of the noise element of the general plan; 
(12)  Install or provide for the installation of street lighting facilities of approved design and illumination in the locations and manner approved by the city engineer; 
(13)  Install or provide for the installation of fire hydrants, gated connections and appurtenances to provide adequate fire protection in accordance with applicable improvement standards of the city. 
(Ord. 413B §2, 1982; Ord. 360B §15, 1979; Ord. 324B §9-7, 1977)  
17.40.080 - Excess size, capacity or number and reimbursement therefor. 
As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the council may require that improvements installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision be of a supplemental size, capacity or number for the benefit of property not within the subdivision and that the improvements be dedicated to the public. If such a condition is imposed, provision for reimbursement to the subdivider in the manner provided by section 66486 of the Subdivision Map Act shall be contained in the subdivision improvement agreement. 
(Ord. 324B §9-8, 1977)  
17.40.090 - Agreement to complete. 
If the required improvements are not satisfactorily completed before a final map or parcel map is filed with the city engineer, the subdivider shall enter into an agreement with the city to make all improvements as may be required upon approval of such map. The improvement agreement to be executed by the subdivider shall be in writing, and shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. 
(Ord. 324B §9-9, 1977)  
17.40.100 - Security for agreement—Forms. 
The improvement agreement referred to in Section 17.40.090 shall be secured by one of the following: 
(1)  A bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties substantially in the form prescribed by the Subdivision Map Act; 
(2)  A deposit either with the city or a responsible escrow agent or trust company selected by the city of cash or negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing deposits of its public moneys; 
(3)  An irrevocable instrument of credit from one or more responsible financial institutions regulated by federal or state government and pledging that the funds are on deposit and guaranteed for payment on demand by the city. 
(Ord. 324B §9-10, 1977)  
17.40.110 - Security for agreement—Amount. 
The improvement security shall be provided in the amount of: 
(1)  One hundred percent of the total estimated cost of the improvement or act to be performed, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the act or agreement; 
(2)  One hundred percent of the total estimated cost of the improvement or act to be performed, securing payment to the contractor, the subcontractor and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment to them for the improvement or the performance of the required act; 
(3)  The amount determined by the council to be necessary to guarantee or warrant the work for a period of one year following completion or acceptance thereof against any defective work or labor done, or defective materials furnished; 
(4)  If the improvement security is other than a bond or bonds furnished by a duly authorized corporate surety, an additional amount shall be included as determined by the council as necessary to cover the cost and reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable attorneys' fees, which may be incurred by the city in enforcing the obligation secured. The improvement security shall also secure the faithful performance of any changes or alterations in the work to the extent that such changes or alterations do not exceed ten percent of the original estimated cost of the improvement. 
(Ord. 324B §§9-11-9-11.4, 1977)  
17.40.120 - Security for agreement—Release. 
Release of the improvement securities mentioned in Section 17.40.110 shall be as provided in the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 324B §9-11.5, 1977)  
17.40.130 - Extent of street improvements. 
Curbs, gutters, sidewalks and street paving shall be installed for the full width of any unimproved public street, within or abutting the subdivision, and any extension thereof as may be reasonably necessary to connect such improvements with any existing improved portion of such street or a connecting street. 
(Ord. 342B §1, 1978: Ord. 324B §9-12, 1977)  
CHAPTER 17.44 - MODIFICATION OF REQUIREMENTS 
 
17.44.010 - Authority of council—Minor changes. 
(a)  The council may grant, conditionally grant or deny requests by a subdivider for modifications to the requirements or standards imposed by this title; provided, however, that no modifications may be made to any requirement expressly imposed by the Subdivision Map Act; and further provided, that nothing herein shall be construed as altering or conflicting with the powers and duties of the council to authorize variances from the regulations and requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
(b)  A minor change in the design of a subdivision which is not violative of the requirements or standards imposed by this title shall not be deemed a modification as the term is used in this title. 
(Ord. 324B §10-1, 1977)  
17.44.020 - Filing of requests. 
Requests for modifications shall be filed with the tentative map. 
(Ord. 324B §10-2, 1977)  
17.44.030 - Application. 
Applications for modifications shall be filed in writing by the subdivider with the department upon a form and in a number of copies required for that purpose as specified by the city engineer. 
(1)  In addition to any other information or material required, the application for modification shall be accompanied by the subdivider's written statement agreeing to an extension of time for action on the tentative map by the commission. The purpose for the extension of time is to permit staff time to examine the merits of the application for modification and to report on the same to the commission. 
(2)  Each application shall state fully the nature and extent of the modifications required, the reasons therefor and the facts relied upon. 
(3)  A nonrefundable fee, to be determined by the council by resolution, shall accompany each application for a modification. The fee shall be in addition to any fee required for processing the tentative map. 
(Ord. 324B §10-3, 1977)  
17.44.040 - Review and comment by city and other agencies. 
The director shall transmit copies of the modification application to the city engineer and members of the subdivision committee for review and comment. The planning director may transmit copies to other public and private agencies or departments affected by the proposed subdivision as he deems appropriate. 
(Ord. 324B §10-4, 1977)  
17.44.050 - Hearing before commission. 
(a)  The commission shall consider the application for modification at the time it considers the tentative map. The commission shall proceed to hear testimony of the subdivider or any witnesses in his behalf, the comments of the subdivision committee, and the testimony of any other interested person desiring to testify. 
(b)  On conclusion of the hearing, the commission shall, at the time it takes action on the tentative map, recommend, on the basis of the evidence and testimony received, whether the modification should be granted, conditionally granted, or denied. 
(Ord. 324B §10-5, 1977)  
17.44.060 - Findings required for recommendation or approval. 
The commission, before recommending any modification, and the council, before approving any modification, shall make all of the following findings: 
(1)  That the property to be divided is of such size or shape, or is affected by such topographic conditions, or that there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property that it is impossible, impractical or undesirable in the particular case to conform to the strict application of this title; 
(2)  That the modification will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare or be injurious to other properties in the vicinity; 
(3)  That the modification is in accord with the intent and purposes of this title and is not inconsistent with the general plan and adopted specific plans of the city. 
(Ord. 324B §10-6, 1977)  
17.44.070 - Waiver of certain improvements. 
The council may waive the requirements for the installation of street paving, curbs, gutters or sidewalks or any of the aforementioned in connection with approval of a parcel map for a subdivision resulting in four or less parcels, provided it makes the following findings: 
(1)  Streets in the general area of the land being subdivided have not been improved to standards required by this title and frontage improvements have not been constructed on streets abutting the subdivision or in the general area of the subdivision; 
(2)  Street grades and/or drainage courses have not been permanently established for the streets abutting the subdivision; 
(3)  Improvement of the streets and construction of frontage improvements prior to establishing street grades, drainage courses or provisions for improvement of remaining portions of the streets and other streets in the general area of the subdivision would not be in the best interests of the city and would impose an unreasonable burden on the property owner; 
(4)  Waiver of the improvements will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with limitations upon other properties in the vicinity. 
(Ord. 324B §10-7, 1977)  
CHAPTER 17.48 - MONUMENTS 
 
17.48.010 - Monumentation requirements generally. 
At the time of making the survey for the final map or parcel map, unless a survey is not required, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with the standards prescribed in section 8771 of the Business and Professions Code so that another engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey. 
(Ord. 347B §4, 1978: Ord. 324B §11-1, 1977)  
17.48.020 - Boundary monuments. 
Monuments shall be set on the exterior boundary of the subdivision at all corners, angle points, beginnings and endings of curves, and at intermediate points as determined by the city engineer to be reasonably necessary to establish the exterior boundaries. The locations of inaccessible points may be established by ties and shall be so noted on the final or parcel map. At least one extension boundary line shall be adequately monumented or referenced prior to recordation of the final map or parcel map. 
(Ord. 324B §11-2, 1977)  
17.48.030 - Interior monuments. 
Interior monuments shall be set at all block and lot corners and angle points and at the beginnings and ends of curves, and along street and alley centerlines at the beginnings and ends of curves, at points of intersection with centerlines of other existing and proposed streets and alleys, and at the points of intersection with the exterior boundary lines. Interior property line and centerline monuments and ties may be set after the final map or parcel map is recorded. 
(Ord. 324B §11-3, 1977)  
17.48.040 - Deferral of setting until after recordation. 
(a)  In the event any or all of the required monuments are to be set after recordation of the final map or parcel map, the engineer or surveyor certificate shall specify the date established by the city engineer by which the monuments will be set. The subdivider shall, prior to the submission of such map to the city engineer for filing, furnish to the city engineer a cash deposit in an amount equal to the estimated cost of setting such deferred monuments. 
(b)  In the event the deferred monuments are not set within the period of time specified, or within the approved extended period of time, and provided that all improvement work has been completed, the city engineer shall give written notice directing the engineer or surveyor of record to set such monuments within 60 days. 
(c)  If the engineer or surveyor of record fails to set the monuments within the time specified, the city engineer shall take action to have a substitute engineer or surveyor set the monuments required. The city engineer shall pay the substitute engineer or surveyor from the cash deposit from the subdivider. 
(Ord. 324B §11-4, 1977)  
17.48.050 - Type, positioning and marks. 
All monuments set in the course of the survey as required by this title shall be of the type specified by the city engineer and shall be set to the depth and in the manner prescribed therefor. Further, all monuments shall be visibly marked or tagged as required by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 324B §11-5, 1977)  
17.48.060 - Survey data to be shown on maps. 
The city engineer shall specify the survey data and information to be shown on each final map or parcel map. 
(Ord. 324B §11-6, 1977)  
CHAPTER 17.52 - CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE 
 
17.52.010 - Application. 
Any person owning real property within the city or a vendee of such person pursuant to a contract of sale of such real property may apply for the issuance of a certificate of compliance stating that such real property or any division thereof complies with the provisions of this ordinance and the Subdivision Map Act. Such application shall be filed with the planning director upon such forms and accompanied by such information as may be prescribed by the planning director. The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee as determined by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 347B §7, 1978: Ord. 324B §13-1, 1977)  
17.52.020 - Hearing before commission—Issuance and filing. 
(a)  Within 45 days after the filing of the request, unless such time is extended by agreement with the property owner, the commission shall conduct a hearing to determine whether a certificate of compliance shall be issued. 
(b)  If the commission determines that the property or division thereof complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title, it shall cause a certificate of compliance to be filed for record with the county recorder. 
(Ord. 324B §13-2, 1977)  
17.52.030 - Conditional certificate of compliance. 
If the commission determines that the property or division thereof does not comply with the Subdivision Map Act or local ordinances applicable to the property at the time the applicant acquired his interest therein, it may recommend to the council the approval of a conditional certificate of compliance. The council may impose such conditions as would have been applicable at the time the applicant acquired title and which had been authorized at such time by the Subdivision Map Act or local ordinances. The council shall cause the certificate of compliance to be recorded. 
(1)  Such certificate shall serve as notice to the property owner or vendee who has applied for the certificate pursuant to this section, a grantee of the property owner, or any subsequent transferee or assignee of the property that the fulfillment and implementation of such conditions shall be required prior to subsequent issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for development of the property. 
(b)  Compliance with such conditions shall not be required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval for development of such property is issued by the city. 
(Ord. 347B §8, 1978: Ord. 324B §13-3, 1977)  
17.52.040 - Land in violation—Denial of development approval. 
No officer, department or agency of the city shall issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to develop any real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or of the provisions of ordinances enacted pursuant thereto if the council finds that the development of such real property is contrary to the public health and safety. The authority to deny such a permit or such approval shall apply whether the applicant therefor was the owner of record at the time of such violation or whether the applicant therefor is either the current owner of record or a vendee of the current owner of the real property with, or without, actual or constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of the acquisition of his interest in such property. 
(Ord. 347B §9, 1978: Ord. 324B §13-4(part), 1977)  
17.52.050 - Land in violation—Grant of conditional certificate. 
The council may grant a conditional certificate of compliance for a division of land which resulted from a violation of the Subdivision Map Act or local ordinance enacted pursuant thereto, if it finds that such approval is not contrary to the public health or safety. It may impose those conditions that would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the current owner of record acquired the property, and which had been established at such time by the Subdivision Map Act or local ordinance enacted pursuant thereto, except that if a conditional certificate of compliance has been filed for record under the provisions of subdivision (b) of section 66499.35 of the Subdivision Map Act, only such conditions stipulated in that certificate shall be applicable. 
(Ord. 324B §13-4 (part), 1977)  
CHAPTER 17.56 - REVERSION TO ACREAGE 
 
17.56.010 - Petition filing, form and contents. 
Petitions for reversion to acreage as authorized by the Subdivision Map Act shall be filed with the planning director. The petition shall be in a form prescribed by the city engineer and shall contain that information and data specified in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of section 66499.13 of the Subdivision Map Act and such other pertinent information as the city engineer deems reasonably necessary to permit adequate review and consideration of the requested action. 
(Ord. 324B §14-1, 1977)  
17.56.020 - Fee. 
The petition for reversion to acreage shall be accompanied by a fee to be determined by the council by resolution. 
(Ord. 324B §14-2, 1977)  
17.56.030 - Review and report by commission. 
A petition for reversion to acreage shall be reviewed by the commission. The procedure for review of a tentative map shall be applicable to the review of a proposed reversion to acreage. No public hearing shall be required. The commission shall submit a written report to the council. 
(Ord. 324B §14-3, 1977)  
17.56.040 - Hearing before council. 
Upon receipt of the report of the commission, the council shall set a hearing on the petition. Notice of the hearing shall be given in the manner provided in Section 17.16.180. Upon conclusion of the hearing, final action shall be taken by the council on the proposed final map. 
(Ord. 324B §14-4, 1977)  
17.56.050 - Findings required for approval—Conditions. 
The council shall approve a reversion to acreage only if it determines and makes the findings required by section 66499.16 of the Government Code. In addition to the findings stated above, the council shall impose appropriate conditions as provided by section 66499.17 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 324B §14-5, 1977)  
17.56.060 - Return of fees and deposits—Release of security. 
Upon filing of the final map for reversion to acreage with the county recorder, any fees and deposits to be returned to the subdivider and any improvement securities to be released by the city shall be processed as provided in the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 324B §14-6, 1977)  
17.56.070 - Filing for recordation and effect thereof. 
Upon approval by the council, the final map shall be delivered to the county recorder. Reversion shall be effective on the date the final map is filed for record by the county recorder. Upon filing, all prior dedications and offers of dedication not shown on the final map for reversion shall be of no further force and effect. 
(Ord. 324B §14-7, 1977)  
CHAPTER 17.60 - MERGER 
 
17.60.010 - When permitted. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, two or more contiguous parcels or lots which have been subdivided under the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and any applicable local ordinance enacted pursuant thereto, or which were not subject thereto at the time of their creation, shall not merge by virtue of the fact that such lots or parcels are held by the same owner, unless any one of such lots or parcels does not conform to standards of minimum lot size and at least one of such contiguous parcels or lots is not developed with a building for which a lawful permit has been issued, or which was built prior to the time such permits were required, in which case such parcels shall be merged. 
(Ord. 347B §10, 1978: Ord. 324B §15-1, 1977)  
17.60.020 - Notice to affected owners—Hearing. 
Whenever the planning director has knowledge that real property has merged pursuant to Section 17.60.010, he shall cause written notice to be given to the owner or owners of the parcels or lots to be affected by the merger. The notice shall advise the owner or owners of the intention to record a notice of merger and specify the time, date and place of a hearing by the commission at which the owners may present evidence why such notice shall not be recorded. The notice shall be given not less than 30 days prior to the hearing by the commission. The commission shall determine whether a notice of merger shall be recorded. 
(Ord. 324B §15-2, 1977)  
17.60.030 - Filing for record. 
If the commission determines that real property has merged as specified by section 66424.2 of the Government Code, the planning director shall cause to be filed for record with the county recorder a notice of such merger, specifying the names of the record owners and particularly describing the real property. 
(Ord. 324B §15-3, 1977)  
17.60.040 - Merger and resubdivision. 
Subdivided lands may be merged and resubdivided without reverting to acreage by complying with all applicable requirements for the subdivision of land of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. 
(1)  Any unused fees or deposits previously made pertaining to the property shall be credited pro rata towards any requirements for the same purposes which are applicable at the time of resubdivision. 
(2)  Any streets or easements to be left in effect after the resubdivision shall be delineated on the map. All streets and easements not so delineated shall be abandoned upon the filing of the map. 
(3)  The filing of the final map or parcel map with the county recorder shall constitute legal merger and resubdivision of the land. 
(Ord. 347B §11, 1978: Ord. 324B §15-4, 1977)  
CHAPTER 17.64 - APPEALS 
 
17.64.010 - Who may appeal—Filing—Fee. 
The subdivider or any interested person affected by a decision of the commission may appeal to the council. Such appeals shall be filed, heard and decided within the time specified in section 66452.5 of the Government Code. The appeal shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the amount determined by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 405B §10, 1982: Ord. 324B §16-1(part), 1977)  
17.64.020 - Hearing—Scheduling—Notice. 
At its next regular meeting after receipt of the appeal by the city clerk, the council shall set the matter for hearing. The council shall give notice of hearing of the appeal as provided by Section 17.16.180. 
(Ord. 324B §16-1.1, 1977)  
17.64.030 - Hearing—Conduct—Decision of council. 
A hearing shall be held within 30 days after the date of the filing of the appeal. The council may deny or sustain the appeal, and sustain, reject or modify the decision of the commission, in whole or in part, or it may return the matter to the commission for further consideration and report to the council. The council may hear the testimony of any interested person and may consider any relevant evidence whether or not the same was considered by the commission. The city clerk shall forward to the appellant and the commission a written report of the decision of the council on the appeal. 
(Ord. 324B §16-1.2, 1977)  
CHAPTER 17.68 - MAP AMENDMENTS AND CORRECTIONS 
 
17.68.010 - Correction of errors or omissions. 
A certificate of correction or an amending map for the purposes set forth in section 66469 of the Government Code may be approved by the city engineer. A copy of the amending map or certificate of correction shall be filed with the planning director. 
(Ord. 324B §17-1, 1977)  
17.68.020 - Modification. 
A recorded final map or parcel map may be modified by a certificate of correction or an amending map upon approval of the city council. 
(1)  Applications for modification of a recorded final map or parcel map shall be filed, processed and considered at a noticed public hearing in the same manner as tentative maps, as set forth in Sections 17.16.060 through 17.16.180, inclusive. 
(2)  The city council shall not approve the requested modification unless the council finds that these are changes in circumstances of the recorded map no longer appropriate or necessary; that the modifications do not impose any additional burden on the present fee owner of the property; that the modification do not alter any right, title or interest in the real property reflected on the recorded maps; and that the map as modified does not result in any of the conditions set forth in section 66474 of the Government Code. In considering a request to modify a recorded final map or parcel map, the city council shall confine the hearing to consideration of and action on the proposed modification only. 
(Ord. 405B §11, 1982: Ord. 324B §17-3, 1977)  
CHAPTER 17.72 - ENFORCEMENT 
 
17.72.010 - Duty to enforce—Authority to file suit. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this title, the city engineer is directed to enforce these regulations and the Subdivision Map Act for all subdivisions within the city. 
(b)  The city attorney, on the approval of the council, shall be authorized on behalf of the city to file a suit in the Superior Court or other court of competent jurisdiction to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision or sale, lease or financing in violation of the Subdivision Map Act, this title, or the conditions and terms of approval granted pursuant to this title. 
(Ord. 324B §12-1, 1977)  
17.72.020 - Notice of violation—Filing—Investigation by city engineer. 
(a)  Any officer or employee of the city who has knowledge that real property has been divided in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this title shall immediately notify the city engineer. Upon receipt of the information, the city engineer shall cause to be filed for record with the county recorder a notice of intention to record a notice of violation. 
(b)  The city engineer shall investigate to determine whether the Subdivision Map Act and this title have been violated as provided in this chapter. He shall submit his written report and recommendation to the council. 
(Ord. 347B §5, 1978: Ord. 324B §12-2(part), 1977)  
17.72.030 - Notice of violation—Contents—Notice to property owner. 
The notice of intention to record a notice of violation shall describe the real property in detail, name the owner thereof, describe the violation, and state that an opportunity will be given the owner to present evidence. Upon recording, a copy of this notice shall be mailed to the owner of the property. 
(Ord. 347B §6, 1978: Ord. 324B §12-2.1, 1977)  
17.72.040 - Permits banned pending decision. 
No permits for use, construction or other purpose shall be issued for the real property pending a decision on the matter. 
(Ord. 324B §12-3.2, 1977)  
17.72.050 - Hearing—Council to hold. 
The council shall set a hearing on the question of whether or not there has been a division of land in violation of this title or the Subdivision Map Act and whether a final notice of violation shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
(Ord. 324B §12-3(part), 1977)  
17.72.060 - Hearing—Notice. 
At least three days prior to the hearing, notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the property owner. The notice shall contain a description and location of the property involved, a description of the violations, and statements that a finding of violation may result in the filing of a final notice of violation which will be constructive notice of such violation to subsequent purchasers of the property, and that a finding or violation may result in the institution of civil and criminal actions. The notice shall specify the time, date and place of the hearing and advise the property owner that he may present evidence why a final notice of violation should not be recorded. 
(Ord. 324B §12-3.1, 1977)  
17.72.070 - Hearing—Conduct. 
The council shall conduct a hearing to determine whether the Subdivision Map Act and applicable ordinances adopted pursuant thereto have been violated, after first referring the matter to the commission. The council shall consider the report of the city engineer, the commission, and other city officers or officials, and evidence submitted by the property owner and other interested persons. Upon completion of the hearing the council shall determine whether the property has been divided in violation of the Subdivision Map Act and applicable local ordinances adopted pursuant thereto and, if so, whether development of the property would be contrary to the public health and safety. 
(Ord. 324B §12-3.3(part), 1977)  
17.72.080 - Decision of council. 
(a)  If the council determines that no violation of this title or the Subdivision Map Act has occurred, it shall cause to be filed with the county recorder a release of the tentative notice of violation, and shall cause a certificate of compliance to be filed. 
(b)  If the council determines that the property has been divided in violation of this title or the Subdivision Map Act, but that the development of the property would not be contrary to the public health and safety, it may grant a conditional certificate of compliance, or it may cause a final notice of violation to be recorded. 
(c)  If the council determines that the property has been divided in violation of this title and of the Subdivision Map Act, and that the development of the property will be contrary to the public health or safety, it shall cause a final notice of violation to be recorded. 
(Ord. 324B §12-3.3(part), 1977)  
17.72.090 - Final notice of violation. 
A final notice of violation shall specify the findings of the council. Upon recordation of the notice of violation, no agency or department of the city shall issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to develop the property until such time as a certificate of compliance has been issued for the property. 
(Ord. 324B §12-3.3(part), 1977)  
17.72.100 - Misdemeanor. 
Any violation of this title constitutes a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided by law. Each day a violation of this title continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. 324B §12-4, 1977)  
Title 18 - ZONING  
DIVISION I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
CHAPTER 18.02 - INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS 
 
18.02.010 - Title of ordinance for citation. 
The ordinance codified in this title shall be known as, and may be cited and referred to as, the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Lincoln, California." 
(Ord. 357B §1.01.000, 1979)  
18.02.020 - Applicability. 
This title applies to the incorporated area of the city. 
(Ord. 357B §1.01.010, 1979)  
18.02.030 - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this title is to: 
(1)  Regulate the use of buildings, structures and land between industry, business, residential use, and open space including agriculture, recreation, enjoyment of scenic beauty and the use of natural resources; 
(2)  Regulate signs and billboards; 
(3)  Regulate the location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and structures; 
(4)  Regulate the size and use of lots, yards, courts and other open spaces; 
(5)  Regulate the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or structure; 
(6)  Regulate the intensity of land use; 
(7)  Establish requirements for off-street parking and loading; 
(8)  Establish and maintain building setback lines; 
(9)  Permit the creation of civic districts around civic centers, publicly owned parks, buildings or grounds, and establish the required regulations; 
(10)  Divide the city into zoning districts of such number, shape and area as may be deemed best suited to carry out the purposes of this title; 
(11)  Provide for the enforcement of the regulations of this title. 
(b)  The purposes set forth in subsection (a) of this section are deemed necessary in order to encourage the most appropriate use of land; to conserve, protect and stabilize the value of property; to provide adequate open spaces for light and air; to prevent undue concentrations of population; to lessen congestion on the streets; to provide adequate provisions for community utilities; and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare. It is a further purpose of this title to implement and supplement the general plan of the city. 
(Ord. 357B §1.01.020, 1979)  
18.02.040 - Reference includes amendments or additions. 
Whenever reference is made to any portion of this title, the reference applies to the ordinance codified in this title as adopted and also to any amendments or additions made after adoption. 
(Ord. 357B §1.01.030, 1979)  
18.02.050 - Minimal and uniform nature of regulations. 
The regulations set forth in this title within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall be uniform for each class or kind of building, structure or use of land throughout the district. 
(Ord. 357B §1.01.040, 1979)  
18.02.060 - Deadline for actions to annul or set aside. 
Except as otherwise provided by law, any action by any person to set aside or annul any decision by any official of the city, the city planning commission or the city council pursuant to this title shall be void unless commenced within 60 days of the final determination of the official, planning commission or city council. 
(Ord. 357B §1.01.050, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.04 - INTERPRETATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— For provisions on uncertain district boundaries, see Ch. 18.08 of this code. 
 
18.04.010 - Jurisdiction of planning commission—Administrative advice. 
The planning commission shall decide any question involving the interpretation or application of any provision of this title, subject to appeal of such decision to the city council. The planning commission shall seek the advice of the city attorney and may seek the advice of any city department or officer before deciding on any question of interpretation. 
(Ord. 357B §2.03.000(part), 1979)  
18.04.020 - Listings imply exclusion. 
Except as otherwise provided in this title, the listing of uses, buildings or structures which are expressly permitted in a particular district implies the exclusion of all other uses, buildings or structures in the district. 
(Ord. 357B §2.03.000(part), 1979)  
18.04.030 - Requirements to be held minimal. 
In interpreting and applying any provisions of this title, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort or general welfare. 
(Ord. 357B §2.03.010(part), 1979)  
18.04.040 - Effect on easements, covenants and other agreements—Conflicting provisions. 
It is not intended by this title to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties. However, where this title imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises, or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than are required by other ordinances, rules or regulations, or by easements, covenants or agreements, the regulations of this title shall govern. In the event of a difference or conflict between the text of this title and the official zoning maps contained in the ordinance codified in this title, the designations on the official zoning maps shall govern. 
(Ord. 357B §2.03.010(part), 1979)  
18.04.050. - Authority for interpretations. 
The community development director (CDD) shall have the authority to issue administrative interpretations of the provisions of this title to resolve ambiguities. 
(1)  Record. A record of Interpretations shall be filed with the community development department. 
(2)  Definition. Whenever the CDD determines that the applicability or meaning of any of the standards of this Title are ambiguous, the CDD may issue an official interpretation. Official interpretations shall be in writing, and shall cite the provisions being interpreted, together with an explanation of their meaning or applicability in the particular or general circumstances that caused the need for interpretation. Any provision of this title that is determined by the CDD to be ambiguous shall be clarified by amendment as soon as is practical. 
(3)  Appeal. Interpretation by the CDD may be appealed to the planning commission pursuant to Section 18.94. 
( Ord. No. 964B, § 1, 5-8-2018 )  
DIVISION II. - DISTRICTS  
CHAPTER 18.06 - ESTABLISHMENT 
 
18.06.010 - Zoning districts listed. 
The zoning districts are as follows: 
R-1 single-family residential district; 
R-2 duplex residential district; 
R-3 multiple residential district; 
R-E residential estate district; 
B-P business and professional district; 
C commercial district; 
H-C highway commercial district; 
L-I light industrial district; 
I industrial district; 
A-D agricultural district; 
O-S open space district; 
PUB public uses; 
PD planned development district; and 
P parks. 
(Ord. 357B §2.01.000, 1979; Ord. No. 929B , § 1, 12-13-2016)  
18.06.020 - Open-space districts established. 
The city council creates, as part of this title, this open-space zoning section. It is the express intent of the city council in so doing to comply with the requirements of Article 4, Chapter 4, Title 7 of the Government Code of California (Sections 65910 through 65912) added by Chapter 1590 of the 1970 Statutes. The following chapters and districts are designated the open-space districts for the city: 
(1)  Chapter 18.18, R-E residential estate district; 
(2)  Chapter 18.30, O-S open space district; 
(3)  Chapter 18.32, PD planned development district. The planned development district shall be construed to be an open-space district if it is combined with either one, or both, of the districts specified in subsections (1) and (2) of this section. 
(Ord. 357B §3.01.020, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.08 - BOUNDARIES AND OFFICIAL MAPS 
 
18.08.010 - Maps—Contents—Adoption. 
The boundaries of the zoning districts listed in Section 18.06.010 are shown on the official zoning map for the city. The maps, all notations, references and other information contained thereon are declared to be part of this title. Each official map shall be identified by the section number of this chapter incorporating the map as part of this title. 
(Ord. 357B §2.02.000, 1979)  
18.08.020 - Maps—Where filed—Final authority. 
The official zoning maps on file in the office of the city clerk shall be the final authority of the current zoning status of land, water areas, buildings and other structures within the city. 
(Ord. 357B §2.02.010, 1979)  
18.08.030 - Maps—Identification. 
This section number is reserved for the identification of the official zoning maps and will be printed on the maps for clarification. 
(Ord. 357B §2.02.020, 1979)  
18.08.040 - Uncertain boundaries of districts. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the official zoning maps, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  District boundaries are either streets or alleys unless otherwise shown, and where the designations of the map indicating the various districts are approximately bounded by street or alley lines, the street or alley shall be construed to be the boundary of such district. 
(2)  Where doubt exists as to the location of a district boundary in the interior of a block, the boundary shall be the nearest interior lot line existing as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or on the date when the property may have been subsequently rezoned. 
(3)  If a district boundary line divides or splits a lot, the lot shall be deemed to be included within the district which is the more restrictive. 
(Ord. 357B §2.03.020, 1979)  
DIVISION III. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS  
CHAPTER 18.10 - SUITABILITY AND COMPLIANCE 
 
18.10.010 - Suitability considered. 
It is declared that the city council has given due and special consideration to the suitability of each and every district designated for the particular uses enumerated, the area requirements, densities and the appropriateness of the grouping and arrangement of the uses in relation to the general plan for the city. 
(Ord. 357B §3.01.000, 1979)  
18.10.020 - Compliance generally. 
No building, structure, vehicle, sign or area in the city shall be used, nor shall any building, structure, sign or vehicle be erected, altered, moved, enlarged or stored in the city except as specifically provided in this title and subject to all the regulations and conditions enumerated in this title. No area shall be used in any manner so as to create problems inimical to the public health, safety or general welfare, or so as to have a detrimental effect on the use or value of property in the vicinity or within the city as a whole. 
(Ord. 357B §3.01.010, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.12 - R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
 
18.12.010 - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted in the R-1 district are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings; 
(2)  Accessory buildings as regulated by Section 18.36.050; 
(3)  Home occupations as regulated by Chapter 18.62; 
(4)  Accessory uses are regulated by Section 18.36.060; 
(5)  Transitional housing, defined in Health and Safety Code section 50675.2(h) as: buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months; 
(6)  Supportive housing, defined in Health and Safety Code section 50675.14(b)(2) as: housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to onsite or off-site services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community; 
(7)  Manufactured Home. In accordance with Government Code section 65852.3 (Local Manufactured Homes Zoning); 
(8)  Signs as permitted by Title 16. 
(Ord. 357B §3.02.000, 1979; Ord. 465B §1, 1984; Ord. No. 856B, § 3, 5-24-2011; Ord. No. 910B , § 2, 1-12-2016; Ord. No. 964B, § 3, 5-8-2018 )  
18.12.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-1 district subject to issuance of a conditional use permit by the planning commission: 
(1)  Public utility buildings and uses, excluding equipment yard, warehouses or repair shops; 
(2)  Churches, schools, parks and playgrounds; 
(3)  Other uses which, in the opinion of the planning commission, are of a similar nature. 
(Ord. 357B §3.02.010, 1979)  
18.12.025 - Accessory uses. 
Solar Energy System. A solar energy system as defined in Section 15.05.020A. shall be permitted if the solar energy system meets all of the following conditions: 
(1)  The solar energy system shall be designed for the purpose of reducing on-site energy needs and shall be accessory to and incorporated into the development of an authorized use of the property. 
(2)  The solar energy system shall only be permitted on the roof of a permitted principle structure or in the rear and side yard of the lot adjacent to a permitted structure. 
(3)  The solar energy system shall conform to all set back requirements for the district in which the solar energy systems is located, unless the community development director or his designee identifies a safety concern requiring placement within the setback. 
(4)  The solar energy system shall be designed to absorb light, have minimal glint and glare and to scatter the reflected light. 
(Ord. No. 923B , § 1, 9-27-2016)  
18.12.030 - Height regulations. 
(a)  The maximum height for principal buildings and structures in the R-1 district shall be 35 feet. 
(b)  The maximum height for accessory buildings and structures in the R-1 district shall be 16 feet. 
(Ord. 357B §3.02.020, 1977)  
18.12.040 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the R-1 district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Corner lot: 6,000 square feet; 
(2)  Interior lot: 6,000 square feet. 
(Ord. 357B § 3.02.030, 1979)  
18.12.050 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all structures and buildings in the R-1 district shall not exceed 60 percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. 748B § 1, 2003: Ord. 357B § 3.02.040, 1979)  
18.12.060 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the R-1 district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Corner lot: 50 feet; 
(2)  Interior lot: 50 feet. 
(Ord. 357B § 3.02.050, 1979)  
18.12.070 - Yards. 
No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged in the R-1 district after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter unless the following yards are provided and maintained: 
(1)  Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 20 feet in depth. 
(2)  Rear Yard. For other than accessory buildings, there shall be a rear yard of not less than ten feet when structures are not adjacent to an alley. When adjacent to an alley, there shall be a rear yard of not less than five feet except as provided for in subsection 18.36.050(b). In addition, for all buildings and structures not less than 1,000 square feet shall remain uncovered on the rear one-third of each lot. 
The rear yard setback for accessory buildings of 255 square feet in area or less: None required when the lot is adjacent to an alley, provided that for each one foot of rear yard setback provided an additional five square feet of building area is permitted up to a maximum of 15 additional square feet of building area; when not adjacent to an alley there shall be a rear yard setback of not less than five feet. 
(3)  Side Yard. There shall be a side yard of not less than five feet. 
(4)  Side Street Yard. On corner lots, there shall be a side street yard of not less than ten feet. 
(5)  Yards on Rights-of-Way in General Plan. Front, side, side street or rear yards required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be determined as provided in Section 18.42.020. 
(Ord. 799B § 2, 2006; Ord. 498B § 2, 1987; Ord. 456 § 1, 1984; Ord. 357B § 3.02.060, 1979)  
18.12.080 - Development standards for conditional uses. 
Development standards for conditional uses in the R-1 district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet; 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 100 feet; 
(3)  Minimum front-yard depth: 25 feet; 
(4)  Minimum rear-yard depth: 20 feet; 
(5)  Maximum height of building or structure: 45 feet. 
(Ord. 357B § 3.02.070, 1979)  
18.12.090 - Minimum area of single-family residences. 
(a)  The minimum area for each single-family residence in the R-1 district shall be 1,200 square feet, excluding the garage or carport. 
(b)  This section shall apply only to single-family residences built on lands which have been subdivided pursuant to a tentative or parcel map which has been approved by the city council on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. 
(Ord. 362B § 1, 1979: Ord. 357B § 3.02.080, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.14 - R-2 DUPLEX RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
 
18.14.010 - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted in the R-2 district are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings, subject to the regulations in Chapter 18.12; 
(2)  Duplexes; 
(3)  Triplexes; 
(4)  Accessory buildings as regulated by Section 18.36.050; 
(5)  Accessory uses are regulated by Section 18.36.060; 
(6)  Transitional housing, defined in Health and Safety Code section 50675.2(h) as: buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months; 
(7)  Supportive housing, defined in Health and Safety Code section 50675.14(b)(2) as: housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to on-site or off-site services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community; 
(8)  Signs as permitted by Title 16. 
(Ord. 357B §3.03.000, 1979; Ord. No. 856B, § 4, 5-24-2011; Ord. No. 910B , § 2, 1-12-2016)  
18.14.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-2 district subject to issuance of a conditional use permit by the planning commission: 
(1)  Churches, schools, parks and playgrounds; 
(2)  Public utility buildings and uses, excluding equipment yards, warehouses or repair shops; 
(3)  Other uses of a similar nature. 
(Ord. 357B §3.03.010, 1979)  
18.14.025 - Accessory uses. 
Solar Energy System. A solar energy system as defined in Section 15.05.020A. shall be permitted if the solar energy system meets all of the following conditions: 
(1)  The solar energy system shall be designed for the purpose of reducing on-site energy needs and shall be accessory to and incorporated into the development of an authorized use of the property. 
(2)  The solar energy system shall only be permitted on the roof of a permitted principle structure or in the rear and side yard of the lot adjacent to a permitted structure. 
(3)  The solar energy system shall conform to all set back requirements for the district in which the solar energy system is located, unless the community development director or his designee identifies a safety concern requiring placement within the setback. 
(4)  The solar energy system shall be designed to absorb light, have minimal glint and glare and to scatter the reflected light. 
(Ord. No. 923B , § 2, 9-27-2016)  
18.14.030 - Height regulations. 
(a)  The maximum height for principal buildings and structures in the R-2 district shall be 35 feet. 
(b)  The maximum height for accessory buildings or structures in the R-2 district shall be 16 feet. 
(Ord. 357B §3.03.020, 1979)  
18.14.040 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the R-2 district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Corner lot: 6,500 square feet; 
(2)  Interior lot: 6,500 square feet. 
(Ord. 357B §3.03.030, 1979)  
18.14.050 - Lot area per duplex or triplex. 
The minimum lot area in the R-2 district for a two-family unit shall be 6,500 square feet, and 7,500 square feet for a three-family unit. 
(Ord. 357B §3.03.040, 1979)  
18.14.060 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all structures and buildings in the R-2 district shall not exceed 50 percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. 357B §3.03.050, 1979)  
18.14.070 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the R-2 district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Corner lot: 50 feet; 
(2)  Interior lot: 50 feet. 
(Ord. 357B §3.03.060, 1979)  
18.14.080 - Yards. 
No building or structure in the R-2 district shall, after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained: 
(1)  Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet in depth. 
(2)  Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard for each lot of not less than ten feet. In addition, not less than 1,000 square feet shall remain uncovered on the rear one-third of each lot. 
(3)  Side Yard. There shall be a side yard of not less than five feet. 
(4)  Courtyard. There shall be a minimum distance between buildings and between buildings and accessory buildings and uses of not less than 15 feet. 
(5)  Side Street Yard. On corner lots, there shall be a side street yard of not less than ten feet. 
(6)  Yards on Rights-of-way in General Plan. Front, side, side street or rear yards required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be determined as provided in Section 18.42.020. 
(Ord. 357B §3.03.070, 1979)  
18.14.090 - Development standards for conditional uses. 
Development standards for conditional uses in the R-2 district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet; 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 100 feet; 
(3)  Minimum front-yard depth: 25 feet; 
(4)  Minimum rear-yard depth: 20 feet; 
(5)  Maximum height of a building or structure: 45 feet. 
(Ord. 357B §3.03.080, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.16 - R-3 MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
 
18.16.010 - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted in the R-3 district are as follows: 
(1)  Apartments; 
(2)  Single-family dwellings, subject to the regulations of Chapter 18.12, duplexes and triplexes, subject to the regulations in Chapter 18.14; 
(3)  Accessory buildings, subject to regulations in Section 18.36.050; 
(4)  Accessory uses, subject to regulations in Section 18.36.060; 
(5)  Transitional housing, defined as buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months; 
(6)  Supportive housing, defined as housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to on-site or off-site services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community; 
(7)  Mobile home park, manufactured housing community, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code section 18210.7 and section 18214, any area or tract of land where two or more lots are rented or leased, held out for rent or lease, or were formerly held out for rent or lease and later converted to a subdivision, cooperative, condominium, or other form of resident ownership, to accommodate manufactured homes, mobile homes, or recreational vehicles used for human habitation; 
(8)  Boardinghouses, defined as: a structure in a residential zone wherein three or more individual rooms or suites of rooms with shared facilities such as kitchen, laundry, and bathrooms are rented or leased by the week, month, or year on a separate basis and one or more meals per day are provided to persons residing therein for compensation; 
(9)  Group home, defined as: a facility which provides 24-hour care and supervision to children, provides services specified by the state of California Health and Human Service Agency, Department of Social Services to a specific client group, and maintains a structured environment, with such services provided at least in part by staff employed by the licensee. The care and supervision provided by a group home shall be nonmedical except as permitted by Welfare and Institutions Code section 17736(b). Since small family and foster family homes, by definition, care for six or fewer children only, any facility providing 24-hour care for seven or more children must be licensed as a group home; 
(10)  Signs as permitted by Title 16. 
(Ord. 357B § 3.04.000, 1979; Ord. 803B § 1, 2006; Ord. 856B, § 5, 5-24-2011; Ord. No. 880B, § 3, 3-26-2013; Ord. No. 910B , § 2, 1-12-2016)  
18.16.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-3 district subject to issuance of a conditional use permit by the planning commission: 
(1)  Lodges; 
(2)  Rest homes; 
(3)  Clubhouses; 
(4)  Churches, schools, parks, and playgrounds; 
(5)  Public building (libraries, utilities, offices, fire stations, police stations, civic buildings, post offices and substations); 
(6)  Townhouses, rowhouses, and condominiums; 
(7)  Single room occupancy (SRO); 
(8)  Other uses which, in the opinion of the planning commission, are of a similar nature to uses (1) through (7) above. 
(Ord. No. 880B, § 4, 3-26-2013; Ord. 851B, § 2, 1-11-2011; Ord. 795B § 1, 2005: Ord. 778B § 2, 2004: Ord. 357B § 3.04.010, 1979)  
18.16.025 - Accessory uses. 
Solar Energy System. A solar energy system as defined in section 15.05.020A. shall be permitted if the solar energy system meets all of the following conditions: 
(1)  The solar energy system shall be designed for the purpose of reducing on-site energy needs and shall be accessory to and incorporated into the development of an authorized use of the property. 
(2)  The solar energy system shall only be permitted on the roof of a permitted principle structure or in the rear and side yard of the lot adjacent to a permitted structure. 
(3)  The solar energy system shall conform to all set back requirements for the district in which the solar energy system is located unless, the community development director or his designee identifies a safety concern requiring placement within the setback. 
(4)  The solar energy system shall be designed to absorb light, have minimal glint and glare and to scatter the reflected light. 
(Ord. No. 923B , § 3, 9-27-2016)  
18.16.030 - Height regulations. 
(a)  The maximum height for principal buildings and structures in the R-3 district shall be 35 feet; provided, that an additional one foot in height may be added, to a maximum height of 50 feet, for each additional foot of side yard added to the minimum side yard requirement. 
(b)  The maximum height for accessory buildings or structures in the R-3 district shall be 16 feet. 
(Ord. 357B § 3.04.020, 1979)  
18.16.040 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the R-3 district shall be 8,500 square feet; 
(Ord. 357B § 3.04.030)
18.16.060 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all structures and buildings in the R-3 district shall not exceed 60 percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. 357B § 3.04.050, 1979)  
18.16.050 - There will be an additional 1,000 square feet in lot area per unit beyond 8,500 square feet for four-family units
18.16.070 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the R-3 district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Corner lot: 68 feet; 
(2)  Interior lot: 68 feet. 
(Ord. 357B § 3.04.060, 1979)  
18.16.080 - Yards. 
No buildings or structures shall be erected or enlarged in the R-3 district after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter unless the following yards are provided and maintained: 
(1)  Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet in depth. 
(2)  Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard for each lot of not less than 15 feet. 
(3)  Side Yard. There shall be a side yard of not less than five feet. 
(4)  Courtyard. There shall be a minimum distance between buildings and between buildings and accessory buildings and uses of not less than 15 feet. 
(5)  Side Street Yard. On corner lots, there shall be a side street yard of not less than ten feet. 
(6)  Building Sites on Rights-of-way in General Plan. Front, side, side street or rear yards required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be determined as provided in Section 18.42.020. 
(Ord. 357B § 3.04.070, 1979)  
18.16.090 - Development standards for conditional uses. 
Development standards for conditional uses in the R-3 district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet; 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 100 feet; 
(3)  Minimum front-yard depth: 20 feet; 
(4)  Minimum rear-yard depth: 20 feet; 
(5)  Maximum height of a building or structure: 45 feet. 
(Ord. 357B § 3.04.080, 1979)  
18.16.100 - Performance standards for townhouses, rowhouses, and condominiums. 
(a)  Townhouses, rowhouses, and condominiums will be subject to the following performance standards and will not be subject to the development standards set out in this chapter in Sections 18.16.030 through 18.16.090: 
(1)  The maximum building height shall be three stories or 55 feet to accommodate architecturally enhanced upper stories and roof lines, and in the case of a garage with an accessory use, the maximum height shall be two stories or 35 feet. 
(2)  The building shall be located between zero to 12.5 feet from the front property line, zero to ten feet from the street side property line, zero to ten feet from the interior side property line. No setback is required from the rear property line for the main building. A garage or secondary unit shall be set back a minimum of four feet from an alley. Different setback requirements may be considered due to public utility easements or other design factors when it is determined that such variations will result in a superior product. 
(3)  The space between attached buildings shall be zero to ten feet and six to 15 feet if detached. 
(4)  Building width shall be a minimum of 16 feet. 
(5)  Second story bay windows, balconies, decorative eaves, or other architectural elements may encroach into the alley setback subject to city approval. 
(6)  Garages and parking areas are encouraged to be located behind buildings. Alley access is encouraged. 
(7)  Shared and/or phased parking solutions are encouraged. There shall be a minimum of two covered parking spaces per main unit and one parking space per secondary residential unit. The second residential unit space does not need to be covered. 
(8)  The city will establish the minimum lot size and dimensions as part of approving the conditional use permit. 
(9)  Garages may have two stories. Interior stairwells are encouraged. Allowable uses for the second story of a garage are: second dwelling residential unit, bonus room, home occupation, storage, or play room. 
(10)  Second dwelling residential units shall not be subject to the requirements set out in Chapter 18.37 and instead shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  A second residential unit shall be subject to the payment of the appropriate building and impact fees; 
b.  The second dwelling unit is not intended for sale and may be rented; provided that the primary existing dwelling unit is owner occupied. The property owner shall enter into a restrictive covenant which shall be recorded against the property. The covenant shall require that one of the two units be owner-occupied and prohibit rental of both the primary and secondary units at the same time. The covenant shall further require that the city be notified of the sale of the property upon the close of escrow; 
c.  No zoning code or building code violation exists on the lot on which the second unit is to be located; 
d.  Construction of the unit complies with the applicable local building code requirements for attached or detached dwellings, as appropriate; 
e.  The second dwelling unit must be of the same architectural type, style, material and texture as the existing primary structure; and subordinate in bulk and relationship to the main residence; and 
f.  A second dwelling unit allowed pursuant to this section shall be conditioned upon, and the applicant must agree to allow inspections of the site and proof of compliance with this section, and other city codes, resolutions, and ordinances. 
(b)  The above-referenced performance standards shall not be allowed and a conditional use permit for the townhouses, rowhouses, and condominiums shall not be approved if all of the following findings cannot be made: 
(1)  That the height, setbacks, lot coverage, building massing, architectural style and quality, or other standard, makes a positive contribution to the overall character of the area and will be compatible with its surroundings; 
(2)  That the standard will not result in unreasonable restrictions of light and air to adjacent properties or the public rights-of-way, or otherwise be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare; and 
(3)  That the standard will support the city's housing policies and will result in a better overall project. 
(Ord. 795B § 2, 2005)  
18.16.200 - Performance standards for single room occupancy (SRO). 
(a)  Definitions. 
Single room occupancy facility - "single room occupancy facility (SRO facility)" means a property containing two or more single room occupancy (SRO) rooms. 
Single room occupancy room (SRO Room) - "single room occupancy room (SRO room)" means a one-room living space intended for occupancy by not more than two persons as a place of permanent residence that is provided with individual or shared sanitary and bathing facilities and may or may not include individual or shared, full or partial, kitchen facilities. 
(b)  All SRO facilities are subject to the performance standards from Section 18.16.200 and will be subject to the development standards set out in this chapter in Section 18.16.090. 
(1)  Occupancy. 
a.  SRO rooms shall be occupied by no more than two persons. 
b.  SRO rooms shall be occupied as the primary resident of the tenant. Transient occupancy of SRO rooms shall not be allowed. 
(2)  Proximity to transit and alternative transportation modality shall be considered and encouraged in the sitting of all SRO facilities. 
(3)  Unit Size. SRO rooms shall be a minimum of 150 square feet in area and a maximum of 400 square feet in area. 
(4)  Facilities. 
a.  Kitchen. No kitchen facilities are required to be provided. Full or partial individual kitchen facilities may be provided for each room or one common (shared) kitchen/dining area may be provided if the developer/operator so desires. 
b.  Bathrooms. Private bathroom facilities shall be provided within each unit to include, at a minimum, a toilet and wash basin. Bathtubs and/or shower facilities shall be provided but may be provided within individual rooms, or may be shared. 
c.  Laundry Facilities. A common laundry area shall be provided at a rate of not less than one washer and one dryer for the first ten rooms, with one additional washer and one additional dryer provided for every five additional rooms or fraction thereof. 
d.  Accessibility. Any and all common facilities shall be provided as fully accessible, to the satisfaction of the building official. 
(5)  Manager's Office or Unit. An on-site management office or manager's unit shall be provided. "House rules," rules that every resident is required to follow, shall be submitted as part of the use permit application. 
(6)  Parking. Parking for SRO facilities shall be provided one space for every one SRO room, plus one space for the management unit or office and one space for each employee, if any, on maximum shift. 
(7)  Storage for Residents. A private, secured storage space of not less than 50 cubic feet per resident shall be provided. Storage space may be provided in private closet(s) accessible from individual SRO rooms; and/or as individually locked areas accessible from a common room; and/or within a separate on-site storage structure. Where storage space is provided within a separate structure, such structure shall provide for separate, locking storage spaces for each SRO room, and shall be of sufficient construction to protect stored items from weather. 
(Ord. No. 880B, § 5, 3-26-2013)  
CHAPTER 18.18 - R-E RESIDENTIAL ESTATE DISTRICT 
 
18.18.010 - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted in the R-E district are as follows: 
(1)  One single-family residential dwelling; 
(2)  Golf course; 
(3)  Country club; 
(4)  Light agricultural uses on more than ten acres; 
(5)  The keeping and/or raising of household pets for personal use only; 
(6)  Accessory structures and uses located on the same site with and necessary for the operation of a permitted use; 
(7)  Signs as permitted by Title 16. 
(Ord. 357B § 3.05.000, 1979; Ord. No. 910B , § 2, 1-12-2016)  
18.18.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the R-E district subject to issuance of a conditional use permit by the planning commission: 
(1)  Agricultural crops, fruit trees, nut trees and vines; 
(2)  Home occupations; 
(3)  Other uses which the planning commission has determined are similar in nature. 
(Ord. 357B § 3.05.010, 1979)  
18.18.025 - Accessory uses. 
Solar Energy System. A solar energy system as defined in section 15.05.020A. shall be permitted if the solar energy system meets all of the following conditions: 
(1)  The solar energy system shall be designed for the purpose of reducing on-site energy needs and shall be accessory to and incorporated into the development of an authorized use of the property. 
(2)  The solar energy system shall only be permitted on the roof of a permitted principle structure or in the rear and side yard of the lot adjacent to a permitted structure. 
(3)  The solar energy system shall conform to all set back requirements for the district in which the solar energy system is located unless, the community development director or his designee identifies a safety concern requiring placement within the setback. 
(4)  The solar energy system shall be designed to absorb light, have minimal glint and glare and to scatter the reflected light. 
(Ord. No. 923B , § 4, 9-27-2016)  
18.18.030 - Animals—Fencing—Storage. 
Special requirements in the R-E district shall be as follows: 
(1)  A maximum of four-hooved livestock may be kept on each lot. Horses or cattle shall be corralled and/or pastured on not less than 20,000 square feet per animal. Other hoofed animals shall be corralled and/or pastured on not less than 10,000 square feet per animal. 
(2)  For the keeping of any poultry, other domesticated bird life, or small domesticated mammals, an area of 20,000 square feet shall be required for each. 
(3)  Any accessory structures used as barns, stables or corrals shall not be less than 30 feet from any abutting property line nor less than 50 feet from any abutting dwelling unit. No animal shall be pastured within 30 feet of any dwelling or patio on abutting property. 
(4)  Fencing (except wire) or agricultural structures shall not be constructed from used or salvaged materials. 
(5)  Corrals, pens, feed areas and permanently fenced pasture shall be maintained free from litter, garbage and accumulations of manure. 
(6)  Materials used and products stored shall be adequately housed, or screened so that the health, safety and welfare of persons occupying the property or adjacent properties will not be jeopardized. 
(Ord. 357B §3.05.020, 1979)  
18.18.040 - Height regulations. 
(a)  The maximum height for principal buildings and structures in the R-E district shall be 35 feet. 
(b)  The maximum height for accessory buildings or structures in the R-E district shall be 16 feet. 
(Ord. 357B §3.05.030, 1979)  
18.18.050 - Lot area. 
The minimum lot area in the R-E district shall be two and one-half acres ; 
(Ord. 357B §3.05.040, 1979)  
18.18.060 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all structures and buildings in the R-E district shall not exceed 30 percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. 357B §3.05.050, 1979)  
18.18.070 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the R-E district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Corner lot: 100 feet; 
(2)  Interior lot: 100 feet. 
(Ord. 357B §3.05.060, 1979)  
18.18.080 - Yards. 
No building or structure in the R-E district shall, after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained: 
(1)  Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet in depth. 
(2)  Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard for each lot of not less than 20 feet. 
(3)  Side Yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of all buildings of not less than ten feet. 
(4)  Side Street Yard. On corner lots, there shall be a side street yard of not less than ten feet. 
(5)  Building Sites on Rights-of-way in General Plan. Front, side, side street or rear yards required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be determined as provided in Section 18.42.020. 
(Ord. 357B §3.05.070, 1979)  
18.18.090 - Dimensions of district. 
The residential estate district shall not be created unless the following minimum area, depth and width of the district are provided: 
(1)  Minimum district area: two and one-half acres; 
(2)  Minimum district width: 100 feet; 
(3)  Minimum district depth: 200 feet. 
(Ord. 357B §3.05.080, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.20 - B-P BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL DISTRICT 
 
18.20.010 - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted in the B-P district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Business and professional offices; 
(2)  Personal service establishments entirely within a building; 
(3)  Financial institutions (banks, title companies, savings and loan companies); 
(4)  Accessory buildings, subject to regulations in Section 18.36.050; 
(5)  Accessory uses, subject to regulations in Section 18.36.060; 
(6)  Other uses which, in the opinion of the planning commission, are of a similar nature; 
(7)  Signs as permitted by Title 16. 
(Ord. 357B § 3.06.000, 1979; Ord. No. 910B , § 2, 1-12-2016)  
18.20.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the B-P district subject to issuance of a conditional use permit by the planning commission: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings, subject to the regulations in Chapter 18.12; 
(2)  Clinics; 
(3)  Clubhouses; 
(4)  Lodges; 
(5)  Churches, schools, parks and playgrounds; 
(6)  Public buildings (libraries, utilities, offices, fire stations, police stations, civic buildings, post offices and substations); 
(7)  Bars, restaurants or coffee shops, if accessory to uses permitted in the district, and where entrance to such is from a lobby or court without direct access to a street or alley; 
(8)  Ambulance services; 
(9)  Funeral parlors and mortuaries; 
(10)  Other uses of a similar nature. 
(Ord. 483B § 1, 1986: Ord. 454B § 1, 1984: Ord. 357B § 3.06.010, 1979)  
18.20.025 - Accessory uses. 
Solar Energy System. A solar energy system as defined in section 15.05.020A. shall be permitted if the solar energy system meets all of the following conditions: 
(1)  The solar energy system shall be designed for the purpose of reducing on-site energy needs and shall be accessory to and incorporated into the development of an authorized use of the property. 
(2)  The solar energy system shall only be permitted on the roof of a permitted principle structure or in the rear and side yard of the lot adjacent to a permitted structure. 
(3)  The solar energy system shall conform to all set back requirements for the district in which the solar energy system is located unless, the community development director or his designee identifies a safety concern requiring placement within the setback. 
(4)  The solar energy system shall be designed to absorb light, have minimal glint and glare and to scatter the reflected light. 
(Ord. No. 923B , § 5, 9-27-2016)  
18.20.030 - Height regulations. 
(a)  The maximum height for principal buildings and structures in the B-P district shall be 35 feet; provided, that an additional foot in height may be added, to a maximum height of 50 feet for each additional foot of side yard added to the minimum side yard requirement. 
(b)  The maximum height for accessory buildings or structures in the B-P district shall be 16 feet. 
(Ord. 357B § 3.06.020, 1979)  
18.20.040 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the B-P district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Corner lot: 6,250 square feet; 
(2)  Interior lot: 6,250 square feet. 
(Ord. 357B § 3.06.030, 1979)  
18.20.050 - Lot area per unit. 
The minimum lot area for a one-unit use in the B-P district shall be 6,250 square feet. The minimum lot area for a two-unit complex shall be 6,250 square feet, and for each additional unit an additional 1,000 square feet will be required. 
(Ord. 357B § 3.06.040, 1979)  
18.20.060 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all structures and buildings in the B-P district shall not exceed 60 percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. 357B § 3.06.050, 1979)  
18.20.070 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the B-P district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Corner lot: 50 feet; 
(2)  Interior lot: 50 feet. 
(Ord. 357B § 3.06.060, 1979)  
18.20.080 - Yards. 
No building or structure shall, after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, be erected or enlarged in the B-P district unless the following yards are provided and maintained: 
(1)  Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 20 feet in depth; 
(2)  Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard for each lot of not less than five feet except ten feet when adjacent to a residential district; 
(3)  Side Yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of all buildings of not less than five feet; 
(4)  Side Street Yard. On corner lots, there shall be a side street yard of not less than five feet; 
(5)  Building Sites on Rights-of-way in General Plan. Front, side, side street and rear yards required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be determined as provided in Section 18.42.020. 
(Ord. 793B § 1, 2005; Ord. 738B § 1, 2003; Ord. 357B § 3.06.070, 1979)  
18.20.090 - Development standards for conditional uses. 
Development standards for conditional uses in the B-P district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet; 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 100 feet; 
(3)  Minimum front-yard depth: 20 feet; 
(4)  Minimum rear-yard depth: 20 feet; 
(5)  Maximum height of a building or structure: 45 feet. 
(Ord. 357B § 3.06.080, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.22 - C COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 
 
18.22.010 - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted in the C district are as follows: 
(1)  Shopping center or mall; 
(2)  Nursery, florist; 
(3)  Quick-food establishment; 
(4)  Newspaper stand; 
(5)  Other collection facilities; 
(6)  Other uses which the planning commission has determined are of the same general character as those listed in this section and will not be obnoxious to abutting properties or detrimental to the area in which located; 
(7)  Signs as permitted by Title 16. 
(Ord. 357B, § 3.07.000, 1979; Ord. 500B § 2, 1987; Ord. No. 910B , § 2, 1-12-2016)  
18.22.020 - Uses permitted within a building. 
All of the following uses are permitted in the C district provided they are conducted entirely within a building or structure: 
(1)  Animal hospital; 
(2)  Apparel store; 
(3)  Bakery; 
(4)  Barbershop; 
(5)  Book or periodical store; 
(6)  Department store; 
(7)  Drugstore; 
(8)  Financial institutions (banks, title companies, savings and loan companies); 
(9)  Food store; 
(10)  Furniture store; 
(11)  Gift shop; 
(12)  Hardware store; 
(13)  Household appliance store; 
(14)  Jewelry store; 
(15)  Kennel (per LMC 6.28.010); 
(16)  Laundromat; 
(17)  Laundry agencies; 
(18)  Offices (professional, business and utility); 
(19)  Personal service establishments; 
(20)  Photographic studios; 
(21)  Photographic supplies; 
(22)  Record store; 
(23)  Restaurant; 
(24)  Retail store incidental to any other use authorized by this section; 
(25)  Salon; 
(26)  Stationery store; 
(27)  Theater; until January 1, 2018, theaters may only locate within a C district that lies within the boundaries of the Lincoln Theater Area. 
(28)  Toy store; 
(29)  Variety store; 
(30)  Other uses which the planning commission has determined are of the same general character as those listed in this section and will not be obnoxious to abutting properties or detrimental to the area in which located. 
(Ord. No. 829B, § 2, 1-8-2008; Ord. 807B § 7, 2006; Ord. 454B § 2, 1984: Ord. 446B § 1, 1983: Ord. 357B § 3.07.010, 1979; Ord. No. 964B, §§ 4, 5, 5-8-2018 )  
18.22.025 - Accessory uses. 
Solar Energy System. A solar energy system as defined in section 15.05.020A. shall be permitted if the solar energy system meets all of the following conditions: 
(1)  The solar energy system shall be designed for the purpose of reducing on-site energy needs and shall be accessory to and incorporated into the development of an authorized use of the property. 
(2)  The solar energy system shall only be permitted on the roof of a permitted principle structure or in the rear and side yard of the lot adjacent to a permitted structure. 
(3)  The solar energy system shall conform to all set back requirements for the district in which the solar energy system is located unless, the community development director or his designee identifies a safety concern requiring placement within the setback. 
(4)  The solar energy system shall be designed to absorb light, have minimal glint and glare and to scatter the reflected light. 
(Ord. No. 923B , § 6, 9-27-2016)  
18.22.030 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the C district subject to issuance of a conditional use permit by the planning commission: 
(1)  Apartments, hotels and motels, subject to the requirements of Chapter 18.16; 
(2)  Ambulance services; 
(3)  Automobile agencies (sales and service); 
(4)  Automobile body and paint shop; 
(5)  Automobile repair shop; 
(6)  Bar; 
(7)  Bowling alley; 
(8)  Bus depot; 
(9)  Heavy equipment sales and service; 
(10)  Home improvement center; 
(11)  Lumberyard; 
(12)  Mortuary; 
(13)  Outdoor storage, displays, sales, and rentals (including, but not limited to and by way of example only: propane tanks, rental kiosks, vending machines, clothing bins, and tires) 
(14)  Parking lot; 
(15)  Plumbing shop; 
(16)  Public buildings (libraries, utilities, offices, fire stations, police stations, civic buildings, post offices and substations); 
(17)  Service station (not including major repair or overhaul, when part of a shopping center); 
(18)  Sheet metal shop; 
(19)  Tire shop; 
(20)  Video game center and arcade; 
(21)  All uses involving the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages. Outdoor service of alcohol requires a four-foot tall barrier encompassing the service area with no access from a public area; 
(22)  Other uses of a similar nature; 
(23)  Pawnshops (per LMC 18.22.100); 
(24)  Tattoo parlors and/or body piercing establishments (subject to a minimum separation of 400 feet from all residential uses, churches and schools); 
(25)  Condominiums and townhomes, subject to the requirements of Chapter 18.16; 
(26)  All uses with an automobile "drive-thru." 
(27)  Vehicle sales and service (excluding: engine replacement/overhaul, transmission repair). 
(28)  Reverse vending machines (Subject to the provisions set forth in Chapter 18.35). 
(29)  Small collection facilities (Subject to the provisions set forth in Chapter 18.35). 
( Ord. No. 964B, §§ 6—8, 10, 5-8-2018 ; Ord. No. 934B , § 1, 1-10-2017;Ord. 807B § 3, 2006; Ord. 799B §§ 3, 4, 2006; Ord. 776B § 1, 2004; Ord. 518B § 2, 1989; Ord. 446B § 2, 1983: Ord. 357B § 3.07.020, 1979)  
18.22.040 - Height regulations. 
(a)  The maximum height for buildings and structures in the C district shall be 50 feet. 
(b)  Civic Center Overlay Zone. For civic and public buildings located within the civic center overlay zone described in the map attached to the ordinance codified in this title and by this reference incorporated herein, the maximum building height shall be 75 feet. 
  
(Ord. 796B § 2, 2005: Ord. 357B § 3.07.030, 1979)  
18.22.050 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the C district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Corner lot: 2,500 square feet; 
(2)  Interior lot: 2,500 square feet. 
(Ord. 357B § 3.07.040, 1979)  
18.22.060 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all buildings and structures in the C district shall not exceed 60 percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. 357B § 3.07.050, 1979)  
18.22.070 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the C district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Corner lot: 25 feet; 
(2)  Interior lot: 25 feet. 
(Ord. 357B § 3.07.060, 1979)  
18.22.080 - Yards. 
No building or structure in the C district shall, after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained: 
(1)  Front Yard. No front yard is required except ten feet when adjacent to a residential district; 
(2)  Rear Yard. No rear yard is required except ten feet when adjacent to a residential district; 
(3)  Side Yard. No side yard is required except ten feet when adjacent to a residential district; 
(4)  Side Street Yard. No side street yard is required except ten feet when adjacent to a residential district; 
(5)  Building Sites on Rights-of-way in General Plan. Front, side, side street or rear yards required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be determined as provided in Section 18.42.020. 
(Ord. 799B § 5, 2006; Ord. 357B § 3.07.070, 1979)  
18.22.090 - District dimensions. 
The commercial district shall not be created unless the following minimum area, depth and width of the district are provided: 
(1)  Minimum district area: one acre; 
(2)  Minimum district width: 100 feet; 
(3)  Minimum district depth: 100 feet. 
(Ord. 357B § 3.07.080, 1979)  
18.22.100 - Pawnshops. 
In addition to any other restrictions imposed upon the issuance of conditional use permits, no pawnshops within the commercial district shall be placed, maintained, owned, or operated in any of the following locations: 
(1)  On any lot directly abutting a residentially zoned lot or abutting a lot upon which a nonconforming residential use is located. 
(2)  Within 500 feet of any parcel of real property upon which is located any of the following facilities: 
a.  Any other pawnshop. 
(Ord. 614B § 1, 1994: Ord. 518B § 3, 1989)  
CHAPTER 18.26 - L-I LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 
 
18.26.010 - Permitted uses. 
Uses permitted in the L-I district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Automobile body and paint shop; 
(2)  Automobile repair shop; 
(3)  Heavy equipment sales and service; 
(4)  Tire shop; 
(5)  Other uses which the planning commission has determined are similar in nature to others listed in this section. 
(6)  Signs as permitted by Title 16. 
(Ord. 357B §3.09.000, 1979; Ord. No. 910B , § 2, 1-12-2016)  
18.26.020 - Uses permitted within a building. 
The following uses are permitted within the L-I district if they are conducted within a building, or surrounded by a solid fence of wood, masonry or similar new materials: 
(1)  Automobile body manufacturing; 
(2)  Boat building; 
(3)  Bottling plant; 
(4)  Building materials; 
(5)  Cabinet shop; 
(6)  Contractor's yards; 
(7)  Emergency shelters; defined in section 50801(e) of the Health and Safety Code as "housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay." Emergency shelters shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Emergency shelters shall be in compliance with all building codes, fire standards, and light industrial parking standards; 
b.  The maximum occupancy shall not exceed 25 individuals; 
c.  Emergency shelters shall provide on-site waiting and intake areas that are screened from public view; 
d.  There shall be at least one staff member of the emergency shelter on site at all times while temporary residents are present; 
e.  Security lights shall be provided to the satisfaction of the development services director; 
f.  The applicant shall coordinate with the Lincoln police department to prepare a security plan for the facility, and shall provide the Lincoln police department with the name(s) and telephone number(s) of a responsible party(ies) to contact. The Lincoln police department may require the provision of on-site private security when the facility of [is] occupied if deemed necessary by the chief of police; 
g.  Emergency shelters shall establish and maintain set hours for client intake/discharge. Said hours shall be posted at the entry to the facility; and 
h.  Emergency shelters shall maintain a minimum 300-foot separation from other emergency shelters. 
(8)  Feed and fuel yards; 
(9)  Food processing; 
(10)  Frozen food lockers; 
(11)  Ice and cold storage; 
(12)  Lumberyard; 
(13)  Machine shop; 
(14)  Warehousing; 
(15)  Other uses which the planning commission has determined are similar in nature. 
(Ord. No. 855B, § 3, 5-24-2011; Ord. 357B §3.09.010, 1979)  
18.26.025 - Accessory uses. 
Solar Energy System. A solar energy system as defined in section 15.05.020A. shall be permitted if the solar energy system meets all of the following conditions: 
(1)  The solar energy system shall be designed for the purpose of reducing on-site energy needs and shall be accessory to and incorporated into the development of an authorized use of the property. 
(2)  The solar energy system shall only be permitted on the roof of a permitted principle structure or in the rear and side yard of the lot adjacent to a permitted structure. 
(3)  The solar energy system shall conform to all set back requirements for the district in which the solar energy system is located unless, the community development director or his designee identifies a safety concern requiring placement within the setback. 
(4)  The solar energy system shall be designed to absorb light, have minimal glint and glare and to scatter the reflected light. 
(Ord. No. 923B , § 8, 9-27-2016)  
18.26.030 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted subject to issuance of a conditional use permit by the planning commission: 
(1)  Automobile wrecking yard; 
(2)  Concrete batch plant; 
(3)  Light manufacturing, fabrication, assembling, component manufacturing, small parts processing; 
(4)  Mobile home sales and services; 
(5)  Outdoor storage and sales; 
(6)  Public utility service yard. 
(7)  Recycling and redemption collection facilities, including reverse vending machine(s), small collection facilities, and recycling facilities (Subject to the provisions set forth in Chapter 18.35). 
(Ord. 357B §3.09.020, 1979; Ord. No. 964B, § 11, 5-8-2018 )  
18.26.040 - Height regulations. 
The maximum height for buildings and structures in the L-I district shall be 50 feet. 
(Ord. 357B §3.09.030, 1979)  
18.26.050 - Lot area. 
The minimum lot area in the L-I district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Corner lot: 10,000 square feet; 
(2)  Interior lot: 10,000 square feet. 
(Ord. 357B §3.09.040, 1979)  
18.26.060 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all structures and buildings in the L-I district shall not exceed 50 percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. 357B §3.09.050, 1979)  
18.26.070 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the L-I district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Corner lot: 100 feet; 
(2)  Interior lot: 100 feet. 
(Ord. 357B §3.09.060, 1979)  
18.26.080 - Yards. 
No building or structure in the L-I district shall, after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained: 
(1)  Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet in depth. 
(2)  Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard for each lot of not less than ten feet. 
(3)  Side Yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of all buildings of not less than ten feet. 
(4)  Side Street Yard. On corner lots, there shall be a side street yard of not less than ten feet. 
(5)  Building Sites on Rights-of-way in General Plan. Front, side, side street or rear yards required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be determined as provided in Section 18.42.020. 
(Ord. 357B §3.09.070, 1979)  
18.26.090 - District dimensions. 
The light industrial district shall not be created unless the following minimum area, depth and width of the district are provided: 
(1)  Minimum district area: one acre; 
(2)  Minimum district width: 100 feet; 
(3)  Minimum district depth: 100 feet. 
(Ord. 357B §3.09.080, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.28 - I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 
 
18.28.010 - Permitted uses. 
The following are permitted uses in the I district provided that they comply with all state and federal laws and city ordinances applicable to the regulation of obnoxious or offensive noise, smoke, dust, explosives, vibration, odors, bright or flashing lights, or any other nuisance factors: 
(1)  Any use provided for as permitted or requiring a conditional use permit in the light industrial district; 
(2)  Wholesale stores and storage; 
(3)  Animal and fiber processing; 
(4)  Mining and excavating; 
(5)  Other uses which the planning commission has determined are similar in nature to those listed in this section; 
(6)  Signs as permitted by Title 16. 
(7)  Solar energy system (defined in Section 15.05.020A) - Consistent with the compatibility polices as set forth in the airport land use compatibility plan. 
(Ord. 357B §3.10.000, 1979; Ord. No. 910B , § 2, 1-12-2016; Ord. No. 923B , § 11, 9-27-2016)  
18.28.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the I district subject to issuance of a conditional use permit by the planning commission: 
(1)  All uses in Section 18.28.010 which do not qualify as a permitted use because of some objectionable factor; 
(2)  Acid storage, manufacturing; 
(3)  Bituminous paving plants; 
(4)  Inflammable liquid storage; 
(5)  Lime or plaster of Paris; 
(6)  Petroleum refining and petroleum or tar products manufacture; 
(7)  Quarries; 
(8)  Salvage yards; 
(9)  Smelters; 
(10)  Recycling and redemption collection facilities, including reverse vending machine(s), small collection facilities, and recycling facilities (Subject to the provisions set forth in Chapter 18.35). 
(Ord. 357B §3.10.010, 1979; Ord. No. 964B, § 12, 5-8-2018 )  
18.28.030 - Height regulations. 
The maximum height for buildings and structures in the I district shall be 100 feet. 
(Ord. 357B §3.10.020, 1979)  
18.28.040 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the I district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Corner lot: 10,000 square feet; 
(2)  Interior lot: 10,000 square feet. 
(Ord. 357B §3.10.030, 1979)  
18.28.050 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all structures and buildings in the I district shall not exceed 75 percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. 357B §3.10.040, 1979)  
18.28.060 - Lot width. 
The maximum lot width in the I district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Corner lot: 100 feet; 
(2)  Interior lot: 100 feet. 
(Ord. 357B §3.10.050, 1979)  
18.28.070 - Yards. 
No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged in the I district after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter unless the following yards are provided and maintained: 
(1)  Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet in depth. 
(2)  Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard for each lot of not less than ten feet. 
(3)  Side Yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of all buildings of not less than ten feet. 
(4)  Side Street Yard. On corner lots, there shall be a side street yard of not less than ten feet. 
(5)  Building Sites on Rights-of-way in General Plan. Front, side, side street or rear yards required for lots abutting a highway or street for which rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be determined as provided in Section 18.42.020. 
(Ord. 357B §3.10.060, 1979)  
18.28.080 - Dimensions of district. 
The industrial district shall not be created unless the following minimum area, depth and width of the district are provided: 
(1)  Minimum district area: one acre; 
(2)  Minimum district width: 100 feet; 
(3)  Minimum district depth: 100 feet. 
(Ord. 357B §3.10.070, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.29 - A-D AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT 
 
18.29.000 - Purpose. 
Well-located and well-composed agricultural land is a major natural resource that cannot be made nor increased. This type of land is the source of essential food stuffs and fibers. An important aspect to this resource are lands within the city that are economically restricted to grazing and animal husbandry due to location, geological formation and chemical/organic composition. It is important to preserve both productive agricultural lands and grazing lands. The purpose, therefore, of this classification is to accomplish this objective by holding to high minimum area standards, permitting only such uses as are related to agricultural production or are similar thereto and by discouraging the encroachment of urban type development and especially that which would be marginal in character and disruptive of sound long range planning and economic factors. Reasonable consideration, however, shall be given by the city to rezoning of land in this classification at such time as the orderly development of the city and the general welfare necessitate development of portions of this land for residential and related uses. 
(Ord. 555B §1(part), 1991)  
18.29.010 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the (A-D) agricultural district: 
(1)  One single-family residence and accessory buildings; 
(2)  Agricultural corps and open field grazing; 
(3)  Livestock, poultry and small animals provided: 
a.  Any building, pen, cage, aviary, animal run or area used to contain, house, confine or feed such animals or fowl shall not be located closer than 75 feet to any boundary property line of the premises, or any building containing a dwelling unit on the same premises, 
b.  Any open-air storage of hay, straw, shavings or similar organic materials shall maintain a distance of not less than 35 feet from any boundary property line, and a distance of not less than 45 feet from any building containing a dwelling unit or accessory living quarters on the same premises; 
(4)  Greenhouses, when incidental to agricultural uses on premises; 
(5)  Marketing of products on the premises, provided: 
a.  Only one stand shall be permitted on the premises and such stand shall contain not more than 500 square feet of floor area, and shall not be located in any required yard or open space on the premises; 
(6)  Pasturing and grazing; 
(7)  Public stables and riding academies provided: 
a.  Any stable or barn shall not be located closer than 75 feet to any boundary property line, or to any building containing a dwelling unit on the same premises, 
b.  Any corrals, exercise yards or rings shall maintain a distance of not less than 45 feet from any building containing a dwelling unit on the same premises, 
c.  Any open-air storage of hay, straw, shavings or similar materials shall maintain a distance of not less than 35 feet from any boundary property line, and a distance of not less than 45 feet from any building containing a dwelling unit or accessory living quarters on the same premises. 
(8)  Signs as permitted by Title 16. 
(Ord. 555B §1(part), 1991; Ord. No. 910B , § 2, 1-12-2016)  
18.29.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the agricultural district subject to issuance of a conditional use permit by the planning commission: 
(1)  Dairies; 
(2)  Churches; 
(3)  Country clubs and golf courses; 
(4)  Kennels; 
(5)  Animal hospitals or clinics. 
(Ord. 555B §1(part), 1991)  
18.29.025 - Accessory uses. 
Solar Energy System. A solar energy system as defined in section 15.05.020A. shall be permitted if the solar energy system meets all of the following conditions: 
(1)  The solar energy system shall be designed for the purpose of reducing on-site energy needs and shall be accessory to and incorporated into the development of an authorized use of the property. 
(2)  The solar energy system shall only be permitted on the roof of a permitted principle structure or in the rear and side yard of the lot adjacent to a permitted structure. 
(3)  The solar energy system shall conform to all set back requirements for the district in which the solar energy system is located unless, the community development director or his designee identifies a safety concern requiring placement within the setback. 
(4)  The solar energy system shall be designed to absorb light, have minimal glint and glare and to scatter the reflected light. 
(Ord. No. 923B , § 9, 9-27-2016)  
18.29.030 - Height regulations. 
The maximum height for buildings and structures in the agricultural district shall be 40 feet, except that barns and other specialized structures used for agricultural purposes may exceed the height limit provided such height will not conflict with other provisions of the zoning code. 
(Ord. 555B §1(part), 1991)  
18.29.040 - Lot area. 
The minimum lot area in the agricultural district shall be ten acres. 
(Ord. 555B §1(part), 1991)  
18.29.060 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width for each lot in the agricultural district shall be not less than 300 feet. 
(Ord. 555B §1(part), 1991)  
18.29.070 - Yards. 
No building or structure in the agricultural district shall, after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained: 
(1)  Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 35 feet. 
(2)  Any building or structure, whether it be a main building or structure, or whether it be an accessory building or structure, shall observe a distance of not less than ten feet from any side or rear property line. Where a greater distance is required as a condition to the establishment of permitted building or use, such greater distance shall prevail. 
(3)  The distance between a building containing a dwelling unit and any other buildings or structures on the same lot shall be not less than 20 feet. Where a greater distance is required as a condition to the establishment of a permitted use, such greater distance shall prevail. 
(4)  Minimum district depth: 100 feet. 
(Ord. 555B §1(part), 1991)  
CHAPTER 18.30 - O-S OPEN SPACE DISTRICT 
 
18.30.010 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the O-S district: 
(1)  Parks; 
(2)  Playgrounds and playfields; 
(3)  Public swimming pools; 
(4)  Golf course; 
(5)  Country club; 
(6)  Schools; 
(7)  Community centers; 
(8)  Public buildings; 
(9)  Signs as permitted by Title 16. 
(Ord. 357B §3.11.000, 1979; Ord. 581B §1, 1992: Ord. No. 910B , § 2, 1-12-2016)  
18.30.020 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the O-S district subject to issuance of a conditional use permit by the planning commission: 
(1)  Commercial uses accessory to permitted uses, such as refreshment stands, restaurants, sports equipment rental and sales, marinas; 
(2)  Museums; 
(3)  Art galleries; 
(4)  Public utility substations; 
(5)  Agricultural land. 
(Ord. 357B §3.11.010, 1979)  
18.30.025 - Accessory uses. 
Solar Energy System. A solar energy system as defined in section 15.05.020A. shall be permitted if the solar energy system meets all of the following conditions: 
(1)  The solar energy system shall be designed for the purpose of reducing on-site energy needs and shall be accessory to and incorporated into the development of an authorized use of the property. 
(2)  The solar energy system shall only be permitted on the roof of a permitted principle structure or in the rear and side yard of the lot adjacent to a permitted structure. 
(3)  The solar energy system shall conform to all set back requirements for the district in which the solar energy system is located unless, the community development director or his designee identifies a safety concern requiring placement within the setback. 
(4)  The solar energy system shall be designed to absorb light, have minimal glint and glare and to scatter the reflected light. 
(Ord. No. 923B , § 10, 9-27-2016)  
18.30.030 - Height regulations. 
The maximum height for buildings and structures in the O-S district shall be 40 feet. 
(Ord. 357B §3.11.020, 1979)  
18.30.040 - Lot area. 
The minimum area for each lot in the O-S district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Corner lot: 10,000 square feet; 
(2)  Interior lot: 10,000 square feet. 
(Ord. 357B §3.11.030, 1979)  
18.30.050 - Lot coverage. 
The maximum lot coverage by all structures and buildings in the O-S district shall not exceed 40 percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. 357B §3.11.040, 1979)  
18.30.060 - Lot width. 
The minimum lot width in the O-S district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Corner lot: 100 feet; 
(2)  Interior lot: 100 feet. 
(Ord. 357B §3.11.050, 1979)  
18.30.070 - Yards. 
No building or structure in the O-S district shall, after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, be erected or enlarged unless the following yards are provided and maintained: 
(1)  Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 20 feet in depth. 
(2)  Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard for each lot of not less than ten feet. 
(3)  Side Yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of all buildings of not less than ten feet. 
(4)  Side Street Yard. On corner lots, there shall be a side street yard of not less than ten feet. 
(5)  Building Sites on Rights-of-way in General Plan. Front, side, side street or rear yards required for lots abutting a highway or street for which proposed rights-of-way are established by the circulation element of the general plan shall be determined as provided in Section 18.42.020. 
(Ord. 357B §3.11.060, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.31 - PUB PUBLIC DISTRICT 
 
18.31.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this designation is to provide areas for public and quasi-public facilities for educational facilities, public buildings, cultural and institutional uses, general government operations, utility and public services, and facilities that serve the general public. 
(Ord. No. 930B , § 1, 12-13-2016)  
18.31.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the PUB district: 
(1)  City-owned facilities, including wastewater treatment and reclamation facilities, community centers, libraries, police and/or fire stations, trail systems, open space areas, and stormwater drainage facilities; 
(2)  Uses and facilities, whether constructed publicly or privately, developed on city-owned land and intended for a purpose found by the city to be in the public interest; 
(3)  Corporation yards, including storage of materials, and repair of equipment and vehicles operated by governmental entities; 
(4)  County, state, and federally owned facilities; 
(5)  Public schools; 
(6)  Creation or preservation of wetland facility; 
(7)  Community water storage, wells and associated facilities; 
(8)  Solar energy facility (as outlined in Chapter 15). 
(Ord. No. 930B , § 1, 12-13-2016)  
18.31.030 - Conditional Uses 
The following uses are permitted in the PUB district subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit by the planning commission: 
(1)  Wind power production; 
(2)  Telecommunications facility per Chapter 18.41; 
(3)  Electrical substation; 
(4)  Other uses, not listed under Section 18.31.020 or 18.31.030, which in the opinion of the community development director are of a similar and compatible nature to those uses described in this section. 
(Ord. No. 930B , § 1, 12-13-2016)  
18.31.040 - Building setbacks. 
Front: 20 feet 
Side: 20 feet 
Rear: 20 feet 
From adjacent residential zoning: 50 feet 
(Ord. No. 930B , § 1, 12-13-2016)  
18.31.050 - Building height regulation. 
(a)  Thirty-five feet. 
(b)  Water tank height shall be determined based upon capacity and hydrology conditions 
(Ord. No. 930B , § 1, 12-13-2016)  
18.31.060 - Lot area. 
Minimum of one-half acre. 
(Ord. No. 930B , § 1, 12-13-2016)  
18.31.070 - Lot width. 
One hundred feet minimum. 
(Ord. No. 930B , § 1, 12-13-2016)  
18.31.080 - Lot depth. 
One hundred feet minimum. 
(Ord. No. 930B , § 1, 12-13-2016)  
18.31.090 - Design review. 
(a)  New construction requires design review approval. The city council may determine that city council review may be substituted for design review for projects of community-wide or regional significance provided the city council determines: 
(1)  Expedited review is required to accommodate city objectives; and 
(2)  The project will not have a significant visual impact. 
(b)  Remodel/addition to an existing building requires design review approval unless the community development director determines: 
(1)  The design of the remodel or addition is consistent with the design of the primary structure; and 
(2)  The remodel or addition will not have a significant visual impact. 
(Ord. No. 930B , § 1, 12-13-2016)  
18.31.100 - Lighting. 
(a)  Light fixture heights should not exceed 12 feet when adjacent to residential uses. No ground-mounted light fixture shall exceed 25 feet in height. 
(b)  All lighting shall be directed downward so that there will be no glare which will cause unreasonable annoyance to occupants of such property or otherwise interfere with the public health, safety, or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 930B , § 1, 12-13-2016)  
CHAPTER 18.32 - PD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 
 
18.32.010 - Purpose. 
This district is established to encourage and provide for a creative and more flexible approach to the use of land; to maximize the choices of types of living environments available to the people of the city; and to encourage more efficient allocation and maintenance of privately controlled common open space through the redistribution of overall densities where such a rearrangement is desirable and feasible. 
(Ord. 375B §2(part), 1980: Ord. 357B §3.12.000, 1979)  
18.32.020 - Means to accomplish purposes. 
It is the intention of this chapter to carry out the purposes set forth in the preceding section by providing the means for greater creativity and flexibility in environmental design than is provided under the strict application of this title while protecting the public health, safety and welfare, and property values. Various land uses may be combined in a planned development to include combinations of residential, commercial, industrial, utility, institutional, educational, cultural, recreational and other uses, provided that combination of uses results in a balanced and stable environment. 
(Ord. 375B §2(part), 1980: Ord. 357B §3.12.010, 1979)  
18.32.030 - Size. 
A planned development, or a unit thereof, shall be of sufficient size that its construction, marketing and operation is feasible as a complete unit independent of any subsequent unit. Generally, developments of less than ten acres are not acceptable. 
(Ord. 375B §2 (part), 1980: Ord. 357B §3.12.020(1), 1979)  
18.32.040 - Function of general development plan. 
As provided in this chapter, the approved preliminary development plan for the property within the PD zone specifies the uses to which such property may be put, the locations of such uses, intensity of land use, and other criteria which constitute the development restrictions applicable to the property. 
(Ord. 375B §2(part), 1975: Ord. 357B §3.12.020(2), 1979)  
18.32.050 - Maintenance of common open space. 
Where the planned development provides open space areas or recreation facilities which are privately owned, but commonly shared among the property owners, and such open space and/or recreation facilities are not maintained in a condition consistent with the approved development, the city may, at its option, cause such maintenance to be performed and assess the cost to the affected property owners or responsible homeowners' association, or cause a lien to be placed on the affected property, to be collected with the taxes thereon. 
(Ord. 375B §2(part), 1980: Ord. 357B §3.12.020(3), 1979)  
18.32.060 - Preliminary development plan—Purpose. 
The purpose of the preliminary development plan is to show the overall development scheme for the affected area and to indicate the sequence in which individual portions of the area will be developed. 
(Ord. 375B §2(part), 1980: Ord. 357B §3.12.030(1), 1979)  
18.32.070 - Preliminary development plan—Initial submittal—Contents. 
The developer shall submit to the planning department a preliminary development plan which shows the overall development scheme and indicates the sequence in which individual portions of the area will be developed. Such plan shall include: 
(1)  Maps or drawings which may be schematic in form; 
(2)  All interior property lines; 
(3)  Land use, existing and proposed; 
(4)  Location and size of existing streets and location of the proposed circulation system; 
(5)  Name(s) of the owner, developer and consultant; 
(6)  Public uses, including schools, parks, recreational areas and other open space, and method of maintaining public open space; 
(7)  The use and general description of each different type of structure or building; 
(8)  Written explanation of the nature of the proposed development and any deviations from regulations otherwise applicable to the property; 
(9)  Generalized topography and proposed changes; 
(10)  Utilities, existing and proposed, serving the area; 
(11)  Vegetation and proposed changes; 
(12)  Proposed sequence and schedule, or phasing, of development. 
(Ord. 375B §2(part), 1980: Ord. 357B §3.12.030(2), 1979)  
18.32.080 - Preliminary development plan—Planning commission consideration. 
After review by the planning department, the proposed preliminary development plan shall be submitted to the planning commission as a proposed rezoning of the property to the PD zone. The commission shall follow the same procedures as in any rezoning, and shall have full authority to alter or modify the preliminary development plan. 
(Ord. 375B §2(part), 1980: Ord. 357B §3.12.030(3), 1979)  
18.32.090 - Preliminary development plan—City council consideration—General development plan. 
The preliminary development plan shall be considered by the city council following the same procedures as in any rezoning. The city council may alter or modify the proposed preliminary development plan. If the rezoning is approved, the preliminary development plan becomes the development restrictions for the PD zone covered by the plan and thereafter shall be designated the "general development plan." The general development plan, as approved, shall consist of a map, together with relevant text materials, showing: 
(1)  All land uses; 
(2)  Intensity of land use as measured by units per acre, area coverage or other acceptable description; 
(3)  Major circulation; 
(4)  A division of the area to be developed into smaller areas, called "phases," and the sequences of their development, unless the entire plan is to be carried out simultaneously. 
(Ord. 375B §2(part), 1980: Ord. 357B §3.12.040, 1979)  
18.32.100 - Development permit required for each phase of development. 
Each phase of the general development plan, or the entire general development plan if it is to be carried out simultaneously, shall be developed only after issuance of a development permit by the city council or planning commission as provided for in Section 18.32.130. 
(Ord. 621B §1, 1994: Ord. 375B §2(part), 1980: Ord. 357B §3.12.050(1), 1979)  
18.32.110 - Specific development plan—Required for permit—Contents. 
A specific development plan shall be submitted to the planning commission with an application for a development permit. Such plan shall consist of a map and necessary textual materials showing: 
(1)  The boundaries of the specific development plan; 
(2)  The size and location of all public utility easements; 
(3)  The exact location and width of all streets, sidewalks, bike trails, pedestrian paths or other areas used for the conveyance of vehicular, pedestrian, bicycle, equestrian or other traffic; 
(4)  The typical location of individual residential structures and the actual location of multifamily, business and commercial structures; 
(5)  The number of units per gross acre; 
(6)  The general landscaping features; 
(7)  The location and size of any proposed park or recreational area, and an indication of whether or not the same is to be publicly or privately owned; 
(8)  The location of any public facilities, including but not limited to fire stations, school sites, utility substations or other facilities; 
(9)  The location of parking areas; 
(10)  The location and screening of refuse disposal areas; 
(11)  Major points of vehicular access to and from multifamily, business and commercial structures; 
(12)  The location and size of all fencing or screening; 
(13)  A designation of the use of all open space, whether publicly or privately owned, and the person or group responsible for its maintenance; 
(14)  The location and size of any proposed signs, exclusive of traffic-control and street signs; 
(15)  Contour lines at intervals designated by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 375B §2(part), 1980: Ord. 357B §3.12.050(2), 1979)  
18.32.120 - Specific development plan—Supplemental information required. 
In conjunction with the specific development plan map, there shall be submitted the following: 
(1)  A preliminary grading plan; 
(2)  For business or commercial areas, an economic feasibility study as to the need and projected use of such facilities; 
(3)  Detail concerning the landscaping, including the type and size of plant materials to be used; 
(4)  Such other and further information as the planning department or the planning commission may deem necessary. 
(Ord. 375B §2(part), 1980: Ord. 357B §3.12.050(3), 1979)  
18.32.130 - Development permit hearing—Planning commission. 
A public hearing on the development permit for residential development shall be held by the planning commission after a completed application has been received and shall be noticed in the same manner as would be done for a rezone. After the close of public hearing, the planning commission shall forward to the city council a recommendation for approval, approval with conditions or disproval of the residential development permit. The planning commission shall not recommend approval unless it finds that the proposed development is consistent with the general development plan. A public hearing on the development permit for commercial, business and professional, and industrial development shall be held by the planning commission after a completed application has been received and shall be noticed in the same manner as would be done for a rezone. At the close of the public hearing, the planning commission may take action to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the permit. The planning commission shall not approve a commercial, business and professional, or industrial development permit unless it finds the proposed development consistent with the general development plan. No action by the city council shall be required for development permits involving industrial, business and professional, or commercial development. 
(Ord. 621B §2, 1994: Ord. 375B §2(part), 1980: Ord. 357B §3.12.050(4), 1979; Ord. No. 964B, § 17, 5-8-2018 )  
18.32.140 - Development permit hearing—City council—Approval or disapproval. 
Except as provided for in Section 18.32.130, a public hearing to consider the planning commission recommendation and the development permit shall be held by the city council and shall be noticed in the same manner as would be done for a rezone. After the close of the public hearing, the city council shall approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the development permit. A development permit shall not be approved unless the city council finds that the proposed development is consistent with the general development plan. 
(Ord. 621B §3, 1994: Ord. 375B §2(part), 1980: Ord. 357B §3.12.050(5), 1979)  
18.32.150 - Subdivision maps. 
(a)  A tentative subdivision map may be processed simultaneously with a request for a development permit or after the approval thereof. 
(b)  No development permit shall be valid until a final map, as defined by the Subdivision Map Act and implementing ordinances of the city, has been filed with the county recorder. 
(Ord. 375B §2(part), 1980: Ord. 357B §3.12.060, 1979)  
18.32.160 - Commencement of development. 
Upon approval of a development permit, and compliance with other applicable regulations, development of the area covered by the specific development plan may commence, provided that all necessary building permits and other required entitlements are obtained. 
(Ord. 375B §2(part), 1980: Ord. 357B §3.12.070, 1979)  
18.32.170 - Failure to file specific development plan. 
(a)  If no specific development plan is filed for approval within one year after approval of the general development plan, or if a period of two years elapses between the approval of a development permit for a specific development plan and the submittal of a specific development plan for development of a separate portion of the area covered by the general development plan, the planning commission shall not consider a specific development plan and development permit therefor until it has first reconsidered the general development plan and readopted or modified it. 
(b)  The planning commission may grant an extension of either or both the time periods specified in subsection (a) of this section for a period not exceeding 12 months, provided application for an extension is made prior to expiration of the applicable period. 
(c)  Except upon its own motion, adopted within 15 days after action by the planning commission under this section, no action by the city council shall be required by this section. 
(Ord. 375B §2(part), 1980: Ord. 357B §3.12.080, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.33 - P PARKS 
 
18.33.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this designation is to preserve lands for park and recreational purposes to protect the physical, social, recreational, aesthetic, and economic resources of the city. The park district may be applied to public and private recreation facilities and is intended to be applied to larger parks especially community-wide facilities, but may also be applied to smaller neighborhood facilities when it is important, due to the planned facilities or natural features, to designate the site for park uses. 
(Ord. No. 931B , § 1, 12-13-2016)  
18.33.020 - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the park district: 
(1)  Parks; 
(2)  Community center; 
(3)  Community activities; 
(4)  Sports fields; 
(5)  Hard courts; 
(6)  Playgrounds; 
(7)  Swimming pool/aquatics center; 
(8)  Public buildings. 
(Ord. No. 931B , § 1, 12-13-2016)  
18.33.030 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the park district subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit by the planning commission: 
(1)  Golf course; 
(2)  Equestrian facility; 
(3)  Farmers market; 
(4)  Private fitness classes; 
(5)  Telecommunications facility per Chapter 18.41; 
(6)  Commercial uses accessory to a permitted or conditional use, such as refreshment stands, restaurants, sports equipment rental and sales (including alcohol sales); 
(7)  Other uses, not listed under Section 18.33.020 or Section 18.33.030, which in the opinion of the community development director are of a similar and compatible nature to those uses described in this section. 
(Ord. No. 931B , § 1, 12-13-2016)  
18.33.040 - Building setbacks. 
Front: 20 feet. 
Side: 20 feet. 
Rear: 20 feet. 
From adjacent residential zoning: 50 feet. 
(Ord. No. 931B , § 1, 12-13-2016)  
18.33.050 - Building height regulation. 
Thirty-five feet. 
(Ord. No. 931B , § 1, 12-13-2016)  
18.33.060 - Lot area. 
Minimum of one acre. 
(Ord. No. 931B , § 1, 12-13-2016)  
18.33.070 - Lot width. 
One hundred feet minimum. 
(Ord. No. 931B , § 1, 12-13-2016)  
18.33.080 - Lot depth. 
One hundred feet minimum. 
(Ord. No. 931B , § 1, 12-13-2016)  
18.33.090 - Design review. 
(a)  New construction requires design review approval. The city council may determine that city council review may be substituted for design review for projects of community-wide or regional significance provided the city council determines: 
(1)  Expedited review is required to accommodate City objectives; and 
(2)  The project will not have a significant visual impact. 
(b)  Remodel/addition to an existing building requires design review approval unless the community development director determines: 
(1)  The design of the remodel or addition is consistent with the primary structure; and 
(2)  The remodel or addition will not have a significant visual impact. 
(Ord. No. 931B , § 1, 12-13-2016)  
DIVISION IV. - USES, YARDS, HEIGHTS, PARKING, LOADING, RIDESHARING AND TRANSPORTATION PLANS  
CHAPTER 18.34 - SPECIAL USES  
Article I. - Special Uses Generally 
 
18.34.010 - Use permit required—Issuance criteria. 
All of the uses listed in this chapter, and all matters directly related thereto, are declared to be uses possessing characteristics of such unique and special form as to make impractical their inclusion in any class of use set forth in the districts defined in this title. Therefore, except as otherwise specified, the authority for a location or the operation of any of the uses designated in this chapter shall be subject to the issuance of a use permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 18.56 of this title. In addition to the criteria set forth in Chapter 18.56 of this title for determining whether or not a conditional use permit should be issued, the planning commission shall consider the following additional factors in determining whether the uses listed in this chapter will be incompatible with other uses permitted in the district and surrounding areas. Such factors are: 
(1)  Damage or nuisance from noise, smoke, odor, dust or vibration; 
(2)  Hazard from explosion, contamination or fire; 
(3)  Hazard occasioned by unusual volume or character of traffic, or the congregating of a large number of people or vehicles. 
(Ord. 715B §1, 2002: Ord. 357B §4.01.000, 1979)  
18.34.020 - Special uses listed. 
The following are designated as special uses: 
(1)  Airports and landing fields; 
(2)  Cemeteries; 
(3)  Establishment of enterprises involving large assemblies of people or automobiles, including: 
a.  Amusement park and racetracks; 
b.  Circuses or carnivals; 
c.  Recreational facilities, privately operated; 
d.  Outdoor music concerts, exhibitions. 
(4)  Hospitals, sanitariums; 
(5)  Institutions of charitable nature; 
(6)  Refuse disposal sites; 
(7)  The mining of natural mineral resources, together with the necessary buildings and structures; 
(8)  Removal or deposit of earth other than in connection with the construction of buildings, roadways or home or public improvements on the site. 
(Ord. 357B §4.01.010, 1979)  
Article II. - Adult-Oriented Businesses[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 878B, § 4, adopted Jan. 22, 2013, amended Art. II, in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former Art. II pertained to sex oriented businesses and derived from Ord. 512B § 1(part), adopted in 1989. 
 
18.34.030 - Purpose. 
The city council finds that adult-oriented businesses have secondary effects, such as impacts on crime levels, property values, and on nearby retail businesses and residents, which the city seeks to avoid, mitigate, or prevent while balancing First Amendment rights with respect to these types of businesses Therefore, special regulation of these businesses is necessary to insure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhoods. The primary purpose of the regulation is to provide neutral time, place, and manner restrictions on adult-oriented businesses to prevent the concentration or clustering of these businesses in any one area. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 4, 1-22-2013)  
18.34.040 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms are defined by Section 5.44.010. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 4, 1-22-2013)  
18.34.050 - Location of adult-oriented businesses. 
(a)  Provided that the business complies with all other regulations of this section and Chapter 5.44 of the City's Municipal Code, adult-oriented businesses shall only be located, established or operated: 
(1)  Within a light-industrial (L-I), light-industrial/planned development (L-I/PD) and industrial (I) districts; 
(2)  At least 1,200 feet away from any area zoned or used for residential purposes; 
(3)  At least 500 feet away from any other adult-oriented business; 
(4)  At least 1,000 feet away from any public or private school site (developed or designated). For the purposes of this subsection, "designated" means a parcel that is general plan designated, zoned, or that has been conditionally permitted to conduct such use; 
(5)  At least 1,000 feet away from any public park, or recreational area, or property zoned, planned or otherwise designated for such use by the city; 
(6)  At least 1,000 feet away from any site used for assembly purposes by a religious organization. 
(b)  Adult-oriented businesses shall not be located in any temporary or portable structures. 
(c)  The determination as to whether the locational provisions of Section 18.34.030 disqualify an adult-oriented business from operation shall be conducted based upon the facts in existence on the date of the filing of an adult-oriented business license application or permit renewal application. 
(d)  Distances required by this section shall be measured from parcel line to parcel line. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 4, 1-22-2013)  
18.34.060 - Waiver of location provisions. 
(a)  Any property owner or his authorized agent may apply for a waiver of any location provisions as set forth in Section 18.34.050. The city council, after receipt of the planning commission's recommendation and a hearing, may waive any locational provision, if the following findings are made: 
(1)  That the proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or injurious to nearby properties, and that the spirit and intent of this chapter will be observed; 
(2)  That the proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development of a skid row area or area of intense blight; 
(3)  That the establishment of a regulated use in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation; nor, will it interfere with any program of urban renewal; 
(4)  That all applicable regulations of this code will be observed. 
(b)  The procedure for this hearing shall be the same as that provided for in Chapter 18.56 of this code for the issuance of conditional use permits. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 4, 1-22-2013)  
18.34.070 - Development and operational standards. 
In addition to the development standards in the underlying zoning district and in addition to other provisions of this code, the following development and operational standards apply to adult-oriented businesses: 
(1)  Signs. Signs, advertisements, displays, or other promotional materials showing "specific sexual activities" or men and/or women in a state of nudity or partial nudity or displaying specified anatomical areas shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be discernible by the public beyond the walls of the building or portion thereof in which the adult-oriented business is conducted. 
(2)  Noise. No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used by an adult-oriented business for amplification of sound to a level discernible by the public beyond the walls of the building or portion thereof in which the adult-oriented business is conducted. 
(3)  Exterior Lighting. All exterior areas, including off-street parking areas and premises entries, of the adult-oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one footcandle of light on parking surfaces and walkways. The lighting shall be maintained and evenly distributed at ground level with appropriate devices to screen, deflect or diffuse the lighting in such a manner as to prevent glare or reflected light from creating adverse impacts on adjoining and nearby public and private properties. Inoperable and/or broken lights shall be replaced within 72 hours. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 4, 1-22-2013)  
18.34.080 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter and the ordinance to which it is a part, or any part thereof is held for any reason to be unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases shall not be affected thereby. The city council hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter and the ordinance to which it is a part regardless of the fact that one or more sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases may be determined to be unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective. 
(Ord. No. 878B, § 4, 1-22-2013)  
Article IV. - Marijuana Regulation[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 948B , § 2, adopted September 26, 2017, repealed the former Arts. IV, and V, §§ 18.34.120—18.34.220, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Arts. IV and V pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 780B §2(part), adopted in 2004; and Ord. 785B §2(part), adopted in 2005; Ord. No. 882B, § 3, adopted May 28, 2013; Ord. No. 893B, § 2, adopted October 28, 2014; Ord. No. 914B , § 3, adopted July 26,2016. 
 
18.34.120 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate personal cultivation and prohibit all commercial cultivation and sale of recreational and medical marijuana to the extent permissible by law in order to promote the health, safety, moral, and general welfare of the residents and businesses of the city of Lincoln. 
( Ord. No. 948B, § 2, 9-26-2017 )  
18.34.130 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. If a word is not defined in this chapter, the common and ordinary meaning of the word shall apply. 
"Accessory structure" means a structure that is accessory to a principal residential structure and customarily a part thereof, which is clearly incidental and secondary to the principal structure and is significantly smaller in area than the principle structure and does not change the character of the principal structure or the principal use of the primary structure. An accessory structure must be a fully-enclosed space within a lawfully permitted building that complies with the California Building Code ("CBSC"), as adopted in the city of that has a complete roof, a foundation, slab or equivalent base to which the floor is secured by bolts or similar attachments, is secure against unauthorized entry, is accessible only through one or more lockable doors, and is not visible from a public right-of-way. Walls and roofs must be constructed of solid materials that cannot be easily broken through such as two inch by four inch nominal or thicker studs overlaid with three-eighths inch or thicker plywood or the equivalent. Plastic sheeting, regardless of gauge, or similar products do not satisfy this requirement. If indoor grow lights or air filtration systems are used, they must comply with the California building, electrical, and fire codes as adopted in the city of Lincoln and all provisions of this article. A garage, whether attached or detached and temporary buildings such as a temporary shed, greenhouse, pre-fabricated structures or other non-permanent and non-permitted structures are not accessory structures under this article. 
"Authorized grower" means a person 21 years and older who is authorized by, and in compliance with state law to cultivate marijuana indoors for personal or medical use. Authorized grower also means a person 18 years and older who is a qualified patient, as that term is described in Health and Safety Code section 11362.77. 
"Child care center" means any licensed child care center, daycare center, or child care home, or any preschool. 
"Commercial marijuana business" includes the commercial cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, distribution, delivery or sale of marijuana and marijuana products as provided for in Business and Professions Code section 26000, et seq. 
"Cultivation" means the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, or processing of marijuana plants or any part thereof. 
"Delivery of medical marijuana" means the commercial transfer of medical marijuana or cannabis products from a dispensary, up to an amount determined by the Bureau of Medical Cannabis Regulation, to a primary caregiver or qualified patient as defined in Section 11362.7 of the California Health and Safety Code, or a testing laboratory. Delivery also includes the use by a dispensary or any technology platform owned and controlled by the dispensary or independently licensed that enables qualified patients or primary caregivers to arrange for or facilitate the commercial transfer by a licensed dispensary of medical cannabis or medical cannabis products as defined in California Business and Professions Code section 19300.5(m). 
"Legal parcel" means any parcel of real property that may be separately sold in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act (Section 66410, et seq. of the Government Code). 
"Marijuana" shall mean any or all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin or separated resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin, including marijuana infused in foodstuff or other ingestible or consumable product containing marijuana. The term "marijuana" shall also include "medical marijuana" as defined in California Health and Safety Code section 11362.5 and "medical cannabis," "medical cannabis product" and "cannabis product" as defined in California Business and Professions Code section 19300.5(af). 
"Marijuana dispensary" means any business, office, store, facility, location, retail storefront, or wholesale component of any establishment, cooperative or collective that delivers medical marijuana as defined in California Business and Professions Code section 19300.5(m), or as may be amended that dispenses, distributes, exchanges, transmits, transports, sells or provides marijuana to any person for any reason, including members of any medical marijuana cooperative or collective consistent with the purposes set forth in California Health and Safety Code section 11362.5, or as may be amended. 
"Medical marijuana" means marijuana used for medical purposes in accordance with the Compassionate Use Act (Health and Safety Code § 11362.5) and the Medical Marijuana Program Act (Health and Safety § 11362.7 et. seq.) 
"Mobile marijuana dispensary" means any clinic, cooperative, club, business, group or person which transports or delivers, or arranges the transportation or delivery, of medical marijuana or medical marijuana products to a person or entity. Mobile marijuana dispensary shall not include deliveries of medical marijuana made by a permitted, lawful marijuana dispensary, operating under state law and the provisions of this chapter, to a qualified patient or primary caregiver. 
"Premises" means a single, legal parcel of property. Where contiguous legal parcels are under common ownership or control, such contiguous legal parcels shall constitute a single "premises" for purposes of this chapter. 
"Primary caregiver" means a "primary caregiver" as defined in Section 11362.7(d) of the Health and Safety Code. 
"Residential structure" means any building or portion thereof legally existing which contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation on a premises or legal parcel located within a residential zoning district. 
"Smoking" means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted combustible substance containing marijuana in any manner or in any form and use of electronic devices with electrical ignition or vaporization (e-cigarettes/cigars or similar devices) with marijuana or its byproducts in the device. 
( Ord. No. 948B, § 2, 9-26-2017 )  
18.34.140 - Marijuana dispensaries and commercial marijuana businesses prohibited. 
Any land use related to marijuana that is not specifically permitted in this article is hereby prohibited, including but not limited to marijuana dispensaries, including mobile marijuana dispensaries, and commercial marijuana businesses. Such uses are prohibited in all zones, districts, properties, and areas within the city. No person or entity shall operate or permit the operation of a marijuana dispensary or commercial marijuana business in or upon any public or private property or premises within the city. The city shall not issue, approve, or grant any permit, license, or other entitlement for the establishment or operation of a marijuana dispensary or commercial marijuana business in any zoning district. 
( Ord. No. 948B, § 2, 9-26-2017 )  
18.34.150 - Marijuana delivery prohibited. 
Delivery of marijuana and medical marijuana, as defined in Section 18.34.130, is prohibited and it shall be unlawful and violation of this chapter for any person to deliver marijuana within the city. This section does not prohibit the delivery of medical marijuana to qualified patients by their primary caregiver. 
( Ord. No. 948B, § 2, 9-26-2017 )  
18.34.160 - Outdoor cultivation prohibited. 
It is hereby declared to be unlawful, a public nuisance, and a violation of this chapter for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any parcel within any zoning district in the city to cause or allow such premises to be used for the outdoor cultivation of marijuana plants. 
( Ord. No. 948B, § 2, 9-26-2017 )  
18.34.170 - Indoor cultivation for personal use. 
Indoor cultivation of no more than six marijuana plants and in a total area of not greater than 50 square feet and only for personal, non-commercial use shall be permitted subject to the following conditions. 
A.  Locations permitted. 
1.  It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to cultivate marijuana inside any residential structure or accessory structure without a marijuana cultivation permit issued by the chief of police or his or her designee pursuant to Section 18.34.190 to ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
2.  Cultivation of marijuana is prohibited in all zones within the city except the following residential zones: R-1 (Single-Family Residential), R-2 (Duplex Residential), R-3 (Multiple Residential), R-E (Residential Estate), LDR (Low-Density Residential), MDR (Medium-Density Residential) and HDR (High-Density Residential). 
3.  There shall be no exterior visibility or evidence of marijuana cultivation outside the private residence or accessory structure from the public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, any marijuana plants, equipment used in the growing and cultivation operation, and any light emanating from cultivation lighting. 
B.  Minimum standards. The indoor cultivation of non-commercial marijuana in a residential zone shall only be conducted within a private residential structure, or accessory structure conforming to the following minimum standards: 
1.  No more than six marijuana plants in an area not greater than 50 square feet, are permitted for indoor personal cultivation within a residence or accessory structure. The total combined indoor cultivation on any parcel with a private residence and an accessory structure shall not exceed 50 square feet. For purposes of this ordinance the area used to cultivate marijuana shall be measured by the aggregate area of vegetative growth of live plants on the premises. 
2.  The building official shall consult with the director of development services and chief of police, or his or her designee, in consideration of any building permit application seeking a building permit for the construction or alteration of any residence for the purposes of marijuana cultivation. 
3.  Indoor grow lights shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) watts each and shall comply with the California Building, Electrical, and Fire Codes as adopted by the city. Gas products (including, without limitation, CO2, butane, propane, and natural gas), or generators shall not be used within any structure used for the cultivation of marijuana. 
4.  The residence shall include a fully functional and usable kitchen, bathroom, and bedroom areas for their intended use by the resident authorized grower, and the premises shall not be used primarily or exclusively for marijuana cultivation. 
5.  The authorized grower shall reside full-time in the residence where the marijuana cultivation occurs. 
6.  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit an owner of a residential structure or accessory structure from prohibiting the growing of marijuana on his or her property and as provided in Section 18.34.190, a property owner's written consent to the cultivation of marijuana at the premises, if different from the authorized grower is required. 
7.  Marijuana cultivation for sale is prohibited. 
8.  The area used for cultivating marijuana shall not be accessible to persons under 21 years old. 
9.  A minimum set back of ten feet from the property line is required for an area in which marijuana is cultivated in a residential structure or accessory structure. 
10.  Any fully enclosed and secure Accessory Structure or residential structure used for the cultivation of non-medical marijuana must have a ventilation and filtration system installed that shall prevent marijuana plant odors from exiting the interior of the structure and that shall comply with the building regulations of the City of Lincoln Municipal Code. 
( Ord. No. 948B, § 2, 9-26-2017 )  
18.34.190 - Cultivation permit. 
Prior to commencing any marijuana cultivation, the person(s) owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any legal parcel or premises where marijuana cultivation is proposed to occur must obtain a marijuana cultivation permit from the chief of police or his or her designee, to ensure compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. 
A.  Permit requirements. The following information will be required with the initial permit application and subsequent permit extensions: 
1.  The physical site address of where the marijuana will be cultivated. 
2.  The name of each person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge of any legal parcel or premises where marijuana will be cultivated. 
3.  Property owner's written consent to the cultivation of marijuana at the premises, if different from the authorized grower. 
B.  Permit duration. The initial permit shall be valid for two years, and thereafter may be extended in increments of two years upon the determination by the chief of police or his or her designee, to ensure the standards and conditions set forth in this article are being met. 
C.  Adjudication of permits by the chief of police. The chief of police may deny an application for a marijuana cultivation permit, or extension thereof, that does not demonstrate satisfaction of the minimum requirements of this chapter. 
D.  Permit fees. The city may establish, by resolution, a fee or fees required to be paid upon filing of an application for permit(s) as provided by this chapter, which fees shall not exceed the reasonable cost of administering this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 948B, § 2, 9-26-2017 )  
18.34.200 - Enforcement. 
Violations of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and may be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 1.16, 1.18, and 1.20, or any other applicable law. Violations of this chapter shall be subject to fines of not less than $500.00 as provided in Section 12.20.020(d) or as otherwise provided by city council resolution. 
( Ord. No. 948B, § 2, 9-26-2017 )  
CHAPTER 18.35 - REDEMPTION AND RECYCLING FACILITIES 
 
18.35.000 - Purpose. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to make the redemption and recycling of reusable materials convenient to the consumer in order to reduce litter and increase the recycling of reusable materials by providing for the permitting and regulating of recycling activities within the city. 
(Ord. 500B §1(part), 1987)  
18.35.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
(1)  "Administrative permit" means a permit issued by the director of community development pursuant to the requirements of Section 18.35.020 of this chapter. 
(2)  "Collection facility" means a center for the acceptance by donation, redemption, or purpose of recyclable materials from the public. Such facility does not use power-driven processing equipment except as indicated in Section 18.35.040. Collection facilities may include the following: 
a.  Reverse vending machine(s); 
b.  Small collection facilities which occupy an area of not more than 500 square feet and may include: 
1.  A mobile unit; 
2.  Bulk reverse vending machines or a grouping of reverse vending machines occupying more than 50 square feet; 
3.  Kiosk-type units which may include permanent structures; and 
4.  Unattended containers placed for the donation of recyclable materials. 
(3)  "Mobile recycling unit" means an automobile, truck, trailer, or van licensed by the department of motor vehicles which is used for the collection of recyclable materials. A mobile recycling unit also means the bins, boxes, or containers transported by trucks, vans, or trailers and used for the collection of recyclable materials. 
(4)  "Recycling facility" means a center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials. A certified recycling facility or certified processor means a recycling facility certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. A recycling facility does not include storage containers or processing activity located on the premises of a residential, commercial, or manufacturing use and used solely for the recycling of material generated by that residential property, business, or manufacturer. Recycling facilities include those facilities as set forth in the definition of "collection facilities" above. 
(5)  "Recyclable material" means reusable material including but not limited to metals, glass, plastic, and paper which are intended for the reuse, remanufacture, or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials. 
(6)  "Reverse vending machine(s)" is an automated mechanical device which accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers including but not limited to aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value of not less than the container's redemption value as determined by the state. A reverse vending machine may sort and process containers mechanically provided that the entire process is enclosed within the machine. In order to accept and temporarily store all three container types in a proportion commensurate with their relative redemption rate and to meet the requirements of certification as a recycling facility, multiple grouping of reverse vending machines may be necessary. A bulk reverse vending machine is a reverse vending machine that is larger than 50 square feet, is designed to accept more than one container at a time, and will pay by weight instead of by container. 
(Ord. 500B §1(part), 1987)  
18.35.020 - Permits required. 
No person shall permit the placement, construction, or operation of any recycling facility without first obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions set forth in this section and Chapter 18.56. The operation of a reverse vending machine and small collection facility as defined by this chapter shall require the issuance of a conditional use permit in accordance with the standards and criteria set forth in Section 18.35.040. 
(Ord. 500B §1(part), 1987; Ord. No. 964B, § 13, 5-8-2018 )  
18.35.030 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 964B , § 14, adopted May 8, 2018, repealed § 18.35.030, which pertained to permits for multiple sites and derived from Ord. 500B §1(part), 1987.  
18.35.040 - Criteria and standards for conditional use permits. 
Those recycling facilities permitted with an administrative permit shall meet all of the applicable criteria and standards listed. The criteria and standards for recycling facilities are as follows: 
(1)  Reverse Vending Machine(s). Reverse vending machines within a commercial structure may be permitted in all commercial and industrial districts with an administrative permit provided that they comply with the following standards: 
a.  The facility shall be established in conjunction with a commercial use or community service facility which is in compliance with the zoning, building, and fire codes of the city. 
b.  The facility shall be located within 30 feet of the entrance to the commercial structure and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation. 
c.  Shall not occupy parking spaces required by the primary use. 
d.  Shall occupy no more than 50 square feet of floor space per installation, including any protective enclosure, and shall be no more than eight feet in height. 
e.  Shall be constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material. 
f.  Shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions, and the identity and phone number of the operator or responsible person to call if the machine is inoperative. 
g.  Shall have a sign area of a maximum of four square feet per machine exclusive of operating instructions. 
h.  Shall be maintained in a clean, litter-free condition on a daily basis. 
i.  Operating hours shall be at least the operating hours of the host use. 
j.  Shall be illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe operation if operating hours are between dusk and dawn. 
(2)  Small Collection Facilities. Small collection facilities may be sited in commercial and industrial districts with an administrative permit provided they comply with the following conditions: 
a.  Shall be established in conjunction with an existing commercial use or community service facility which is in compliance with the zoning, building, and fire codes of the city. 
b.  Shall be no larger than 500 square feet and occupy no more than five parking spaces not including space that will be periodically needed for removal of materials or exchange of containers. 
c.  Shall be set back at least ten feet from any street line and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation. Specific locations for a facility shall be approved by the director of community development during the review of a permit. 
d.  Shall accept only glass, metals, plastic containers, papers, and reusable items. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials. 
e.  Shall use no power-driven processing equipment except for reverse vending machines. 
f.  Shall use containers that are constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material, covered when site is not attended, secured from unauthorized entry or removal of material, and shall be of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected and collection schedule. 
g.  Shall store all recyclable material in containers or in the mobile unit vehicle and shall not leave materials outside of containers when attendant is not present. 
h.  Shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials and mobile facilities at which truck or containers are removed at the end of each collection day shall be swept at the end of each collection day. 
i.  Shall not exceed noise levels of 60 dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned or occupied property, otherwise shall not exceed 70 dBA. 
j.  Attended facilities located within 100 feet of a property zoned or occupied for residential use shall operate only during the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
k.  Containers for the 24-hour donation of materials shall be at least 30 feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use. 
l.  Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material which may be deposited, the facility shall be clearly marked to identify the name and telephone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation, and display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling enclosure or containers. 
m.  Signs may be provided as follows: 
1.  Recycling facilities may have identification signs with a maximum of 20 percent per side or 16 square feet, whichever is larger; 
2.  Signs must be consistent with the character of the location; 
3.  Directional signs bearing no advertising message may be installed with the approval of the director of community development if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way. 
n.  The facility shall not impair the landscaping required by the city. 
o.  No additional parking spaces will be required for customers of small collection facilities located at the established parking lot of a host use. One space will be provided for the attendant, if needed. 
p.  Mobile recycling units shall have an area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking during hours when the unit is scheduled to be present. 
q.  Occupation of parking spaces by the facility and by the attendant may not reduce available parking spaces below the minimum number required for the primary host use unless all the following conditions exist: (a) The facility is located in a convenience zone or a potential convenience zone as designated by the California Department of Conservation; (b) A parking study shows that existing parking capacity is not already fully utilized during the time the recycling facility will be on the site; (c) The permit will be reconsidered at the end of 12 months. A reduction in available parking spaces in an established parking facility may then be allowed up to a maximum of five spaces. 
r.  If the permit expires without renewal, the collection facility shall be removed from the site on the day following permit expiration. 
(Ord. 500B §1(part), 1987; Ord. No. 964B, § 15, 5-8-2018 )  
18.35.050 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 964B , § 16, adopted May 8, 2018, repealed § 18.35.050, which pertained to permit renewal and derived from Ord. 500B §1 (part), 1987.  
CHAPTER 18.36 - UTILITIES, FENCES AND ACCESSORIES 
 
18.36.010 - Applicability. 
The use regulations specified in the various districts in this title shall be subject to the general use regulations and exceptions in this chapter. 
(Ord. 357B §4.02.000, 1979)  
18.36.020 - Utility lines and facilities. 
Subject to the provisions of Sections 18.36.021 through 19.36.025, public utility distribution and power-transmission lines and poles, and underground facilities for distribution of gas, water, communications, electricity and cable television, shall be allowed in all districts without limitations as to height or without obtaining a use permit therefor; providing, however, that all routes of proposed gas, water and electric-transmission lines shall be submitted to the city planning commission for its review and recommendation. Such recommendations shall be received prior to acquisition of rights-of-way. 
(Ord. 480B §1, 1986: Ord. 357B §4.02.010, 1979)  
18.36.021 - Purpose. 
It is the intent of Sections 18.36.021 through 18.36.025 to implement in a single procedure section 12888.5 of the California Public Utilities Code and sections 53891 and 53896 of the California Government Code which authorize the city to review and to approve or disapprove the location and construction of facilities for the transmission of electrical energy, operating at 100,000 volts or more, such as substations, transmission lines and poles, and accessory structures, by the public utilities. It is the purpose of this section to provide for these facilities in the city's communities in the most compatible and least obtrusive manner, while part of the city. The procedural rules set forth herein are designed to insure that sufficient information is provided in a timely manner to allow the city to make a reasonable and informed decision on applications submitted. 
(Ord. 480B §2(part), 1986)  
18.36.023 - Definitions. 
For purposes of Sections 18.36.023 through 18.36.025, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  "Direct impact" means interference with the use or enjoyment of a person's property, real or personal, such as visual impacts, noise impacts, and interference with antenna reception. 
(2)  "Feasible" means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social, and technological factors. 
(3)  "High voltage transmission facilities" means electrical transmission lines, poles, accessory structures operated at the electrical potential of 100,000 volts or greater, and substations where at least one of the transmission lines connecting with the facility is operated at the electrical potential of 100,000 volts or greater. 
(4)  "Public utility" means a municipal utility district as defined by section 11501 et seq. of the Public Utilities Code of California, and including but not limited to the Sacramento Municipal Utility District ("SMUD"). 
(5)  "Substation" means a facility which transforms electrical energy to a lesser voltage for the purposes of subregional or localized distribution, or which functions as a transition point from overhead to underground electrical transmission lines, or which acts as the point of convergence for two or more transmission lines. 
(Ord. 480B §2(part), 1986)  
18.36.025 - Procedure. 
(a)  Location. High voltage transmission facilities may be located in any zone subject to the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Permit Required. A transmission facilities permit is required to construct and locate a high voltage transmission facility in any zone. Application for a transmission facility permit shall be filed with the planning department and shall be subject to a filing and investigation fee. Transmission line fees shall be the same as conditional use permit fees; substation fees shall be the same as rezoning fees. 
(c)  Information to Accompany Permit Application. An application for a environmental document prepared and certified pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act, Public Resources Code section 21000 et seq., sufficient in detail to allow the planning commission and the city council to determine the exact nature and extent of the use. The application shall include, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The expected electrical requirements, as determined by the public utility of the areas within the district which will be affected by the project; 
(2)  The locations and capacities of the high voltage transmission facilities proposed, together with a description of basic technical and design concepts that favor the selection of the chosen locations and a list of feasible alternative sites; 
(3)  An assessment of the type and magnitude of the direct impacts of the proposed project and of each alternative; 
(4)  Mitigation measures: 
a.  The measures to be implemented by the public utility to compensate for or mitigate the direct and indirect impacts of the project; and 
b.  Where any portion of a proposed project is adjacent to residentially zoned residentially used property or the Lincoln Airport, a discussion of feasible routing alternative. 
5.  Any other information the planning director deems necessary to allow the planning commission and city council to determine the exact nature and extent of the proposed project and any impacts of the project. 
(d)  Hearings. 
(1)  Within 30 days after an application for a transmission facilities permit is filed and accepted as complete, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing thereon. The procedural requirements for the hearing shall be governed by Chapter 18.92 of the Lincoln Municipal Code; provided, that said hearing may be initiated by the permit applicant. 
(2)  Mailed notice of the hearing shall be provided at least ten days prior to the hearing to the owners of all property within 400 feet of the property subject to the permit; provided, that if such mailed notice would result in notice to more than 250 persons, as an alternative to such mailed notice, notice may be given by placing an advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation within the area affected by the proposed facilities. 
(3)  The planning commission shall recommend approval, approval of an alternative, or disapproval of the permit and transmit said recommendation to the city council. 
(4)  Upon receipt of a recommendation on the permit from the planning commission, the city council shall set the matter for hearing and give notice thereof as provided in subsection 18.36.025(d)(2). The hearing shall be conducted within 60 days of the date the application and environmental document was filed and accepted as complete; and the city council shall adopt a resolution approving, approving an alternative, or disapproving the permit. 
(e)  Review Criteria and Findings. The planning commission and the city council shall evaluate applications for transmission facilities permits in accordance with intent and purpose statement contained in Section 18.36.021 and any applicable land use plans and policies adopted by the city council. Any decision of the city council on a transmission facilities permit application shall be based on findings concerning: 
(1)  The consistency of the proposed facilities with the city's general plan and applicable redevelopment and specific plans; 
(2)  Whether there are feasible alternatives to the proposal; and 
(3)  Such other factors related to the public health, safety, and welfare as are included within the policies set forth below for assessing transmission facilities permits. 
(f)  Policies. The city adopts the following policies for reviewing transmission facilities permit applications: 
(1)  To discourage within the city lattice towers along new transmission lines rights-of-way or along portions of existing right-of-way utilized for expansion of the transmission system. 
(2)  To incorporate into a project mitigation measures appropriate to the site of a particular project and each transmission line segment of a project whenever feasible, such as undergrounding or rerouting transmission lines to reduce economic impacts, visual impacts and antenna reception interference, reducing the number of poles or towers used for a project, using landscaping to screen or soften the visual impacts of projects, and incorporating sound attenuation measures into projects. 
(3)  To locate substations on other than local or collector streets. 
(4)  The following routing preferences are adopted: 
a.  Preference shall be given to the location of transmission lines in the rank order specified below: 
1.  Within existing public utility transmission rights-of-way or rights-of-way anticipated for other projects proposed pursuant to Sections 18.36.021 through 18.36.025. 
2.  Adjacent to railroads or adopted freeway routes. 
3.  Adjacent to or through existing or planned agricultural uses. 
4.  Along or adjacent to major arterial streets where existing or planned uses are commercial or industrial. 
b.  Preference shall be given to the location of substations in the following rank order: 
1.  Areas designated for industrial or commercial land uses in an adopted plan. 
2.  Undeveloped areas designated for residential use in an adopted plan. 
3.  Areas designated agricultural-urban reserve in an adopted plan. 
4.  Sites designated for residential use in an adopted plan and surrounded by existing residential uses. 
(Ord. 480B § 2(part), 1986)  
18.36.030 - Mobile homes, boats, trailers and recreational vehicles. 
Mobile homes, trailer coaches, camp cars, trailers or boats maintained on any lot, piece or parcel of land, other than a lawful commercial storage facility, mobile home park, trailer park or trailer court or compatible single-family lot as determined by Chapter 18.60, shall comply with the following conditions: 
(1)  The vehicle, trailer or boat shall not be maintained in any required front yard or side street yard. The vehicle or boat shall be located behind a six-foot-high wall, fence or adequate landscaped screen within the side or rear yard. 
(2)  The vehicle, trailer or boat shall be situated not closer than three feet to any main building. 
(3)  The vehicle, trailer or boat shall not be used for sleeping quarters nor shall any sanitary or cooking facilities be used therein. 
(4)  The vehicle, trailer or boat shall be registered at the location where it is parked. 
(Ord. 730B § 4, 2003) (Ord. 389B § 1, 1981: Ord. 357B § 4.02.020, 1979)  
18.36.040 - Fences, hedges and walls. 
Fences, hedges and walls may be erected in any district subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Fences, hedges and walls not exceeding six feet in height may occupy any side, side street or rear yard area, provided: 
a.  That such fences, walls or hedges do not extend into any front yard; 
b.  That in the case of a corner lot, fences, walls and hedges may extend to within five feet of the side street yard property line along a side street or into the portion of the rear yard abutting the side street yard. 
c.  Fences, hedges and walls not exceeding four feet in height may occupy the front yard provided they obtain a city encroachment permit if so required by the city engineer. 
(2)  Fences or structures exceeding six feet in height, for the purpose of enclosing commercial or industrial uses, or tennis courts and similar uses, when located on the rear half of a lot, may be erected subject to the obtaining of a conditional use permit as provided in Chapter 18.56. Fences around electric substations or other public facilities may exceed six feet in height without securing a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 824B, § 1, 10-23-2007; Ord. 799B § 6, 2006; Ord. 685B § 1, 2000; Ord. 357B § 4.02.030, 1979)  
18.36.050 - Accessory buildings. 
(a)  Where an accessory building is attached to the main building, it shall be made structurally a part of and have a common roof with the main building, and shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this title applicable to the main building. As defined in Section 18.36.060, an accessory structure located in any "R" district shall not be located within five feet of the side line of the lot or, in the case of a corner lot, within ten feet of the street side line. 
(b)  A garage, attached or detached, which has vehicle access onto an alley shall not be located within ten feet of any alley. A garage, attached or detached, which is located adjacent to an alley but has no vehicle access to the alley may be located no closer than five feet to the alley. 
(c)  Residential garage entrances opening onto a front or side street yard shall be located not less than 20 feet from the public street; provided that in the case of Hollywood drive from a side street yard (i.e., garage door is perpendicular to street), the minimum shall be ten feet from the public street. 
(Ord. 799B § 7, 2006; Ord. 717B § 1, 2002: Ord. 498B § 1, 1987; Ord. 456B § 2, 1984; Ord. 357B § 4.02.040, 1979)  
18.36.060 - Accessory uses. 
Accessory uses are defined as uses incidental, related, appropriate and clearly subordinate to the main use of the lot or building, which do not alter the principal use of the lot or building or adversely affect other properties in the district. Such accessory uses are authorized in any district subject to the definitions set forth above. 
(Ord. 357B § 4.02.050, 1979)  
18.36.070 - Swimming pools. 
(a)  Swimming pools in any "R" residential district shall be constructed only on the rear one-half of the lot or 50 feet from the front property line, whichever is less; such pools shall not be located closer than three feet from the rear lot line, not closer than three feet from any side lot line, nor closer than ten feet from any side street yard lot line. If an easement exists, it shall not be encroached upon. 
(b)  Filter and heating systems for any pool shall not be located closer than five feet from any property line. 
(c)  No pool shall occupy over 50 percent of the required rear yard of any multiple dwelling or dwelling group. Coverage by a swimming pool shall not be considered in measuring maximum lot coverage. 
(Ord. 494B § 1, 1987: Ord. 357B § 4.02.060, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.37 - SECOND DWELLING RESIDENTIAL UNITS 
 
18.37.010 - Permitted use. 
A second dwelling unit, as defined by California Government Code section 65852.2(i)(4), is permitted on any lot located within any low density residential district or zone provided a permit is obtained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 733B §1(part), 2003)  
18.37.020 - Zones. 
A second dwelling unit is permitted on any lot located within any low-density residential district or zone subject to the standards prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. 733B §1(part), 2003)  
18.37.030 - Requirements for a second dwelling unit. 
A second dwelling unit may be permitted only if all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  There must be no more than one existing single-family dwelling on the lot for which an application under this chapter is submitted; 
(2)  No zoning code or building code violation exists on the lot on which the second unit is to be located; 
(3)  The existing unit must be owner occupied. The property owner shall enter into a restrictive covenant which shall be recorded against the property. The covenant shall require that one of the two units be owner-occupied and prohibit rental of both the primary and secondary dwelling units at the same time. The covenant shall further require that the city be notified of the sale of the property upon the close of escrow; 
(4)  The utility service for the proposed second dwelling unit must be serviced through the existing single-family dwelling service; 
(5)  The second dwelling unit is not intended for sale and may be rented; provided that the existing dwelling unit is owner occupied; 
(6)  The second dwelling unit is either attached to the existing dwelling, or located within the living area of the existing dwelling, or detached from the existing dwelling and located on the same lot as the existing dwelling; 
(7)  Construction of the unit complies with the applicable local building code requirements for detached dwellings, as appropriate. Construction shall conform to design review, fees, charges and any other zoning requirements generally applicable to residential construction in the zone in which the property is located. 
(Ord. 733B §1(part), 2003)  
18.37.040 - Size. 
The maximum size of an attached unit shall not exceed 30 percent of the existing living area of the primary residence or 640 square feet. The maximum size of a detached unit shall not exceed 640 square feet. "Living area" as used in this chapter, means the interior habitable area of a dwelling unit, including basements and habitable attics, but not including garages or any accessory structures. The maximum number of bedrooms shall not exceed two. 
(Ord. 733B §1(part), 2003)  
18.37.050 - Findings for approval of a second dwelling unit. 
In addition to other required findings, the following finding must be made to approve the second unit: all public services, including water, fire flow, and public sewer can be provided and the unit will not have an adverse impact on the delivery of such services. 
(Ord. 733B §1(part), 2003)  
18.37.060 - Development standards. 
All second dwelling units must comply with the setback, lot coverage and building separation standards within the zone that are applicable to the primary structure. The subject parcel must be of conformance with the standards prescribed for the parcel size, lot width, lot depth and lawful public access. Any parcel that does not conform to such requirements shall not be granted approval for a second dwelling unit. 
(Ord. 733B §1(part), 2003)  
18.37.070 - Height regulation. 
The height of a second unit shall not exceed one story, except that a second story structure may be approved provided, it is determined the structure is not out of character with the neighborhood and the existing structure. 
(Ord. 733B §1(part), 2003)  
18.37.080 - Parking requirement. 
One additional paved off-street parking space shall be required for each second dwelling bedroom. The parking spaces for the existing primary structure and/or the second dwelling unit shall not be located within any required setback area. The second dwelling unit parking shall be in addition to the required minimum of two off-street parking spaces for a single-family unit. 
(Ord. 733B §1(part), 2003)  
18.37.090 - Architectural style. 
The second dwelling unit must be of the same architectural type, style, material and texture of the existing primary structure; and subordinate in bulk and relationship to the main residence. 
(Ord. 733B §1(part), 2003)  
18.37.100 - Fees, exactions requirements. 
For the purpose of the assessment of all fees and exactions consistent with this code, construction of a second dwelling unit shall be considered separate from that of the existing single-family dwelling on the lot, and the payment of fees and exactions for such second unit shall be in addition to those which may have been paid for the existing single-family dwelling. The city council may, by policy, provide for fee modifications, waivers or deferments. 
(Ord. 733B §1(part), 2003)  
18.37.110 - Inspection authority. 
A permit for second dwelling units issued pursuant to this chapter shall be conditioned upon, and the applicant must agree to allow inspections of the site and proof of compliance with this chapter, and the requirements imposed in the granting of the permit, and other city codes, resolutions and ordinances. 
(Ord. 733B §1(part), 2003)  
18.37.120 - Existing second unit. 
This chapter shall in no way validate any existing illegal second dwelling unit. 
(Ord. 733B §1(part), 2003)  
CHAPTER 18.38 - AREA AND YARD REGULATIONS 
 
18.38.010 - Applicability. 
The area, yard and other regulations specified in this title in the various districts are subject to the general regulations in this chapter. 
(Ord. 357B § 4.03.000, 1979)  
18.38.020 - Substandard residential lots. 
In any "R" district, a single-family dwelling may be erected on any lawfully created parcel of land, the area of which meets the requirements of this title. No structure shall be erected on any substandard lot if the parcel was acquired from the owner of record of contiguous property, or his transferee, after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The width of yards for single-family dwellings constructed pursuant to this section may be reduced to ten percent of the width of the lot but in no instance less than three feet. 
(Ord. 357B § 4.03.010, 1979)  
18.38.030 - Distances between and around buildings. 
Dwelling groups shall be constructed so that the following minimum distances are provided between buildings and between buildings and lot lines: 
(1)  The sum of the height of any two adjacent buildings, divided by two, but in no case less than 15 feet, shall be maintained between main buildings. 
(2)  A minimum of 15 feet shall be maintained between a side yard line and the access side of a single row of dwelling groups. 
(Ord. 357B § 4.03.020, 1979)  
18.38.040 - Garage or carport entrance orientation. 
Except in the case of a single-family dwelling, any garage or carport required by the provisions of this division, or required by the conditions of any conditional use permit, shall be constructed so that no entrance or open side faces, or opens onto, a street contiguous to any lot or parcel, unless such entrance or open side can be closed by means of a door, or doors, or similar device, or is screened by a fence, hedge, wall or similar structure which is not more than 50 percent transparent. 
(Ord. 357B § 4.03.030, 1979)  
18.38.050 - Projection of porches, landings and stairways into yards. 
Open, uncovered, raised porches, landing places or outside stairways may not project into any required side, front or rear yards. 
(Ord. 357B § 4.03.040, 1979)  
18.38.060 - Projection of architectural features into yards. 
Architectural features on the main building, such as cornices, eaves, canopies and sills, may not extend more than two feet into any side yard or side street yard. Eaves and canopies may extend a maximum of three feet into the required front or rear yard. 
(Ord. 357B § 4.03.050, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.40 - HEIGHT REGULATIONS 
 
18.40.010 - Applicability—Chimneys, steeples and similar appurtenances. 
The height regulations specified for the various districts in this title shall be subject to the height regulations and exceptions in this chapter. Exception: Where chimneys, silos, cubicles, flagpoles, monuments, gas storage holders, water tanks, church steeples and similar structures and mechanical appurtenances are permitted in the district, height limits may be exceeded upon the securing of a conditional use permit from the planning commission pursuant to the provisions in Chapter 18.56. 
(Ord. 690B § 1, 2000: Ord. 357B § 4.04.000, 1979)  
18.40.020 - Excessive height permitted when. 
In any district in which the height limit is less than 75 feet, public and semipublic buildings, communication equipment buildings, schools, churches, hospitals, other institutions and commercial buildings permitted in such districts may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet upon securing a conditional use permit from the planning commission. 
(Ord. 799B § 8, 2006: Ord. 357B § 4.04.010, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.41 - WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES  
Article I. - General 
 
18.41.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide uniform standards for the design, placement and permitting of wireless telecommunication facilities consistent with applicable federal requirements. The standards are intended to minimize the adverse visual impacts and operational effects of these facilities through appropriate design, siting and screening techniques while providing for the communication needs of residents, local businesses and governmental agencies. 
(Ord. 690B §2 (part), 2000)  
18.41.020 - Authority. 
Wireless telecommunication facilities are regulated at the federal, state and local level. In February 1996, the Federal Government enacted the 1996 Telecommunications Act. This Act contains provisions concerning the placement of antenna structures and other facilities for use in providing personal wireless services. Specifically, Section 704 preserves the right of local agencies to regulate these facilities based on aesthetics, visual impacts and land use impacts. 
(Ord. 690B §2 (part), 2000)  
18.41.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
(1)  "Antenna" means any system of wires, poles, rods, discs or other similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency electromagnetic waves when such system is external or attached to the exterior of a structure. 
(2)  "Co-location" means the practice of sharing support structures and buildings by wireless telecommunications providers (either public or private). 
(3)  "Façade mounted antenna" means an antenna that is directly attached to or affixed to any building façade. 
(4)  "Flush mounted antenna" means an antenna mounted to a structure which does not project above the facade to which it is mounted, does not project more than 18 inches from the surface it is mounted to, and is a minimum of 15 feet above grade. 
(5)  "Ground mounted antenna" means an antenna with its support structure placed directly on the ground. 
(6)  "Lattice tower" means a three or more legged open structure designed and erected to support wireless telecommunication antennas and connecting appurtenances. 
(7)  "Monopole" means a single pole structure (non-lattice) designed and erected to support wireless telecommunications antennas and connecting appurtenances. 
(8)  "Panel antenna" means an antenna or array or antennas designed to concentrate a signal in a particular area. Panel antennas are typically flat, rectangular devices generally less than six square feet in size, although some types are larger. Also known as directional antennas. 
(9)  "Roof mounted" means an antenna directly attached to the roof of an existing building, water tank, tower or structure other than a telecommunications tower. 
(10)  "Stealthing" means improvements or treatments added to wireless telecommunications facility which mask or blend the proposed facility in to the existing structure or visual backdrop in a such a manner as to render it "minimally visible" to the casual observer. Stealthing may utilize, but does not require, concealment of all components of the wireless facility. 
(11)  "Wireless telecommunication facility" means any structure, antenna, pole, equipment and related improvements which support the wireless telecommunications industry in the transmission and/ or reception of electromagnetic signals. 
(Ord. 690B §2 (part), 2000)  
Article II. - Permitting 
 
18.41.040 - Overview. 
Wireless telecommunications facilities that are generally considered to have minimal impacts or which are exempt from local review by state or federal statutes have been classified as exempt under this article and are not subject to discretionary review when in compliance with the development standards set forth herein. Other wireless telecommunication facilities that have the potential to create impacts have been categorized to allow for additional review. Unless listed below as exempt or prohibited, no wireless telecommunication facility shall be constructed without first obtaining the prescribed permit. 
(Ord. 690B §2 (part), 2000)  
18.41.050 - Pre-application. 
Two pre-application meetings are recommended for all wireless telecommunications proposals. The first should take place at the earliest stage of site location research and should include a service area map and description of the type of antenna facility required. The second is recommended after the site is selected and should include a preliminary site plan and visual impact drawings. No fees are charged for review of material submitted at this stage. 
(Ord. 690B §2 (part), 2000)  
18.41.060 - Submittal requirements. 
All applications for wireless telecommunication facilities shall be submitted to the community development department. The number and size of plans shall be determined by the community development director or his designee, who may waive certain requirements or require additional information based on specific project factors. Any submittal shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Submittals shall include all application materials generally required for the type of permit sought (i.e., conditional use permit). 
(2)  Site plan, including all facility related support and protection equipment. Plan shall also describe general project information including the type of facility, number of antennas, height to top of antenna(s), radio frequency range, wattage output of equipment, statement of compliance with current FCC requirements and a description of the anticipated maintenance program and back-up generator power testing schedule. 
(3)  Elevations of all proposed wireless telecommunication structures and appurtenances, and composite elevations from the street(s) and view-sheds showing the proposed project and all buildings on the site. 
(4)  Photo simulations, photomontage, story poles, elevations or other visual or graphic illustrations necessary to determine potential visual impact of the proposed project. Visual impact demonstration shall include accurate scale and coloration of the proposed facility. 
(5)  Landscape plan that shows existing vegetation, vegetation to be removed and proposed plantings by type, size, location and method of irrigation. If deemed necessary, the community development director or his/her representative may require a registered arborist's report to document project impacts on existing vegetation. This report may recommend protective measures to be implemented during and after construction. 
(6)  A geographic service area map with and without the proposed facility showing "hand-off" sites within the city planning area and distances between these sites. The map shall illustrate the geographic area the facility could be located in and all other existing sites that could be used for the proposed antenna location. The map shall also include all wireless telecommunication facilities of all telecommunication service providers within 1,000 feet of the proposed site. 
(7)  Provide a discussion of and supporting information regarding alternative site selection and co-location opportunities in the service area. Each application shall demonstrate how the proposed facility satisfies the locational preference guidelines established by resolution. If the proposed location is not a preferred location, the application shall describe the preferred location sites within the geographic service area, a statement why each alternative site was rejected and a contact list used in the site selection process. 
(8)  Provide noise and acoustical information for the base transceiver station(s) equipment buildings, and associated equipment such as air-conditioning units and back-up generators. 
(9)  A cumulative impact analysis may be required for the proposed facility and other wireless telecommunication facilities on or near the project site. The analysis shall include the height of all existing and proposed wireless telecommunication facilities on or near the site, dimensions of all antennas and support equipment on or near the site, power rating for all existing and proposed back-up equipment and a report estimating the ambient radio frequency fields and cumulative electro-magnetic radiation at the proposed site. 
(10)  Statement by the applicant of willingness to allow other carriers to co-locate on their facilities whenever technically and economically feasible and aesthetically desirable. 
(Ord. 690B §2 (part), 2000)  
18.41.070 - Exempt facilities. 
The following wireless telecommunication facilities are exempt from discretionary review under this chapter, provided they meet the location and design requirements set forth below: 
(1)  Interior and exterior facilities accessory to a residential use of a site, including, but not limited to, television antennas, satellite dishes and amateur radio facilities meeting the requirements set forth below. 
a.  One satellite dish or other similarly scaled telecommunication device not exceeding one meter in diameter per dwelling unit. Satellite dishes and similar devises may not extend above the roof peak or parapet. Satellite dishes and similar devises placed on property zoned multi-family use shall not be located in such a manner as to result in visual clutter. 
b.  Ground-mounted antennas and support structures shall not be located within the front or side yard setbacks. 
c.  Antenna height shall not exceed the maximum allowable building height by more than ten feet. 
(2)  Public safety facilities including transmitters, repeaters and remote cameras meeting the requirements set forth below. 
a.  Facilities shall be located on existing public structures such as buildings, towers, bridges and light poles. 
b.  Facilities shall be treated to match the supporting structure. 
(3)  Wireless telecommunication facilities accessory to other public equipment such as irrigation controls, well monitoring and traffic signals. 
(4)  Wireless telecommunication facilities erected and operated for emergency situations meeting the requirements set forth below: 
a.  The facility shall be removed at the conclusion of the emergency. 
(5)  Mobile facilities when placed on a site for less than 24 consecutive hours. 
(6)  Facilities specifically exempted under state or federal law. 
(Ord. 690B §2 (part), 2000)  
18.41.080 - Class I facilities—Administrative design review. 
Class 1 facilities as described below shall require an administrative design review approval from the community development director or his/her designee pursuant to Chapter 18.68 of this code and must meet the criteria as set forth in this section. The community development director or his/her designee shall have authority to approve an administrative design review application upon a determination that the criteria set forth in Section 18.41.080 has been met. Within ten days of receiving a complete application, the community development director will render a determination regarding the approval of the application. The director shall have the authority to approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application. The community development director may, at his or her discretion, schedule for review by the planning commission any application for approval. The planning commission shall have the authority to approve, approve with conditions or deny all applications for design review if so scheduled by the director. Class I facilities shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Additional antennas on a tower for which a conditional use permit has been previously approved that allows co-location and meet the requirements set forth below. 
a.  The tower was constructed and is operating in accordance with the requirements of the conditional use permit. 
b.  The type and size of proposed antenna(s) is consistent with the requirements of the conditional use permit. 
c.  The new antenna array does not exceed the height of the existing tower. 
d.  The antenna array is the second or third grouping on the tower. 
e.  The proposed array fits within the three-dimensional envelope of the existing tower and arrays. 
f.  The proposed array does not include a microwave dish greater than one meter in diameter. 
g.  The combined EMR for all arrays does not exceed state or federal standards. 
h.  The new array does not require major modifications to the existing tower. 
i.  The new array is consistent with the style and color of the existing tower and arrays. 
j.  The new array does not contain graphics, lettering, signage, markings or advertisement except for necessary safety warnings required by law. 
(2)  Facade mounted antennas in industrial zones meeting the requirements set forth below: 
a.  The lowest part of the antenna shall be a minimum of 15 feet above grade. 
b.  The antenna and mountings shall not project more than 18 inches from the building surface to which it is mounted. 
c.  Antennas, connections and supports shall be treated to match the color scheme of the building. 
d.  Antennas and connections shall not project above the mounting facade. 
e.  Ground-mounted support equipment shall be undergrounded or screened from public view. 
f.  Exterior electrical lines serving the equipment cabinet or building shall be undergrounded. 
g.  If panel type antennas are proposed, the total square footage of all panels shall not exceed 25 square feet on any facade. 
(3)  Wireless telecommunication facilities concealed from public view or fully integrated into the site architecture of non-residential structures to be constructed, renovated or remodeled. 
(Ord. 690B §2 (part), 2000)  
18.41.090 - Class II facilities—Design review. 
Class II facilities as described below shall be reviewed in accordance with Chapter 18.64 of this code (Design Review) and must meet the criteria as set forth in this section. Class II facilities consist of the following: 
(1)  Any exempted or Class I facility which does not meet the location and design standards of Sections 18.41.070 or 18.41.080, respectively; 
(2)  Any mobile antenna when placed on a site for more than 24 hours, but less than 30 days meeting the requirements set forth below: 
a.  Antenna vehicle/trailer shall be located only on an improved surface. 
b.  Parking and access for support personnel shall be on an improved surface. 
c.  Day and night safety marking shall be provided. 
d.  The antenna vehicle/trailer and support parking shall not be located within a public right-of-way. 
(3)  Roof-mounted facilities on non-residential structures meeting the requirements forth below: 
a.  The facility and related equipment shall be fully screened from public view or architecturally integrated into the building design. 
b.  Antennas shall match the color scheme of the building facade to which they are attached. 
c.  Ground-mounted equipment shall be undergrounded or screened from public view. 
d.  Antennas and support structures shall not exceed the allowable height limit for the zone or exceed the roof parapet by more than six feet, which ever is less. 
(4)  Wireless telecommunication antennas on publicly owned or publicly utilized lands meeting the requirements set forth below: 
a.  Antennas may be mounted on existing buildings or structures. Ground-mounted antennas shall not exceed 15 feet. 
b.  The antennas shall be integrated into the site and/or structure design. 
c.  Ground-mounted equipment shall be undergrounded or screened from public view. 
d.  Parking and access shall be on an improved surface. 
(5)  Replacement of previously approved towers in commercial and industrial zones meeting the requirements set below: 
a.  The height of the new tower is equal to or less than the existing tower. 
b.  If technological improvements or developments occur which allow the use of a materially smaller or a less visually obtrusive tower, the applicant may be required to upgrade the tower to minimize adverse impacts. 
(6)  Placement of private carrier facilities on utility, signal or lighting structures within a public right-of-way or easement meeting the requirements set forth below: 
a.  Antennas shall be treated to match the supporting structure. 
b.  Antennas mounted in residential areas shall be no more than two feet in height and one foot in width. In all zones, antenna size shall be limited to the minimum functional size. 
c.  Ground-mounted equipment shall be undergrounded or screened from public view. 
d.  The city retains the right to deny an application for this type of wireless telecommunication facility based on aesthetic impacts alone. 
(7)  Antenna arrays mounted on existing signs, water towers, sport field light towers and other similarly scaled structures meeting the requirements set forth below: 
a.  Antennas shall be treated to match the supporting structure. 
b.  Ground-mounted equipment shall be undergrounded or screened from public view. 
c.  The city retains the right to deny an application for this type of wireless telecommunication facility based on aesthetic impacts alone. 
(Ord. 690B §2 (part), 2000)  
18.41.100 - Class III facilities—Conditional use permit. 
Class III wireless as described below shall be reviewed in accordance with Chapter 18.56 of this code (Conditional Use Permits), and must meet the criteria as set forth in this section. Class III facilities shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Any Class II facility which does not meet the location and design standards of Section 18.41.090; 
(2)  Monopole or lattice tower facilities in any zone meeting the requirements set forth below: 
a.  Monopoles and lattice towers shall be located and designed to minimize visual impacts. Towers located in high visibility locations shall incorporate "stealth" design techniques to disguise the tower as art/sculpture, clock tower, flagpole, tree or other appropriate and compatible visual form. 
b.  Monopole and lattice towers shall be located on the rear half of the parcel, unless aesthetic benefit is achieved through an alternative location. 
c.  New private monopoles and lattice towers shall not be located within 500 feet of residentially zoned or developed parcels. 
d.  Monopoles and lattice towers shall generally not be permitted within 1,000 feet of an existing tower. This standard may be modified upon a finding by the planning commission that the cumulative visual impacts are not significant and that the tower is necessary to provide services not possible with co-location on an existing tower or structure in the service area. Independent review of the request, at the applicants cost, may be required by the director of community development. 
e.  Monopoles and lattice towers shall be designed at the minimum functional height. Tower height shall generally not exceed the maximum height for buildings in the zoning district in which it is located by more than ten feet. This standard may be modified upon a finding by the planning commission that the cumulative visual impacts are not significant and that the height is necessary to provide services not possible with a tower meeting the height standard. Independent review of the request, at the applicant's cost may be required by the director of community development. If no maximum building height is established in this chapter, the height of the tower shall be reviewed for the visual impact on the surrounding land uses and the community. 
f.  As a condition of approval for all monopoles and lattice towers, the applicant shall provide the city with a written commitment that they will allow other service providers to co-locate on towers where technically and economically feasible. 
g.  Ground mounted equipment shall be undergrounded or screened from public view. 
h.  Parking and access shall be on an improved surface. 
(3)  Non-accessory wireless telecommunication facilities located on residentially developed land meeting the requirements set forth below: 
a.  Wireless telecommunication facilities which are not accessory to single-family or two-family dwellings, shall not be permitted on lands zoned or developed for such use. 
b.  Wireless telecommunication facilities shall be limited to building or facade mounted facilities which are integrated into the architectural design and treated to match the building. 
c.  Wireless telecommunication facilities shall meet all state and federal requirements for health and safety pertaining to distance from sensitive receptors. 
(4)  Wireless telecommunications facilities located on publicly owned lands not otherwise having local land use zoning, but lying within the jurisdiction of the city meeting the requirements set forth below: 
a.  Monopole and lattice towers must be in compliance with the standards of subsection 18.41.100(2) of this chapter. 
b.  Shall be subject to periodic review as established in Section 18.41.190 of this chapter. 
c.  Ground-mounted equipment shall be underground or screened from public view. 
d.  Parking and access shall be on an improved surface. 
(5)  Other wireless telecommunication facilities not listed as exempt, permitted, or prohibited. 
(Ord. 690B §2 (part), 2000)  
18.41.110 - Prohibited facilities. 
The following wireless telecommunication facilities shall be prohibited: 
(1)  Wireless telecommunication facilities located within designated sensitive habitat areas such as habitat restoration areas. The department of community development shall maintain a map identifying such areas; 
(2)  Wireless telecommunication facilities where the combined EMF/RF exceeds the state or federal standard; 
(3)  Non-accessory wireless telecommunication facilities located on lands developed or zoned for single-family or duplex residential districts. 
(Ord. 690B §2 (part), 2000)  
Article III. - Location and Design Standards 
 
18.41.120 - General standards. 
(a)  In any instance where a wireless telecommunication facility requires design review approval under the ordinance codified in this chapter, the director of community development shall have the discretion to also require a conditional use permit upon finding that the facility may have significant negative impacts on surrounding properties or land uses. 
(b)  If technological improvements or developments occur which allow the use of materially smaller or less visually obtrusive equipment, the service provider may be required to replace or upgrade an approved facility upon application for a new permit m order to minimize the facility's adverse impacts on land use compatibility and aesthetics. 
(c)  Each service provider with a wireless telecommunication facility in the city shall obtain a city business license prior to initiation of service. 
(Ord. 690B §2 (part), 2000)  
18.41.130 - Location and design standards. 
The city council may, by resolution, establish location and design guidelines for wireless telecommunication facilities. Such guidelines shall be consistent with the development standards established in this chapter and shall be considered and applied by the community development department and planning commission when considering applications for the development or replacement or wireless telecommunication facilities. 
(Ord. 690B §2 (part), 2000)  
18.41.140 - Height. 
(a)  All wireless telecommunication facilities shall be designed to the minimum functional height required. 
(b)  Unless otherwise noted in this chapter, wireless telecommunications facility height shall not exceed the maximum allowable building height for the zone in which the facility is located by more than ten feet. If no maximum building height is established in the this chapter, the height of the facility shall be reviewed for the visual impact on the surrounding land uses and the community. 
(c)  The height of a wireless telecommunication tower shall be measured from the natural, undisturbed ground surface below the center of the base of said tower to the top of the tower itself or, if higher, the tip of the highest antenna or piece of equipment attached thereto. 
(d)  The planning commission may approve an increase in height upon making the determination that the additional height is necessary to meet the technical requirements of the facility at a specific location and that the health, safety and general welfare of the public warrants the increase in height. 
(Ord. 690B §2 (part), 2000)  
18.41.150 - Landscaping. 
(a)  Landscaping, wherever appropriate, shall be used as screening to reduce visual impacts of wireless communication facilities. Any proposed landscaping shall be visually compatible with existing vegetation m the vicinity. 
(b)  Existing landscaping in the vicinity of a proposed wireless communication facility shall be protected from damage during and after construction. Submission of a tree protection plan may be required to ensure compliance with this requirement. 
(c)  Off-site landscaping may be required to mitigate off-site impacts, subject to willing property owners. Additional landscaping may also be required in public rights-of-way to obscure visibly of wireless telecommunication facilities from passing motorists, bicyclists and pedestrians. 
(Ord. 690B §2 (part), 2000)  
Article IV. - Management 
 
18.41.160 - Public health and safety. 
(a)  No wireless communication facility or combination of facilities shall generate, at any time, electromagnetic frequency radiation (EMF) or radio frequency radiation (RF) in excess of the FCC adopted standards for human exposure, as amended over time. 
(b)  All wireless telecommunication facilities must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate such facilities. If such standards and regulations are changed, the property owner or responsible party shall bring such facilities into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling agency. Any violation of this section is hereby deemed a public nuisance and shall constitute grounds for revocation of any permits and/or approvals granted under this chapter. Such violations shall also constitute grounds for abatement and removal of the wireless telecommunication facility by the city at the property owner's expense. 
(c)  If it is found that wireless telecommunication facilities are or will be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of persons working or residing near such facilities, then the service provider(s) shall be solely responsible for the removal, adjustment or replacement of the facilities. In no case shall the facility remain in operation if it is found to create a hazard to health, safety and welfare. A facility shall not be found to create a hazard to health, safety or welfare as a result of EMF or RF emissions from the facility so long as it meets all then current standards established by the FCC or other federal agency having jurisdiction. 
(d)  The wireless telecommunication service provider shall submit a certification to the community development department from a licensed engineer in the field of EMF/RF emission, ten days after full power operation, and on two-year intervals after the initial certification, verifying that the facility is and has been operated within the then current applicable federal standards for EMF/RF emission standards. The report shall consider cumulative effects of co-located facilities and be written in plain English. 
(Ord. 690B §2 (part), 2000)  
18.41.170 - Noise. 
(a)  Wireless telecommunication facilities, power sources, ventilation and cooling facilities shall not generate noise discernable beyond the property lines. Wireless telecommunication facilities located on occupied buildings shall not produce noise that is discernible to the building occupants. 
(b)  Back-up generators shall only be operated during power outages and for testing and maintenance on weekends between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
(Ord. 690B §2 (part), 2000)  
18.41.180 - Minimum performance standards. 
(a)  Wireless telecommunication facilities shall not be operated in any manner that would cause interference with the city's emergency telecommunication system. 
(b)  Fencing, barriers or other appropriate measures to restrict access to wireless telecommunication facilities shall be maintained. 
(c)  The service provider(s) shall maintain all required warning and emergency contact signs at the wireless telecommunication site. The signs shall not include advertising and shall be posted in a manner to reduce visual clutter. 
(d)  Lighting shall not be permitted on wireless telecommunication facilities unless required as a public safety measure. If lighting is required, the city may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to surrounding uses. Security lighting installed at wireless telecommunication facility sites shall only be operational when personnel are present. 
(Ord. 690B §2 (part), 2000)  
18.41.190 - Periodic review. 
(a)  The city may conduct a periodic review of wireless communication facilities to consider whether or not the facility is conforming with the conditions of its discretionary approval or appropriate permits. The city shall consider whether or not the facility is conflicting with emerging land uses approved under the applicable general or specific plan. If the city concludes that adverse impacts to emerging land uses can be reduced through the use of new technology, or through the retirement of the current facility, the carriers shall work with the city to develop a plan for achieving these mitigation goals. 
(b)  The city may impose a condition limiting the duration of any permit for a wireless telecommunication facility located on a property zoned other than industrial. As part of such condition, the city shall specify the threshold which would trigger termination of the permit following a duly noticed public hearing. 
(Ord. 690B §2 (part), 2000)  
18.41.200 - Implementation and monitoring costs. 
(a)  The wireless telecommunication service provider or its successor(s) shall be responsible for the payment of all reasonable costs associated with monitoring the conditions of approval contained in any discretionary approval issued pursuant to this chapter of this title, including costs incurred by the city or any other appropriate agency. The community development department shall collect such costs on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. 690B §2 (part), 2000)  
18.41.210 - Transfer of operation. 
Any carrier/service provider authorized by the city to operate a wireless telecommunication facility may assign the operation of the facility to another service provider licensed by the FCC provided that advanced notice of the transfer is given to the community development director and all conditions of approval for the subject facility are carried out by the new service provider. Notwithstanding the above, a service provider may transfer, without advanced notice, operation of a facility to its general partner or any party controlling or controlled by the existing service provider. 
(Ord. 690B §2 (part), 2000)  
18.41.220 - Abandonment. 
If any wireless communication facility or attached wireless communication facility is not operated for a continuous period of six months, the service provider shall notify the community development director. A wireless communication facility shall be considered abandoned and shall be removed by the facility owner within the next six months and the site restored to its original setting. The city may, at its discretion, require the posting of a performance surety to cover the cost of the removal of abandoned facilities. 
(Ord. 690B §2 (part), 2000)  
18.41.230 - Revocation of permit. 
Wireless telecommunication service providers shall fully comply with all conditions related to any permit or approval granted under this chapter. Failure to comply with any condition shall constitute grounds for revocation. If a condition violation is not remedied within a reasonable period, the community development director may schedule a public hearing before the planning commission to consider revocation of the permit or approval granted under this chapter. The planning commission revocation action may be appealed to the city council. 
(Ord. 690B §2 (part), 2000)  
18.41.240 - Severability. 
If any action, subsequent sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is, for any reason, held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 690B §2 (part), 2000)  
18.41.250 - Use of outside consultants. 
From time to time the city may contract for the services of a qualified outside consultant to supplement staff in the review of proposed wireless telecommunication facilities. The use of outside consultants shall be at the applicant's expense. The cost of these services shall be in addition to all other applicable fees associated with the project, and shall be contracted for and administered by the city. 
(Ord. 690B §2 (part), 2000)  
18.41.260 - Appeals. 
Any person dissatisfied with the decision to either approve or deny a development permit for the construction or modification of a wireless telecommunication facility, excluding exempt facilities, may file an appeal in accordance with Chapter 18.94 of this title. 
(Ord. 690B §2(part), 2000)  
CHAPTER 18.42 - SETBACK MEASUREMENTS 
 
18.42.010 - Applicability. 
Yard depth and similar regulations specified in this title for the various districts shall be subject to the regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. 357B §4.05.000, 1979)  
18.42.020 - Measurement of setbacks. 
The setback of all buildings and structures shall be determined by the exterior boundaries of the streets and highways and their proposed widenings and extensions as indicated in the circulation element of the general plan. The width of any street or highway which does not appear in the circulation element of the general plan shall be determined from the standards for street widths and improvements as prescribed in Title 17 of this code. 
(Ord. 357B §4.05.010, 1979)  
18.42.030 - Front setback where substandard adjoins. 
In R-1 and R-2 districts, where four or more lots in a block have been improved with buildings at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this title, the minimum required front setback shall be an average of the setback on the improved lots, if the setbacks are less than the minimum requirements for the above districts. 
(Ord. 357B §4.05.020, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.44 - PARKING AND LOADING AREAS  
Article I. - Off-Street Parking Requirements 
 
18.44.010 - Accessible off-street parking required—Requirements minimal. 
Accessible off-street parking shall be provided as set forth in this chapter for the uses specified within this title. These provisions are deemed the minimum requirements and nothing shall preclude the installation of more parking spaces. 
(Ord. 387B § 1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B § 4.06.000, 1979)  
18.44.020 - Number of spaces required—When required. 
Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in connection with the erection or increase by units or dimensions, or the moving of any building or structure, in the amounts set out in this article. 
(Ord. 387B § 1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B § 4.06.010, 1979)  
18.44.030 - Residential uses. 
Off-street parking spaces shall not be located in the required front-yard, side-yard, or rear-yard setback areas in residential districts, including R-1, R-2 and R-3 districts. Off-street parking shall be provided in the following manner: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings shall provide an attached or detached two-car garage or carport. In those instances where rear-yard access is available, the garage or carport can be provided in the rear yard as long as such structures comply with all other provisions of Chapter 18.12. The two-car garage or carport shall have minimum interior dimensions of 20 feet by 20 feet. The garage door shall have a minimum opening of 16 feet. 
Duplexes and multiple residential dwellings shall provide a two-car garage or carport per family unit. 
(2)  Apartment and dwelling groups shall provide two parking spaces per one bedroom unit (one covered and one uncovered), two parking spaces per multiple bedroom unit to be located in a garage or carport and one guest parking space per every five units. The guest parking does not need to be located in a garage or carport. 
(3)  Roominghouses shall provide one parking space per guestroom and an additional parking space for every two employees. 
(4)  Resthomes shall provide one parking space for each bed and an additional parking space for every two employees. 
(5)  Hospitals shall provide one parking space for each patient bed or 1,000 square feet and an additional parking space for every four employees. 
(6)  Hotels and motels shall provide at least one parking space per each sleeping room, suite of rooms or housekeeping unit. If the hotel or motel is combined with other uses such as a restaurant or bar, the parking shall be determined by requiring at least 100 percent of the required parking for the principal use and the other uses shall provide, in addition, not less than 70 percent of the parking spaces which would otherwise be required if the uses were by themselves. 
(Ord. 799B § 9, 2006; Ord. 746B § 1, 2003; Ord. 629B § 1, 1995; Ord. 387B § 1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B § 4.06.020, 1979)  
18.44.040 - Business and professional offices—Personal-service uses. 
Business and professional offices, and personal-service establishments, shall provide at least one parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area and an additional parking space for every two employees. 
(Ord. 387B § 1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B § 4.06.030, 1979)  
18.44.050 - Financial institutions. 
Financial institutions shall provide one parking space for every 300 square feet of gross floor area and an additional parking space for every two employees. 
(Ord. 387B § 1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B § 4.06.040, 1979)  
18.44.060 - Service stations. 
Service stations shall provide one parking space per 1,000 square feet of the total ground and building area used for sales and service. 
(Ord. 387B § 1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B § 4.06.050, 1979)  
18.44.070 - Theaters, restaurants and bars. 
Theaters, restaurants and bars shall provide not less than one parking space for each five seats and an additional parking space for every two employees. 
(Ord. 387B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §4.06.060, 1979)  
18.44.080 - Commercial uses. 
Commercial uses conducted exclusively within a building shall provide one parking space for each 250 square feet of floor area. 
(Ord. 387B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §4.06.070, 1979)  
18.44.085 - Health clubs/fitness centers. 
Health clubs/fitness centers shall provide one space per 150 square feet of weight room, pool and spa; one space per 50 square feet of aerobics/martial arts area; one space per tanning/massage room; and two spaces per court (tennis/other racquet-type). Additional spaces for other uses such as retail areas, restaurants, and offices shall be calculated using one space per 300 feet of area with locker and dressing rooms being excluded. If the facility also has outdoor recreation areas, then the facility shall provide one space per 100 square feet of pool area and two spaces per court. 
(Ord. 775B §1, 2004)  
18.44.090 - Shopping centers. 
Shopping centers shall provide one parking space for each 225 square feet of floor area. 
(Ord. 387B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §4.06.080, 1979)  
18.44.100 - Churches—Funeral homes. 
Churches and funeral homes shall provide one parking space per four seats, and one for every 40 square feet of floor area within the assembly area. In cases where benches or pews are being used, one seat would equate to 18 inches. 
(Ord. 746B §2, 2003: Ord. 387B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §4.06.090, 1979)  
18.44.110 - Industrial uses. 
For all industrial uses, one parking space shall be provided for each three employees, but in no case less than one parking space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(Ord. 387B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §4.06.100, 1979)  
18.44.120 - Warehouse and storage buildings. 
Warehouse and storage buildings shall provide at least one parking space for each employee plus one parking space for each company-operated vehicle, or one parking space for each 2,000 square feet of gross floor area whichever is greater. 
(Ord. 387B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §4.06.110, 1979)  
18.44.130 - Halls—Places of public assembly. 
For dancehalls, skating rinks, auditoriums, exhibition halls and similar places of public assembly where there is space for set-up seating or where there is no fixed seating, there shall be provided one parking space for each 100 square feet of floor area used for dancing, skating or assembly. 
(Ord. 387B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §4.06.120, 1979)  
18.44.140 - Uncovered sales areas. 
Uncovered sales areas such as for new or used automobile, boat or trailer sales, lumber or building material yards, plant nurseries or similar uses shall provide a minimum of five customer parking spaces for the first 5,000 square feet of uncovered sales area and three customer parking spaces for each additional 1,000 square feet of uncovered sales area. In addition, there shall be one parking space for each employee. 
(Ord. 387B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §4.06.130, 1979)  
18.44.150 - Schools. 
(a)  Elementary schools shall provide at least one parking space for each employee plus bus loading space for at least two school buses. 
(b)  Junior high schools shall provide at least one parking space for every three seats in the main auditorium or assembly hall or one parking space for each employee plus off-street loading space for school buses. 
(c)  High schools shall provide the greater of the following: 
(1)  At least one parking space for each employee and one parking space for every three students in the eleventh and twelfth grades; or 
(2)  At least one parking space for every three seats in the main auditorium or stadium, whichever is the greater. 
(Ord. 387B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §4.06.140, 1979)  
18.44.160 - Uses not listed. 
For uses not listed in this article, off-street parking requirements will be determined by the city planning department and planning commission as deemed necessary to provide for the transportation needs of the use and to promote the general welfare. 
(Ord. 387B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §4.06.150, 1979)  
18.44.170 - Most restrictive regulations apply. 
If more than one standard is applicable in any individual case, the more restrictive regulation shall apply. 
(Ord. 387B §1 (part), 1981: Ord. 357B §4.06.160, 1979)  
18.44.180 - Central business district—Requirements. 
The central business district is described in the map attached to the ordinance codified in this title and by this reference incorporated herein. Uses within this district shall provide off-street parking in the following amounts: 
(1)  Commercial Uses. For new construction, one parking space for each 400 square feet of floor area. For reconstruction, one parking space for each 800 square feet of floor area. 
(2)  Shopping Centers. Such uses shall provide one parking space for each 250 square feet of floor area. 
(3)  Business and Professional Offices and Personal Services. Such uses shall provide at least one parking space for each 400 square feet for new construction, and for reconstruction at least one parking space for each 800 square feet; and in either classification an additional parking space for every three employees. 
(4)  Theaters, Restaurants and Bars. Such uses shall provide not less than one parking space for each five seats and an additional parking space for every two employees. 
(5)  Service Stations. One parking space per 1,000 square feet of the total ground and building area used for sales and service. 
(6)  Uses Not Listed in this Section. For uses within the central business district but not listed in this section, off-street parking requirements shall be determined by the city planning staff and planning commission as deemed necessary to provide for transportation needs in the central business district and to promote the general welfare. 
(7)  More Restrictive Provisions to Apply. If more than one standard is applicable in any individual case, the more restrictive regulation governing the central business district shall apply. 
(Ord. 387B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §4.06.170, 1979)  
18.44.190 - Central business district—Existing buildings—Enlargement. 
If the off-street parking maintained on a lot in connection with a building or other structure located in the designated central business district existed at the time the ordinance amending these provisions was adopted is insufficient to meet the requirements of this chapter, or where no parking space has been provided, the provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to require the provision of additional parking or facilities. 
However, such building or structure shall not be enlarged to create additional floor area, seating capacity or guestrooms, as the case may be, unless additional parking space is supplied and maintained to meet the requirements of this title for such additional floor area, seating capacity or guestrooms. 
(Ord. 615B §1, 1994: Ord. 387B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §4.06.180, 1979)  
18.44.200 - Off-site facilities—In-lieu fee. 
In any case where it is not physically possible to provide required parking on the property being developed, and when approved by the planning commission, the parking requirements may be satisfied by either or a combination of both of the following: 
(1)  Provide the required parking on nearby property. Any plan submitted shall include a description of the alternative parking and a determination of the length of time such parking will be available for use; 
(2)  Submit a cash payment in lieu of the required parking space. Such fee shall be equal to the cost of purchasing and developing the number of parking spaces required but not provided by the applicant. The city council shall set this fee by resolution. The council shall consider the cost of the newest public parking lot and any increases in such cost since construction in determining this fee. 
(Ord. 387B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §4.06.190, 1979)  
18.44.210 - Mixed uses. 
When the use is constructed in conjunction with other uses, the parking shall be determined by requiring at least 100 percent of the required parking for the principal use, and the other uses shall provide, in addition, not less than 70 percent of the parking spaces which would otherwise be required if they were used by themselves. 
(Ord. 387B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §4.06.200(1), 1979)  
18.44.220 - Fractional spaces. 
When units or measurements determining the number of required parking spaces results in requirements of a fractional space, any fraction up to one-half shall be disregarded, and fractions of one-half or over shall require one parking space. 
(Ord. 387B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §4.06.200(2), 1979)  
18.44.230 - Seating capacity calculation. 
In churches, sports arenas and other places of assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews, booths or other similar seating facilities, each 20 inches of such seating shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of determining the requirements for off-street parking facilities pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 387B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §4.06.200(3), 1979)  
18.44.240 - Dimensions and layout of spaces. 
All off-street parking facilities provided pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall comply with the minimum dimensions for off-street parking and maneuvering space as illustrated on the following page: 
STANDARD CITY OFF-STREET PARKING DIAGRAM 
Minimum dimensions for off-street parking shall be as follows: 
  
LEGEND 
* 	For handicapped drivers using crutches or wheelchairs, 12 feet is recommended. 
** 	Twenty-foot minimum aisles recommended for two-directional use. 
(X) 	Cars per lineal feet. 
A choice 	Based on the number of spaces needed, dimensions of available area, and access pattern. 
B choice 	Eight-foot increases the number of cars but makes parking more difficult. Ten-foot makes parking convenient but allows fewer cars. 
 
NOTES 
Wider spaces are recommended for in-and-out customer parking and for cross-slopes over five percent; narrower spaces may be used for compact cars and employee parking. Parking dimensions should be selected to best serve the needs of customers, clients or employees using the parking spaces. Spaces narrower than nine feet in width are not recommended, and only in cases of unusual property constraints including size, shape, topography and location will the planning department consider such a request. 
Within the range of minimum standards shown, the planning department shall have the authority to determine and approve the parking layout utilized for each parking lot based upon factors of traffic safety, customer/client convenience and the public welfare. The planning department shall also have the authority to establish and/or approve parking stalls and maneuvering area dimensions for parking angles other than those set forth in this section. 
(Ord. 387B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §4.06.220, 1979)  
18.44.250 - Handicapped spaces. 
Provision of handicapped parking stalls shall be determined as follows: 
Total No. of Spaces 	No. of Handicapped Spaces 
0—100 	1 plus 1 for each 40 or fraction thereof 
101—200 	4 plus 1 for each 80 or fraction thereof over 120 
 
(Ord. 387B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §4.06.230, 1979)  
Article II. - Development and Maintenance of Parking, Loading and Similar Outdoor Areas 
 
18.44.260 - Purpose of provisions—Applicability. 
The purpose of this article is to provide safeguards to life, limb and property and to promote the public welfare by providing for the erection and maintenance of curbs or barriers near sidewalk areas and the surfacing and drainage of property which is utilized for: 
(1)  Off-street parking areas; 
(2)  Off-street loading and unloading areas; 
(3)  Off-street pickup and delivery areas; 
(4)  Storage, sale, rental and service areas for any type of mobile equipment, goods, materials or objects. 
(Ord. 387B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §4.06.210(1), 1979)  
18.44.270 - Barriers required to prevent right-of-way encroachment. 
Except at approved driveways, every off-street parking area, every off-street loading or unloading area, and every storage, sale, rental or service area for any type of mobile equipment, goods, materials or objects shall have erected and maintained thereon barriers which shall be so located as to prevent any portion of a parked vehicle, equipment or object from projecting into the public right-of-way. The required barriers shall be as follows: 
(1)  For off-street parking areas, there shall be developed and maintained a buffer area between the parking area and the adjacent sidewalk or sidewalk area of not less than three feet in total width surrounded by a curbing not less than six inches in height and thickness. 
(2)  For off-street loading or unloading or storage, sale, rental or service areas for any type of mobile equipment, goods, materials or objects, there shall be erected and maintained thereon, adjacent to the sidewalk or sidewalk area, a curb or barrier, at least six inches in height or thickness, of either concrete, wood, masonry, iron, steel or other suitable material. 
(Ord. 387B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §4.06.210(2), 1979)  
18.44.280 - Surfacing—Grading—Drainage. 
Every off-street parking area, every off-street loading or unloading area, and every storage, sale, rental or service area for any type of mobile equipment, goods, materials or objects shall be surfaced with hard, durable, plant-mix asphaltic paving at least two inches thick after compaction and four inches of aggregate base material or with Portland cement concrete paving at least three inches thick. Alternative hard surface materials, which in the opinion of the city engineer are of equal durability to asphalt/concrete may be approved by the city. All such areas shall be surfaced and graded as approved by the city engineer in such a manner as to provide the site with adequate drainage. No building permit shall be issued for any building with an accompanying parking or service area unless the surfacing and drainage plans for such areas have been approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 629B §2, 1995: Ord. 387B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §4.06.210(3), 1979)  
18.44.290 - Approval required—Plans. 
Every person desiring to establish, change or enlarge an off-street parking area, off-street loading or unloading area, or storage, sale, rental or service area for any type of equipment, goods, materials or objects shall make an application to the city engineer for the approval of such facilities. Such application shall be accompanied by three copies of the layout, grading and paving plans. 
(Ord. 387B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §4.06.210(4), 1979)  
18.44.300 - Manner of entry and exit. 
Except for single-family and two-family dwellings, no parking area or facility shall be developed and maintained which requires that vehicles back out over the sidewalk or sidewalk area into the adjacent street. All parking areas and facilities, except as otherwise provided in this section, shall be designed so that vehicles enter and exit the street right-of-way in a head-on manner, and that all traffic circulation occurs within the boundaries of the parking site. 
(Ord. 387B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §4.06.210(5), 1979)  
18.44.310 - Fencing of parking areas abutting residential uses. 
Wherever any portion of a parking area abuts property zoned for residential use, an approved solid fence shall be erected to a height not less than six feet as prescribed by the building inspector. 
(Ord. 387B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §4.06.210(6), 1979)  
18.44.320 - Use of parking areas. 
Parking areas shall be used for automobile parking only, with no sales, dead storage, repair work, dismantling or servicing of any kind. 
(Ord. 387B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §4.06.210(7), 1979)  
18.44.330 - Lighting. 
If lighting is provided, such lighting shall be arranged to reflect away from residential areas, public streets and highways. 
(Ord. 387B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §4.06.210(8), 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.45 - RIDESHARING PROGRAM AND TRANSPORTATION PLANS  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
18.45.010 - Ridesharing program established. 
The Lincoln ridesharing program is established. 
(Ord. 418B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §11.01.000, 1979)  
18.45.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose and intent of the ridesharing program is to: 
(1)  Reduce total vehicle emissions in the South Placer region by reducing the number of vehicular trips that might otherwise be generated by home-to-work commuting; 
(2)  Reduce peak-hour traffic circulation in the South Placer region by reducing both the number of vehicular trips and the vehicular miles of travel that might otherwise be generated by home-to-work commuting. 
(Ord. 418B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §11.01.010, 1979)  
18.45.030 - Objective of reducing commuter trips. 
The fundamental objective of the ridesharing program as established by this chapter is to reduce the average number of vehicular trips for home-to-work commuting to 25 percent fewer trips than would occur if all such trips were made in single-occupant motor vehicles. Large employment facilities will be expected to accomplish a higher percentage of this reduction than small employment centers in recognition of the greater opportunity for rideshare matches at large employment facilities. 
(Ord. 418B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §11.01.020, 1979)  
18.45.040 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Applicant" means an applicant for a conditional use permit, zoning change or tentative subdivision map for: 
(1)  A new use or uses which, individually or collectively, may generate employment for 200 or more employees at a common work location; or 
(2)  For the expansion of an existing project for a use or uses which, individually or collectively, after expansion, may generate both: 
a.  Twenty percent more employment than the applicant's base-line employment, and 
b.  Employ 200 or more employees at one common work location. 
"Base-line employment" means the average number of employees employed at a common work location for the 12-month period ending on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter as determined by the transportation coordinator. 
"Carpool" means a motor vehicle occupied by two or more persons traveling together. 
"Common work location" means either a single building or a group of buildings or work locations at a common site. "Commuter" means an employee who travels regularly to and from a facility. 
"Commuter matching service" means any system for mapping and matching home and work locations of interested commuters to identify prospects for ridesharing. 
"Major project controller" means every employer or common work location with 100 or more employees working at a single site for at least 20 hours per week. 
"Peak-hour commuter" means any employee who travels regularly to and from a facility three or more days a week and arrives at or departs from the facility during the morning hours of 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. or the evening hours of 4:30 p.m. to 5:30 p.m. 
"Project controller" means the lessor of a common work location whose tenants, individually or collectively, employ ten or more but less than 50 employees, or an employer who employs ten or more but less than 50 employees or the owner or operator of an educational facility which employs ten or more but less than 50 employees, or has more than 500 but less than 1,000 students enrolled in a secondary or higher level of school. 
"Ridesharer" means any employee who commutes to and from his or her work location by any mode other than single-occupancy light-duty or medium-duty vehicle, motorcycle or moped. 
"Sacramento Rideshare Program" means the commuter matching service and commuter information service operated by the CALTRANS-Sacramento Ridesharing Project. 
"Shift of employment" means any group of employees who work at a common work location and who arrive and depart from work in a common time interval not greater than one hour. 
"South Placer Transportation Coordinator or Transportation Coordinator" means the coordinator of transportation information and transportation plans, as established by the coordination agreement for the South Placer Task Force Relating to Highway 65, a joint powers agreement entered into by the county and the cities of Roseville, Rocklin and Lincoln, as it exists as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and as it may thereafter be amended. 
"Transportation Control Measure (TCM) Coordinator" means that individual assigned by the Placer County transportation commission to assist member jurisdictions in complying with the provisions of the trip reduction ordinances. 
"Transportation plan" means the plan submitted by an applicant and approved by the city pursuant to Article 3 of this chapter (Section 18.45.090 et seq.). 
(Ord. 604B §1, 1993; Ord. 418B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B Ch. 11 Art. 3, 1979)  
18.45.050 - Other requirements unaffected. 
No section or provision of this chapter shall preclude application of any other development standards, requirements or conditions of approval that may be imposed in the project review and approval procedures of the city. 
(Ord. 418B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §11.02.000, 1979)  
Article II. - Ridesharing Requirements 
 
18.45.060 - Incentives. 
Every project controller and major project controller shall encourage ridesharing for tenants and employees by providing the following incentives to ridesharing: 
(1)  Posting. Posting in a conspicuous place or places information materials provided by the transportation coordinator to encourage ridesharing. Informational materials may include: 
a.  Current schedules, rates (including procedures for obtaining transit passes), and routes of mass transit service to the common work location or employment site, 
b.  The location of all bicycle routes within at least a five-mile radius of the common work location or employment site, 
c.  Posters or flyers encouraging the use of ridesharing and referrals to sources of information concerning ridesharing; 
(2)  Commuter Matching Service. Disseminating annually to all tenants and employees, and to new tenants and new employees when hired, written information provided by the transportation coordinator regarding an area-wide commuter ridesharing matching service. 
(Ord. 418B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §11.04.000, 1979)  
18.45.070 - Facilitation of use. 
Every new major project controller and any existing project controller or major project controller who expands his work force from base-line employment by 20 percent or more and who, after expansion, employs 50 or more employees at a common work location, shall facilitate the tenants' or employees' use of an area-wide ridesharing program by: 
(1)  Ridesharing Coordinator. Designating an employee or other appropriate person to serve as a ridesharing coordinator. The ridesharing coordinator's responsibilities shall include: 
a.  Publicizing the availability of public transportation, 
b.  Communicating employee or tenant transportation needs to the transportation coordinator, 
c.  Assisting employees or tenants in forming carpools or vanpools, 
d.  Maintaining a current employee and/or tenant transportation profile showing the distribution of employees and tenants by transportation mode, 
e.  Conduct an annual commute survey as part of the annual reporting requirement; 
(2)  Sacramento Rideshare Program. Using the Sacramento Rideshare Program, or an equivalent independent matching service; 
(3)  Parking Facilities. Establish preferential parking facilities for carpools and vanpools, and provide parking for bicycles as follows: 
a.  Preferential Parking. If a major project controller provides or subsidizes off-street parking facilities or spaces to any employee or tenant for the parking of motor vehicles used primarily for commuting between place of residence and the common work location or employment site, such major project controller shall provide guaranteed parking spaces for each carpool and vanpool in which its tenants or its employees participate, under more favorable terms and conditions than are afforded to parking of single-occupant motor vehicles. Parking spaces assigned to exclusive carpool or vanpool use shall be so designated with appropriate signing or pavement markings. Such parking shall be made available on request of any carpool or vanpool to the major project controller's ridesharing coordinator, 
b.  Bicycle Parking Facilities. Bicycle parking facilities which will accommodate the parking and securing of bicycles shall be made available at the request of any tenant or employee whose primary mode of commuting is by bicycle, made to the major project controller's ridesharing coordinator. 
(Ord. 604B §2, 1993; Ord. 418 §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §11.04.010, 1979)  
18.45.080 - Applicability. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Division V of this title (Section 18.46.010 et seq.), all existing project controllers and major project controllers within the city shall comply with the provisions of this article immediately upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The provisions of this article shall also apply to all future project and major project controllers, including those subject to Article III of this chapter. 
(Ord. 418B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §11.04.030, 1979)  
Article III. - Transportation Plans 
 
18.45.090 - Required when. 
This article shall apply to every applicant for a conditional use permit, zoning change or tentative map for: 
(1)  A new project which would allow a use or number of uses that, individually or collectively, would employ 100 or more employees at one common work location; or 
(2)  The expansion of an existing project which would allow a use or uses that, individually or collectively, after expansion, may both: 
a.  Generate employment for 100 or more employees; and 
b.  Increase the total number of employees at the common work location by 20 percent or more from the applicant's base-line employment. 
(Ord. 604B §§3, 4, 1993: Ord. 418B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §11.05.000, 1979)  
18.45.100 - Contents. 
The applicant shall submit, along with any other required information, a transportation plan for the project. The transportation plan shall include the following: 
(1)  Description. A description of the activity and operating characteristics of the proposed project (e.g., business hours and peak hours of traffic generation); 
(2)  Estimate. An estimate of the commuting characteristics of the tenants and/or employees anticipated at the project site (e.g., travel distance and mode); 
(3)  Mitigation Measures. Mitigation measures designed to achieve a reduction in the number of vehicle trips that would occur if all home-to-work trips by the anticipated tenants or employees were made in single-occupant vehicles. The applicant shall design a program to achieve a 30-percent reduction in vehicle trips. Such mitigation measures shall be selected by the applicant and may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Payment of subsidies or provision of other incentives to carpoolers or vanpoolers, 
b.  Payment of parking charges or absorption of vanpool operation expense for ridesharers, 
c.  Payment of subsidies or provision of incentives for the use of transit or transportation by other than single-occupant motor vehicles, 
d.  Provision of amenities, such as bicycle lockers, transit shelters, shuttle buses, etc., designed to enhance the use of other than single-occupancy motor vehicles, 
e.  An adequate number of shower and personal locker facilities for regular bicycle commuters, 
f.  A vanpool program consisting of a continuously outstanding offer to acquire a van or vans (by purchase, lease or otherwise), to obtain insurance and to make available to any group of at least eight employees a van for their use in a vanpool, 
g.  Provisions for shifting of vehicle trips from the peak hour to the nonpeak hours. A reduction in vehicle trips per day shall be permitted and calculated in the following manner: The number of trips taken out of the peak hour, divided by the estimated total trips multiplied by 25 percent would equal the percent reduction of vehicle trips per day credited, 
h.  Any other program the applicant may devise, 
i.  Assistance in transportation plan preparation will be provided by the city through the transportation control measure (TCM) coordinator. A TCM coordinator will be provided to the city by the Placer County transportation commission. The TCM coordinator's tasks shall include: conducting an initial survey regarding employees' use of alternative transportation modes which all employers will be asked to participate in; conducting an annual commute survey as part of assisting the employer's annual reporting requirements. 
(Ord. 604B §5, 1993; Ord. 418B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §11.05.010, 1979)  
18.45.110 - Administrative review and evaluation. 
The transportation plan shall be referred to the transportation coordinator for review and evaluation of the proposed mitigation measures and for recommendation to the planning commission or the city council. 
(Ord. 418B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §11.05.020, 1979)  
18.45.120 - Approval, modification or disapproval. 
The planning commission or city council, as the case may be, shall review and evaluate the transportation plan and shall approve, modify and approve or disapprove the transportation plan as part of the review and approval process for the application under submission. No project application subject to the provisions of this article shall be approved without approval of the transportation plan. The transportation plan shall not be approved unless it is found to meet the trip-reduction objectives established in subsection 18.45.100(3). 
(Ord. 418B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §11.05.030, 1979)  
18.45.130 - Compliance agreement. 
As a condition of approval of the project, the city may require the applicant to enter into a written agreement with the city obligating the applicant to comply with the transportation plan. Such agreement shall be made to run with the land and bind all successors in interest of the applicant and shall constitute an equitable servitude on the property. Where appropriate, the city may require the agreement to include a provision for a penalty, in the event of breach by the applicant or a successor in interest, and, where the applicant is required to construct physical improvements on the project site, to include a provision for improvement security for the construction in a form approved by the city attorney. 
(Ord. 418B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §11.05.050, 1979)  
18.45.140 - Compliance required for other approvals. 
Compliance with the approved transportation plan shall be included as a condition of approval for the application under consideration, and may be included as a term of a development agreement between the city and the project applicant. 
(Ord. 418B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §11.05.070, 1979)  
18.45.150 - Credit for ridesharing actions. 
Actions required in Article II of this chapter may be credited in the transportation plan for their potential contribution to the trip-reduction objective as required by this article. 
(Ord. 418B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §11.05.080, 1979)  
18.45.160 - Reduction of required parking spaces as trip reduction accomplished. 
Parking space requirements for tenant or employee parking for the project may be reduced below the prevailing parking standard by a percentage of the total number of spaces required that is equivalent to the percentage of trip reduction that is to be achieved by the programs specified in the transportation plan. In no case shall parking space reduction exceed the prevailing parking requirements or standards relating to tenants or employees. 
(Ord. 418B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §11.05.090, 1979)  
18.45.170 - Annual compliance report. 
Each applicant subject to the requirements of this article, and all successors in interest of the applicant obligated to carry out the transportation plan or any part thereof, shall submit to the transportation coordinator a report by March 1st every year describing the transportation program. The report shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Description. A description of the measures taken to comply with this chapter, including an accounting of the resources expended on rideshare promotion activities; 
(2)  Use. The average number of tenants and/or employees regularly arriving at and leaving the project site for the reporting period by each of the following methods of transportation: 
a.  Single-passenger motor vehicles (including mopeds); 
b.  Carpools; 
c.  Van-type vehicles with eight or more commuters; 
d.  Mass transit; 
e.  Bicycles; 
f.  All others. 
(3)  Numbers. The total number of tenants and/or employees at the project site shall be included in the report; 
(4)  The rideshare coordinator will be responsible for conducting an annual commute survey as part of the employer's annual reporting requirements. 
(Ord. 604B §6, 1993; Ord. 418B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §11.06.000, 1979)  
Article IV. - Enforcement 
 
18.45.180 - Responsibility of planning department. 
The provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the city planning department. 
(Ord. 418B §1 (part), 1982: Ord. 357B §11.07.030, 1979) 
Editor's note— Ord. 418B added two sections numbered "11.07.030" to Ord. 357B. The other is codified as §18.45.220.  
18.45.190 - Inspection and noncompliance notice—Ridesharing requirements. 
(a)  The transportation coordinator shall periodically review compliance with the general requirements of Article II by on-site checks at the common work location or employment site. 
(b)  In the event of noncompliance, the transportation coordinator shall report to the city planning director, who shall review the transportation coordinator's report. If the planning director determines that the project controller or major project controller is in noncompliance with the requirements of Article II, he or she shall issue a letter to the project controller specifying the points of noncompliance. 
(Ord. 418B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §11.07.000, 1979)  
18.45.200 - Inspection and noncompliance notice—Transportation plans. 
(a)  The planning director, with the assistance of the transportation coordinator, shall monitor the implementation of transportation plans required pursuant to Article III of this chapter. Monitoring shall occur through the reporting procedure required in Section 18.45.170, as well as by periodic on-site checks at the facility, and an annual review of compliance with the transportation plan. 
(b)  If the planning director determines there is noncompliance with the requirements of the transportation plan, he or she shall issue a letter specifying the points of noncompliance. 
(Ord. 418B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §11.07.010, 1979)  
18.45.210 - Compliance upon notice. 
Upon receipt of a letter of noncompliance, the project controller, the major project controller, the applicant and all successors in interest of the applicant obligated to carry out the transportation plan or any part thereof, as the case may be, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter as set forth in the letter of noncompliance, unless an appeal is filed from the determination of the planning director as set forth in Section 18.96.010 of this code. 
(Ord. 418B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §11.07.020, 1979)  
18.45.220 - Penalties for violation. 
In the event of failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter or with the terms of a transportation plan required pursuant to this chapter, the city may impose the following penalties: 
(1)  Any penalty which may be imposed under this title; 
(2)  Any penalty as set forth in the transportation agreement plan, if any. 
(Ord. 418B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §11.07.030, 1979) 
Editor's note— Ord. 418B added two sections numbered "11.07.030" to Ord. 357B. The other is codified as §18.45.180.  
DIVISION V. - NONCONFORMING USES, LOTS AND STRUCTURES  
CHAPTER 18.46 - NONCONFORMITY GENERALLY 
 
18.46.010 - Intent. 
Within the districts established by this title or by amendments which may be adopted after the ordinance codified in this title, there exist lots, structures and uses of land and structures which were lawful before the ordinance codified in this title was adopted or amended, but which would now be prohibited, regulated or restricted. The city council declares that nonconforming uses and structures are incompatible with permitted uses and structures and shall not be enlarged, expanded or extended. Further, nonconforming uses and structures are intended to be eliminated as soon as possible and such nonconforming uses and structures shall not be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited by this title. 
(Ord. 357B §5.01.000, 1979)  
18.46.020 - Prior nonconformity unaffected. 
The passage and adoption of the ordinance codified in this title shall not be construed to make conforming a use of land, building or structure which was nonconforming as determined by the regulations of Ordinance No. 107B of the city, as amended. 
(Ord. 357B §5.01.010, 1979)  
18.46.030 - Existing conditional uses. 
Any use existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, which is listed as a conditional use in the district wherein located, and for which a conditional use permit has not been granted, shall be and remain a nonconforming use until a conditional use permit is obtained as provided in Chapter 18.56. 
(Ord. 357B §5.01.020, 1979)  
18.46.040 - Grant of conditional use permits to effect conformity. 
The city council may, after a hearing before the planning commission on the subject, cause a nonconforming use to become a conforming use upon the issuance of a conditional use permit generally as provided in Chapter 18.56. The city council shall require such conditions as to make the use as nearly conforming to the district as possible. In addition, the city council shall make a finding in writing that the nonconforming use as conditioned will not be detrimental to the health, safety, peace and morals, comfort and general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the use, or be detrimental or injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood or of the general welfare of the city. 
(Ord. 357B §5.01.030, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.47 - REQUESTS FOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES 
 
18.47.010 - Purpose. 
This section provides a procedure to request reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities seeking access under the Americans with Disabilities Act, Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (the Acts) in the application of zoning laws and other land use regulations, policies, procedures, and project entitlement exhibits or conditions of approval. 
(Ord. No. 879B, § 1, 3-26-2013)  
18.47.020 - Applicability. 
A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any property owner, duly authorized tenant or lessee who desires to implement improvements to a specific property that are designed to provide access to housing when the application of a zoning law or other land use regulation, policy, practice, project entitlement exhibit or condition of approval acts as a barrier to reasonable access. This section is intended to apply to those persons who are defined as disabled under the Acts. 
A request for reasonable accommodation may include a modification or exception to the rules, standards, practices, and project entitlement exhibits or conditions of approval for the siting, development and use of structures and facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a person with a disability with equal opportunity to access housing. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be made in the manner prescribed by Section 18.47.030. 
(Ord. No. 879B, § 1, 3-26-2013)  
18.47.030 - Application requirements. 
Application requests for reasonable accommodation shall be submitted as a written request to the development services director or his/her designee (alternative submission formats may be approved by the development services director or his/her designee should a written application be unduly burdensome). All requests shall include the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name, address and telephone number. 
(2)  The name, address, and telephone number of the property owner(s). 
(3)  The street address and assessor's parcel number of the property for which the request is being made. 
(4)  The current actual use of the property. 
(5)  A statement describing the basis for the claim that the applicant is entitled to and is being denied reasonable accommodation, including a description of the zoning law, provision, regulation, policy, project entitlement exhibit feature or condition of approval from which reasonable accommodation is being requested, a description of the specific accommodation requested, and an explanation of why the requested accommodation is necessary to make the specific property accessible to the applicant. 
(6)  Photos, site plans, drawings, and/or other graphics as may be needed to make the proposed changes clear. 
(7)  Concurrent review. If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is being made also requires some other discretionary approval, then the applicant may file the request concurrently with the application for discretionary approval. 
(Ord. No. 879B, § 1, 3-26-2013)  
18.47.040 - Review authority and procedure. 
(a)  Development Services Director or His/Her Designee. If no approval is sought other than a request for reasonable accommodation, then the request for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the Development Services Director, or his/her designee. The development services director or his/her designee shall make a written determination within five working days and either grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation in accordance with Section 18.47.050. 
(b)  Other Review Authority. Requests for reasonable accommodation submitted for concurrent review with another discretionary land use application shall be reviewed by the authority reviewing the discretionary land use application. The applicable reviewing authority shall make a written determination and either grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation in accordance with Section 18.47.050. 
(Ord. No. 879B, § 1, 3-26-2013)  
18.47.050 - Findings and decision. 
(a)  Findings. The written decision to grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation will be consistent with the Acts and shall be based on consideration of the following: 
(1)  Whether the property which is the subject of the request will be used by an individual or a group of individuals considered disabled under the Acts, and that the accommodation requested is necessary to make the specific property accessible to an individual with disabilities protected under the Acts; 
(2)  Whether there are alternative reasonable accommodations available that would provide an equivalent level of benefit, or if alternative accommodations would be suitable based on the circumstances of this particular case; 
(3)  Whether the requested accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city; 
(4)  Whether the requested accommodation would be consistent with the general plan land use designation of the property which is the subject of the reasonable accommodation request, and with the general purpose and intent in the applicable zoning district; 
(5)  Whether the requested accommodation would present a substantial negative impact on the physical attributes of the property. 
(b)  Conditions of Approval. In granting a request for reasonable accommodation, the reviewing authority may impose any conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the reasonable accommodation will comply with the findings required in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 879B, § 1, 3-26-2013)  
18.47.060 - Appeal of determination. 
A determination by the reviewing authority to grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 18.94 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 879B, § 1, 3-26-2013)  
CHAPTER 18.48 - NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND 
 
18.48.010 - Continuation. 
Except as provided in this chapter, the nonconforming use of land may be continued; provided, that: 
(1)  Such use shall not be expanded or extended in any way, either on the same or adjoining land. 
(2)  Such use shall not be changed, except to a use which conforms to the regulations of the district in which such land is located. 
(3)  If such use is discontinued for a period of 12 months or more, whether or not there was the intent to abandon such use, except upon court order, such use shall not thereafter be reestablished. 
(Ord. 357B §5.02.000, 1979)  
18.48.020 - Discontinuance required when. 
The nonconforming use of land shall be discontinued within three years from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title or within three years from the date the use became nonconforming pursuant to a predecessor ordinance in each of the following cases: 
(1)  Where no building or structure is employed in connection with such use; 
(2)  Where the only buildings employed are accessory to the principal use of the land and the replacement cost thereof does not exceed $1,000.00; 
(3)  Where such use is maintained in connection with a conforming building. 
(Ord. 357B §5.02.010, 1979)  
18.48.030 - Off-street parking compliance required when. 
If the automobile parking space maintained on a lot in connection with a building or other structure at the time the ordinance codified in this title was adopted was insufficient to meet the requirement of this title, or where no parking space has been provided, the building or structure shall not be altered or enlarged to create additional dwelling use, seating capacity, floor area or guestrooms, as the case may be, unless additional automobile parking space is supplied and maintained to meet the requirements of this title for such additional dwelling units, seating capacity, floor area or guestrooms. 
(Ord. 357B §5.02.020, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.50 - NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS 
 
18.50.010 - Repair and maintenance. 
A nonconforming building or structure may be maintained or repaired provided that for any period of 12 consecutive months such repair and maintenance shall not exceed 25 percent of the current replacement costs of the nonconforming building or structure. 
(Ord. 357B §5.03.000, 1979)  
18.50.020 - Addition or enlargement. 
A building or structure which is nonconforming as to use, lot area or yard width or depth requirements of this title shall not be added to or enlarged unless such nonconforming building or structure and the addition or enlargement and the use are all made to conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. 357B §5.03.010, 1979)  
18.50.030 - Relocation. 
A nonconforming building or structure shall not be moved to any other lot or to any other portion of the lot in which it is presently located unless as a result of the move the building or structure will conform to the regulations of the district in which it will be located after the move. 
(Ord. 357B §5.03.020, 1979)  
18.50.040 - Restoration after damage or destruction. 
A nonconforming building or structure which is damaged or partially destroyed by any reason to the extent of not more than 50 percent of its value at that time may be restored. The occupancy or use of such building or structure which existed at the time of such partial destruction may be continued or resumed, provided that the total cost of the restoration does not exceed 50 percent of the value of the building or structure at the time of the damage. The restoration is to be started within a period of one year of the damage and diligently prosecuted to completion. In the event such damage or destruction exceeds 50 percent of the value of the nonconforming building or structure, no repairs or construction shall be made unless every portion of the building or structure is made to conform to all regulations for new buildings in the district in which it is located. The value shall be determined by the city engineer in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Building Code. 
(Ord. 357B §5.03.030, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.52 - NONCONFORMING USE OF BUILDINGS 
 
18.52.010 - Continuation. 
A nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure may be continued except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 357B §5.04.000, 1979)  
18.52.020 - Discontinuance deadline. 
In any district the nonconforming use of a main building shall be discontinued within five years from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or five years from the date the use first becomes nonconforming, whichever date is later. 
(Ord. 357B §5.04.010, 1979)  
18.52.030 - Extension throughout building—Change. 
Any nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure may be extended throughout the building provided no structural alterations except those required by law are made. If no structural alterations are made, the nonconforming use of a building may be changed to another nonconforming use which, in the opinion of the planning commission, is the same or more restrictive in nature. 
(Ord. 357B §5.04.020, 1979)  
18.52.040 - Vacancy mandates discontinuance. 
A structure, or a portion thereof, nonconforming in use, which is or becomes vacant and remains unoccupied for a continuous period of not less than 12 months, shall not thereafter be used unless the use conforms to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. 357B §5.04.030, 1979)  
DIVISION VI. - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS, VARIANCES, MOBILE HOME CERTIFICATES, HOME OCCUPATIONS AND TEMPORARY BUILDINGS IN INDUSTRIAL AREAS  
CHAPTER 18.54 - PROCEDURES 
 
18.54.010 - Applicability. 
The provisions in this chapter apply equally to applications for conditional use permits and variances. 
(Ord. 799B § 10(part), 2006: Ord. 389B § 2(part), 1981: Ord. 357B § 6.01.000, 1979)  
18.54.020 - Authority of planning commission and city planner. 
The city planning commission is authorized to grant conditional use permits and variances pursuant to the provisions of this division. The city planner is authorized to grant variances as set forth in Section 18.58.050. 
(Ord. 799B § 10(part), 2006: Ord. 458B § 1, 1984: Ord. 389B § 2(part), 1981: Ord. 357B § 6.01.010, 1979)  
18.54.030 - Applications. 
Applications for a variance or conditional use permit shall be made in writing by the property owner or his agent to the planning commission or, in case of applications for variances under Section 18.58.050 to the city planner, on a form to be prescribed by the commission. The application shall include the following data: 
(1)  A map drawn to scale showing the property for which the permit is requested and the property lines for property within 400 feet of the exterior boundary lines of the property; 
(2)  The names and mailing addresses of the owners of the property shown on the map; 
(3)  The proposed use of the property for which the application is sought; 
(4)  Such other information as the planning commission or the city planner may require. 
(Ord. 799B § 10(part), 2006: Ord. 458B § 2, 1984: Ord. 389B § 2(part), 1981: Ord. 357B § 6.01.020, 1979)  
18.54.040 - Public hearing. 
A public hearing shall be held by the planning commission or in the case of variances under Section 18.58.050 by the city planner, after the filing of the application. Not less than ten days prior to the hearing, notice by mail to all property owners shown on the list furnished by the applicant shall be given. The notice shall include the name and address of the applicant, owner, agent if any, zoning classification of property, the proposed use, and date, hour and place of the hearing. 
(Ord. 799B § 10(part), 2006: Ord. 458B § 3, 1984: Ord. 389B § 2(part), 1981: Ord. 357B § 6.01.030, 1979)  
18.54.050 - Conditions. 
The planning commission may designate conditions in connection with variances or conditional use permits as it deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this title. The city planner may designate conditions in connection with variances under Section 18.58.050 as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this title. 
(Ord. 799B § 10(part), 2006: Ord. 458B § 4, 1984: Ord. 389B § 2(part), 1981: Ord. 357B § 6.01.040, 1979)  
18.54.060 - Notice of decision—Finality of decision. 
(a)  Upon the grant of the variance or conditional use permit, the planning commission shall prepare and deliver to the applicant a written statement of its decision and any attached conditions. A copy shall also be delivered to the building inspector and other city officials. 
(b)  Upon the grant or denial of a variance under Section 18.58.050, the city planner shall prepare and deliver to the applicant a written statement of the decision and any attached conditions. A copy shall also be delivered to the building inspector and other city officials. 
(c)  The decision of the planning commission or city planner shall not become final for a variance or conditional use permit, nor shall a permit or license of any kind be issued by any city office, until the time in which an appeal may be filed has elapsed without an appeal being filed. 
(Ord. 799B § 10(part), 2006: Ord. 458B § 5, 1984: Ord. 389B § 2(part), 1981: Ord. 357B § 6.01.050, 1979)  
18.54.070 - Lapse from disuse. 
A conditional use permit or variance, if not used for the purpose for which it was granted shall lapse and shall become void one year following the date of issuance, unless by conditions of the use permit or variance a greater time is allowed. 
(Ord. 799B § 10(part), 2006: Ord. 389B § 2(part), 1981: Ord. 357B § 6.01.060, 1979)  
18.54.080 - Revocation and modification. 
(a)  Initiation of Proceedings. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing for the purpose of either modifying or revoking any variance or conditional use permit which has been granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance superseded by this title. Public hearings shall be held and notice given in accordance with the provisions of this chapter for the granting of conditional use permits and variances. 
(b)  Decision of City Council. After the public hearing as provided in subsection (a) of this section, the city council may revoke or modify a conditional use permit or variance for any one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  That such approval was obtained by fraud; 
(2)  That any person making use of or relying upon, the conditional use permit or variance is violating or has violated any condition of such conditional use permit or variance; 
(3)  That the use for which the conditional use permit or variance was granted is being or has been exercised contrary to the terms and conditions of such approval; 
(4)  That the use for which the approval was granted is so exercised as to be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare and constitutes a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 799B § 10(part), 2006: Ord. 389B § 2(part), 1981: Ord. 357B § 6.01.070, 1979)  
18.54.090 - Reapplication after denial or revocation. 
An application for a variance or conditional use permit shall not be accepted for a period of six months following the denial or revocation of substantially the same conditional use permit or variance for the same premises. 
(Ord. 799B § 10(part), 2006: Ord. 389B § 2(part), 1981: Ord. 357B § 6.01.080, 1979)  
18.54.100 - Withdrawal of applications. 
The city planning commission, or in the case of applications for variances under Section 18.58.050, the city planner, may permit the withdrawal of an application for a conditional use permit or variance filed pursuant to this chapter. Any fee accompanying the application shall not be returned to the applicant. 
(Ord. 799B § 10(part), 2006: Ord. 458B § 6, 1984: Ord. 389B § 2(part), 1981: Ord. 357B § 6.01.090, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.56 - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS 
 
18.56.010 - Types—Consideration by planning commission. 
Conditional use permits, revocable, conditional or valid for a term, may be issued for any of the uses or purposes for which such permits are required or permitted by the terms of this title. Because of their unusual characteristics, conditional uses require special consideration so that they may be located and developed properly with respect to their effect on the surrounding property. The consideration of a conditional use permit application shall result in the issuance of written findings in support of the planning commission decision, which shall be based on substantial evidence in view of the whole record. To grant a conditional use permit, the planning commission shall find that the establishment, maintenance or operation of the use, building or structure applied for will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety, peace, morals, comfort or general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of such proposed use or be detrimental or injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the city. 
(Ord. 807B § 8, 2006: Ord. 357B § 6.02.000, 1979)  
18.56.020 - Findings required. 
The city council is aware that from time to time persons in possession of property desire to use property for purposes which are not specifically provided for in this title. In order to carry out the intent of this title and to promote the general welfare of the community, the city council authorizes the planning commission to grant conditional use permits for uses which are not provided for in the district, subject to the following: 
(1)  A finding by the planning commission that the use is substantially similar in characteristic to a use or uses currently within the district; 
(2)  A finding by the planning commission that the use would be appropriate in the district applicable to the property as a permitted or conditional use; 
(3)  A finding by the planning commission that the proposed use, with the appropriate conditions, will not be detrimental to the health, safety, peace and morals, comfort and general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the city; 
(4)  A finding that at least one of the findings in Section 15.32.250 of the municipal code is satisfied. 
(Ord. 357B § 6.02.010, 1979; Ord. No. 913B , § 5(Exh. C), 6-28-2016)  
CHAPTER 18.58 - VARIANCES 
 
18.58.010 - Variances. 
Where practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships or results inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this title may result from the strict application of the terms of this title, variances from such requirements may be granted as provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. 458B §7(part), 1984: Ord. 357B §6.03.000(1, 2), 1979)  
18.58.020 - Findings required to grant variance. 
The planning commission, or in the case of applications for variances pursuant to Section 18.58.050 the city planner, may grant a variance when it is determined that: 
(1)  The applicant has shown that because of special circumstances applicable to the subject property, including size, shape, topography, location, buildings, or surroundings, the strict application of the requirements of this title are found to deprive the subject property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under the same classification. 
(2)  The grant of the variance would not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and the district in which the subject property is situated. 
(Ord. 458B §7(part), 1984: Ord. 357B §6.03.000(3), 1979)  
18.58.030 - Variance for otherwise unauthorized use or activity prohibited. 
The planning commission and the city planner shall not grant a variance which is not otherwise expressly authorized by the zoning regulation governing the parcel of property for which the variance is requested. 
(Ord. 458B §7(part), 1984: Ord. 357B §6.03.000(4), 1979)  
18.58.040 - Written findings required. 
Whenever the planning commission or the city planner grants or denies a variance, the planning commission or the city planner, as the case may be, shall set forth in writing the findings on which the decision is based. 
(Ord. 458B §7(part), 1984)  
18.58.050 - Authority to act on variances. 
The city planner shall have authority to grant a variance from height and yard requirements up to 35 percent of the requirement set forth in the title, upon determining that the criteria set forth in Section 18.58.020 have been met and making the findings required by Section 18.58.020. The city planner may, in his or her discretion, schedule for hearing by the planning commission any application for a variance under his or her authority. The planning commission shall have the authority to grant all applications for variances. 
(Ord. 458B §7(part), 1984)  
18.58.060 - Appeal of action by city planner. 
Any applicant or other person aggrieved by a decision made by the city planner under Section 18.58.050 may appeal to the planning commission under Chapter 18.94. 
(Ord. 458B §7(part), 1984)  
CHAPTER 18.59 - DENSITY INCREASE AND INCENTIVE PROGRAM[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 881B, § 2, adopted April 23, 2013, repealed Ch. 18.59 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 18.59 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 18.59, §§ 18.59.010—18.59.030, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 630B § 1(part), adopted in 1995. 
 
18.59.010 - Intent. 
This chapter is adopted in accordance with section 65915 et seq., of the California Government Code. The purpose of this chapter is to establish a density increase and incentive program to provide both density increases and other incentives for owner-occupied and rental housing developments to encourage the creation of housing affordable to moderate, low, and very low income households, and to encourage the creation of housing for senior citizens. As used in this chapter, density bonus units are those units designated for senior citizens, or very low, low, or moderate income households that qualified the housing project for award of a density bonus or other incentives. 
(Ord. No. 881B, § 2, 4-23-2013)  
18.59.020 - Applicable zoning districts. 
This chapter shall be applicable to all zoning districts that allow residential uses. 
(Ord. No. 881B, § 2, 4-23-2013)  
18.59.030 - Qualifications. 
All proposed housing developments that qualify under California Government Code section 65915 for a density increase and other incentives, and any qualified land transfer under California Government Code section 65915 shall be eligible to apply for a density bonus (including incentives and/or concessions) consistent with the requirements, provisions and obligations set forth in California Government Code section 65915, as may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 881B, § 2, 4-23-2013)  
18.59.040 - Density increase and other incentives. 
The city of Lincoln shall grant qualifying housing developments and qualifying land transfers a density bonus, the amount of which shall be as specified in California Government Code section 65915 et seq., and incentives or concessions also as described in California Government Code section 65915 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 881B, § 2, 4-23-2013)  
18.59.050 - Application. 
(a)  An application for a density increase or other incentives under this chapter for a housing development shall be submitted in writing to the planning division of the city of Lincoln, development services department, to be processed concurrently with all other entitlements of the proposed housing development. The application for a housing development shall contain information sufficient to fully evaluate the request under the requirements of this chapter, and in connection with the project for which the request is made, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  A brief description of the proposed housing development; 
(2)  The total number of housing units proposed in the development project, including unit sizes and number of bedrooms; 
(3)  The total number of units proposed to be granted through the density increase and incentive program over and above the otherwise maximum density for the project site; 
(4)  The total number of units to be made affordable to or reserved for sale, or rental to, very low, low or moderate income households, or senior citizens, or other qualifying residents; 
(5)  The zoning, general plan designations and assessors parcel number(s) of the project site; 
(6)  A vicinity map and preliminary site plan, drawn to scale, including building footprints, driveway(s) and parking layout; and 
(7)  A list of any concession(s) or incentives(s) being requested to facilitate the development of the project, and a description of why the concession(s) or incentive(s) is needed. 
(b)  The application shall be considered by the planning commission and/or the city council at the same time each considers the project for which the request is being made. If the project is not to be otherwise considered by the planning commission or the city council, the request being made under this chapter shall be considered by the development services director or his/her designee, separately. The request shall be approved if the applicant complies with the provisions of California Government Code section 65915 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 881B, § 2, 4-23-2013)  
18.59.060 - Retention. 
Consistent with the provisions of California Government Code section 65915 et seq., prior to a density increase or other incentives being approved for a project, the city of Lincoln and the applicant shall agree to an appropriate method of assuring the continued availability of the density bonus units. 
(Ord. No. 881B, § 2, 4-23-2013)  
CHAPTER 18.60 - ALCOHOL SALES 
 
18.60.010 - Application for determination of public convenience or necessity for sale of alcohol. 
(a)  Any person who possesses an existing commercial building or approved commercial project whose application for an on-sale or off-sale alcohol license is required by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board of the State of California ("ABC") to be subject to a determination of public convenience or necessity ("PCN Determination") by the city of Lincoln, may apply to the city of Lincoln for a determination of whether public convenience or necessity would be served by the granting of such license. Such application shall be made on forms provided by the city and contain such information required by the city. 
(b)  The application shall be filed at the community development department and shall be accompanied by payment of fee to be established by resolution of the city council calculated to offset the costs of processing applications. No application shall be deemed completed, nor shall it be reviewed, without payment of application fee. 
(c)  The PCN application shall include a written statement from the application demonstrating, by substantial evidence, that the public convenience or necessity would be served by the issuance of a license from the ABC. 
(d)  All applications involving a license for the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages that require the issuance of a PCN determination shall also be required to file application for and obtain approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 18.56 of this code. 
(e)  Sale of alcohol where the sale of alcohol is not considered the business's primary use the product storage and display occupies less than three percent of the floor area ratio or is less than ten square feet, whichever is less. 
(Ord. 807B §4, 2006; Ord. 797B §§4, 5, 2005; Ord. No. 935B , § 1, 1-10-2017)  
18.60.020 - Hearing required. 
(a)  Proceeding regarding a PCN determination for the issuance of a license from the ABC shall be scheduled for public hearing before the planning commission within 60 days of receipt of a completed application or as soon thereafter as the matter can be scheduled. Notice of the hearing shall be given in the same manner as set forth in Government Code sections 65090 and 65091. 
(b)  The hearing shall be held without regard to the technical rules of evidence and all persons desiring to appear shall be permitted to do so. The applicant shall bear the burden of proof that public convenience or necessity would be served by the issuance of the license. Therefore, the applicant shall provide all evidence necessary to show that the selling of alcoholic beverages at the applicant premises will serve public convenience or necessity and will be accomplished in a manner to eliminate any objections received pursuant to this section. In all cases in which an applicant applies for a PCN determination, the planning commission may exercise its discretion to issue or deny issuance of a letter of public convenience or necessity. In exercising its discretion, the planning commission shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The type of proposed use by the applicant; 
(2)  Whether the proposed use will be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the community; 
(3)  Whether the use would enhance the economic viability of the area in which it is proposed to be located; 
(4)  The extent of support or opposition to the proposed license from members of the community; 
(5)  The number of licenses within a one-mile radius of the proposed licensed location; 
(6)  The type of licensed premises within a one-mile radius of the proposed licensed location and the extent to which the proposed license would cause a further over-concentration of the particular type of premises in the area; 
(7)  The background and the history of the applicant, including the nature and extent of problems on any premises where he or she has operated a licensed premises in the past; 
(8)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any offense involving moral turpitude or any offense related to the sale or use of alcoholic beverages; 
(9)  How close the proposed establishment will be to a residential neighborhood, place of worship, or school; 
(10)  Whether there is a history of police or crime-related problems in the area proposed for a license; and 
(11)  Whether the proposed license would enhance recreational or entertainment opportunities in the area. 
(c)  The planning commission may determine that the public convenience or necessity will be met and the health, safety or welfare of the community will be prompted only if certain conditions are imposed upon any license issued by the ABC. Such conditions shall be included in the planning commission's decision and shall be communicated to the ABC. The conditions may cover any matter relating to the privileges to be exercised under the license. If a letter is issued with conditions applied, it shall specifically set forth that the public convenience or necessity is served only if the conditions set forth in the letter are met by the applicant. Examples of such conditions can be, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Sales of beer and malt beverages shall be in quantities of not less than a six pack; 
(2)  Sales of wine shall be in containers of at least 750 ml; 
(3)  Wine coolers shall not be sold in quantities of less than factory packs of four; 
(4)  Distilled spirits shall be sold in containers of at least 200 milliliters; 
(5)  No wine shall be sold with an alcohol content greater than 15 percent by volume; 
(6)  Restriction as to hours of sale; 
(7)  Display of sign may be regulated; 
(8)  Types and strength of alcoholic beverages to be served where such types of strengths are otherwise limited by law; 
(9)  The personal conduct of the licensee shall not conflict with the implementation of any conditions imposed on the licensee or the licensed premises. 
(d)  If necessary, the hearing may be continued for further review. At the conclusion of the hearing, the planning commission shall determine whether the public convenience or necessity will be served by authorizing the issuance of a license for the applicant premises. The PCN determination shall be reduced to writing by the community development director who will author a PCN determination stating whether the planning commission finds public convenience and necessity will or will not be served by the issuance of a license from the ABC. The written determination shall be served by mail upon the applicant and the ABC within 15 business days of the decision of the planning commission. 
(e)  No letter of public convenience or necessity shall be issued by the planning commission pursuant to this section unless the applicant agrees, in writing, that if the ABC issues a license to sell alcoholic beverages, the license will be subject to all conditions imposed as part of the PCN determination at all times the license is in use and in effect. 
(Ord. 797B §4 (part), 2005)  
18.60.030 - Expiration—No transfer of determination. 
(a)  A PCN determination in support of the issuance of a license for the ABC is only valid for one year from the date of the planning commission's action and the PCN determination shall so state. If no license to sell alcoholic beverages has been issued to the applicant for the applicant premises, within one year of issuance of a favorable PCN determination, the city's PCN determination shall be deemed withdrawn without the need for further action by the planning commission or the applicant, and the applicant must reapply if he/she seeks another PCN determination. 
(b)  Except as provided in Business and Professions Code section 23958.4, the PCN determination is not transferable to any other applicant or proposed licensee. Unless permitted by Business and Professions Code section 23958.4, any proposed licensee for the same premises must submit a new application and follow the procedures for the issuance of a PCN determination in this section. Nothing in this section precludes the city from protesting the issuance of a license from the ABC pursuant to other sections of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, including, but not limited to, section 23958. 
(Ord. 797B §4 (part), 2005)  
18.60.040 - Appeal to the city council. 
The decision of the planning commission regarding the PCN determination or related imposition of conditions may be appealed to the city council pursuant to Chapter 18.94. The request for the appeal shall state the reasons why the person appealing the decision believes the planning commission's PCN determination should be reversed or modified. At any proceeding before the city council, the applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating that public convenience or necessity will be served by issuance of an alcoholic beverage license, and that issuance of the license will not pose any threat to the health, safety or welfare of the community in which the licensed premises would be located. 
(Ord. 797B §4 (part), 2005)  
18.60.050 - Revocation. 
In the event of a violation of any of the conditions imposed on an applicant or the applicant premises in accordance with this section, the planning commission may, after public notice and hearing, revoke any letter of public convenience or necessity issued regarding the applicant or applicant premises. Upon revocation, the applicant shall not continue to sell alcoholic beverages at the applicant premises. The determination of the planning commission shall become final ten days after the date of decisions unless appealed to the city council. The revocation shall be reported to the ABC. 
(Ord. 797B §4 (part), 2005)  
18.60.060 - Exempted uses. 
Churches serving sacramental wine used only during authorized religious services. 
(Ord. 807B §6, 2006)  
CHAPTER 18.61 - CHILD DAY CARE USES 
 
18.61.010 - Purpose. 
Consistent with the findings of the state, the city council finds that child day care services are an essential service for working parents in the city of Lincoln and that child care services in family homes are desirable to parents and provide children with a residential environment that is conducive to healthy and safe development. Regulations in this chapter are intended to address child day care uses in both residential and nonresidential zoning districts consistent with the provisions of state law and in a manner that recognizes the need for such services and the importance of minimizing the effects on surrounding properties. 
(Ord. 745B §2(part), 2003)  
18.61.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter and in accordance with state law, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them in this section. 
"Child" means a person who is under 18 years of age. 
"Child day care facility" means a facility that provides nonmedical care to children in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual on less than a 24-hour basis. This definition includes family day care homes, day care centers, and employer-sponsored child care centers as defined below. 
(1)  "Family day care home" means a home that regularly provides care, protection, and supervision for 14 or fewer children, in the provider's own home, for periods of less than 24 hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away, and is either a small or large family day care home as follows: 
a.  "Small family day care home" means a home which provides family day care to eight or fewer children in the provider's home, including children under the age of ten years who reside at the home (California Health and Safety Code section 1596.78(c)). A small family day care home may provide care for more than six and up to eight children without an additional adult attendant if the following conditions are met (California Health and Safety Code section 1597.44): 
1.  At least two of the children are at least six years of age; 
2.  No more than two infants are cared for during any time when more than six children are cared for; 
3.  The licensee notifies each parent that the facility is caring for two additional school-age children and that there may be up to seven or eight children in the home at one time; and 
4.  The licensee obtains the written consent of the property owner when the family day care home is operated on property that is leased or rented. 
b.  "Large family day care home" means a home which provides family day care to seven to 14 children in the provider's home, including children under the age of ten years who reside at the home (California Health and Safety Code section 1596.78(b)). A large family day care home may provide care for more than 12 children and up to and including 14 children, if all of the following conditions are met (California Health and Safety Code section 1597.465): 
1.  At least two of the children are at least six years of age; 
2.  No more than three infants are cared for during any time when more than 12 children are being cared for; 
3.  The licensee notifies each parent that the facility is caring for two additional school-age children and that there may be up to 13 or 14 children in the home at one time; 
4.  The licensee obtains written consent of the property owner when the family day care home is operated on property that is leased or rented. 
(2)  "Day care center" means any child day care facility other than a family day care home, and includes infant centers, preschools, and extended day care facilities. 
(3)  "Employer-sponsored child care center" means any child care facility at the employer's site of business operated directly or through a provider contract by any person or entity having one or more employees, and available exclusively for the care of children of that employer, and of the officers, managers, and employees of that employer. 
(Ord. 745B §2(part), 2003)  
18.61.030 - Permit requirements by zoning district. 
The following table lists permit requirements by zoning district for child day care facilities that are not otherwise exempt in accordance with state law (e.g., recreation programs and after school day care on school campuses). Required permits shall be processed in accordance with the standard procedures of the California Health and Safety Code section 1597.46(2) and Title 18 of this code. The reference to administrative review refers to an informal procedure whereby the director of community development (or his or her designee) reviews the use to ensure compliance with applicable provisions of this chapter prior to granting a nondiscretionary permit. 
Table 18.61.030-1 Permit Requirements for Child Day Care Facilities 
Permit Legend: 
N = Use not permitted 
P = Use permitted by right 
AR = Use permitted with Administrative Review 
CUP = Use permitted with Conditional Use Permit 
Child Day Care Facilities 	Residential Zoning Districts (1) 	Commercial Zoning Districts 	Industrial Zoning Districts (2) 	Public/ Quasi-Public Zoning Districts 	Open Space Zoning Districts (3) 
	R-1 	R-2 	R-3 	RPD 1-5 	R-E 	BP 	C 			
Small Family Day Care Home 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 
Large Family Day Care Home 	AR 	AR 	AR 	AR 	AR 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 
Day Care Center 	CUP 	CUP 	CUP 	CUP 	CUP 	(4) 	(4) 	CUP 	CUP 	CUP 
Employer-sponsored Child Care Center 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 	(4) 	(4) 	CUP 	CUP 	CUP 
(1) Single-family residential dwellings in the Agriculture (A-D) Zoning District shall have the same permit requirements as the R-1 zone. 
(2) Permit requirements apply to all industrial zoning districts, with the exception of the Industrial (I) Zoning District, where child day care facilities are not permitted. 
(3) Permit requirements apply to all open space zoning districts, with the exception of the Open Space Conservation (OS-C) Zoning District, where child day care facilities are not permitted. 
(4) New child day care uses in an existing structure require administrative review and new day care facility structures require design review. 
 
(Ord. 745B §2(part), 2003)  
18.61.040 - Development and operational standards. 
Development and operational standards listed in this chapter are intended to supplement the standards in the underlying zoning districts for each type of child day care facility. All uses defined in this chapter shall comply with applicable state licensing requirements and all other provisions of this title. 
(1)  Small Family Day Care Homes. In accordance with state law, small family day care homes operated under the standards of state law constitute an accessory use of residentially zoned and occupied properties and do not fundamentally alter the nature of the underlying residential use. Therefore, small family day care homes simply require a current license from the state and shall contain a fire extinguisher and smoke detector device pursuant to State Fire Marshal Standards. Such use shall operate in compliance with the city's noise ordinance and will not be permitted any signs for the day care use. 
(2)  Large Family Day Care Homes. In order to obtain the required nondiscretionary permit listed in Table 18.61.030-1 of this chapter (e.g., administrative review in single-family residential zoning districts), large family day care homes shall comply with the following provisions: 
a.  License. All large family day care homes, regardless of the underlying zoning district, are required to obtain a business license from the city and provide the city with a copy of the state of California day care license; 
b.  Day Care Provider's Residence. The large family day care home shall be the principal residence of the day care provider, and the use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the primary use of the property as a residence; 
c.  Separation. In order to maintain the integrity of residential neighborhoods, large family day care homes shall not be located closer than 200 feet from an existing state licensed large family day care home or within 200 feet of any other day care center or employer-sponsored child care center licensed to care for more than 12 children. Certain exceptions, in the form of legitimate physical barriers and buffers, such as a streambed corridor, highway, or arterial that would provide comparable separation may be allowable as determined by the director of community development; 
d.  Traffic Control. To ensure that children are not placed at risk and that street traffic is not unduly interrupted, each large family day care home shall provide the equivalent of two loading/unloading parking spaces for child drop-off and pick-up. Loading spaces may be located in the driveway of the home or on the street directly abutting the subject property where on-street parking is permitted; 
e.  Parking. In addition to the standard single-family parking requirement of two covered parking spaces located outside the required front yard and street-side yard setback areas, one additional off-street parking space shall be provided for each employee that does not reside at the home. The driveway may serve to meet the employee parking requirement; 
f.  Noise. In order to protect adjacent residential dwellings from noise impacts, outdoor activities are restricted to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Amplification equipment shall not be used for outdoor activities associated with the day care use. The day care use is subject to compliance with the city's noise ordinance; 
g.  Indoor Play Areas. All indoor play areas must comply with city building and zoning codes, subject to inspection and approval by the local building department, fire marshal, and the department of social services community care licensing; 
h.  Signs Prohibited. No signs shall be allowed in conjunction with the day care facility. 
(3)  Day Care Centers and Employer-sponsored Child Care Centers. In order to obtain required authorization or permits listed in Table 18.61.030-1 of this chapter (e.g., conditional use permit in public and quasi-public zoning districts), day care centers and employer-sponsored child care centers shall comply with the following provisions: 
a.  License. Day care centers and employer-sponsored child care centers, regardless of the underlying zoning district, are required to obtain a business license from the city and provide the city with a copy of the state of California day care license; 
b.  Traffic Control. Off-street loading areas shall be provided on-site and designated for the forward travel of vehicles both on entering and leaving the premises. The site plan shall clearly identify pedestrian routes to and from the drop-off and pick-up areas, including sidewalks and directional signage; 
c.  Parking. Required parking shall include one space for each employee, one visitor space for every ten students, plus adequate drop-off/pick-up areas as determined by the community development director. Parking shall be provided based on the maximum student and corresponding employee capacity for the facility; 
d.  Noise. In order to protect adjacent uses from noise impacts associated with the child day care facility, hours of operation are limited to 14 hours a day between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., and outdoor activities are restricted to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Amplification equipment shall not be used for outdoor activities associated with the day care use. Day care centers and employer-sponsored child care centers shall comply with all applicable provisions of the city's noise ordinance; 
e.  Signs. Day care centers and employer-sponsored child care centers are permitted business signs as follows: 
1.  Freestanding Signs. One freestanding monument sign with a maximum sign area of 12 square feet and a maximum sign height of five feet, 
2.  Wall Signs. If located in a nonresidential zoning district, day care centers and employer-sponsored child care centers may also have one building-attached wall sign with a maximum sign area of 0.5 square feet for each lineal foot of primarily building frontage, up to a maximum of 20 square feet. 
(Ord. 745B §2(part), 2003)  
CHAPTER 18.62 - HOME OCCUPATIONS 
 
18.62.010 - Home occupation defined. 
A "home occupation" is a business activity carried on within a dwelling by its inhabitant(s). The activity must be incidental to the residential use of the dwelling and must not change the residential character of the surrounding area by generating more traffic, noise, or storage of material than would otherwise be expected in a residential zone. 
(Ord. 464B §1(part), 1984: Ord. 350B §1, 1978)  
18.62.020 - Home occupation permits. 
Except as provided in Section 18.62.060 and subsection 18.62.060(2), no business use of a residential unit shall be conducted within any dwelling unit located within a residential zone. 
(Ord. No. 832B, § 1, 2-26-2008; Ord. 464B §1(part), 1984: Ord. 350B §2, 1978) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 832B, § 1, adopted Feb. 26, 2008, change the title of § 18.62.020 from "Conditional use permit required when" to "Home occupation permits." This historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes.  
18.62.030 - Findings required for permit issuance. 
No conditional use permit shall be issued for a home occupation unless the planning commission makes the following findings, in addition to those findings otherwise required for issuance of any conditional use permit: 
(1)  Such use is customarily incidental to the use of the dwelling unit as a residence; 
(2)  Such use does not constitute retail or wholesale sales with transfer of products to the buyer at the residential site; 
(3)  Such use shall be conducted solely by an occupant of the dwelling unit; 
(4)  No signs shall be placed or erected on the property; 
(5)  Such use shall be conducted within the dwelling unit and not within a garage or other accessory building, or on or within an unenclosed area; 
(6)  At least one of the findings in Section 15.32.250 of the municipal code is satisfied. 
(Ord. 350B §3, 1978; Ord. 464B §1(part), 1984: Ord. No. 832B, § 2, 2-26-2008; Ord. No. 913B , § 6(Exh. D), 6-28-2016)  
18.62.040 - Specification of permissible uses. 
The city council may specify by resolution those uses which are deemed to be permissible home occupations subject to the criteria set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 464B §1(part), 1984: Ord. 350B §4, 1978)  
18.62.050 - Business license fee. 
Issuance of a conditional use permit for a home occupation shall be conditioned upon payment of a business license fee as set by city resolution, payable at the time of issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 832B, § 3, 2-26-2008; Ord. 464B §1(part), 1984: Ord. 350B §5, 1978)  
18.62.060 - Home occupation clearance, conditions, and limitations. 
The following regulations shall apply to home occupations in dwelling units located in any residential district: 
(1)  A home occupation shall be permitted without the issuance of a conditional use permit subject to an occupant's compliance with the following conditions and limitations: 
a.  No more than two home occupations shall be permitted in a dwelling unit. 
b.  The home occupation(s) shall be operated by no more than two individuals, both of whom shall be inhabitants of the dwelling unit. 
c.  The home occupation(s) shall not require the use of more than 15 percent of the total floor area of the dwelling unit and such use shall be clearly incidental to the use of the dwelling as a residence. 
d.  The home occupation(s) shall not require the elimination of required off-street parking spaces. 
e.  The home occupation(s) shall be conducted solely within the dwelling unit and not within a garage or other accessory building or on or within an unenclosed area. 
f.  No signs advertising the home occupation(s) shall be allowed. 
g.  The home occupation(s) shall not require the storage of flammable or hazardous materials. 
h.  Vehicles relating to the home occupation(s) shall not be parked at the subject residence if they are larger than a standard pickup or van. Not more than one vehicle specifically for use in conjunction with each home occupation shall be permitted. 
i.  No equipment or material relating to a home occupation (other than a permitted vehicle) shall be parked or stored outside of the subject residence. 
j.  The home occupation(s) shall not create adverse levels of noise, dust, odors, or vibrations above the ambient levels in the surrounding neighborhood. 
k.  The person conducting each home occupation shall pay a business license fee in the amount set by city resolution. 
l.  The city may, from the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., enter the premises for the purpose of inspecting to determine whether or not the conditions of this subsection are being complied with. 
m.  Home occupation(s) will have limited business hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. only. 
n.  No home occupation(s) permit(s) shall be issued which involve commercial food handling, processing, or packing. 
o.  The delivery of materials to the residence shall not exceed more than two deliveries of products or materials per day. No delivery shall involve the use of commercial vehicles, no delivery shall be by vehicles larger than an automobile, pickup, or typical delivery van, such as, but not limited to, UPS, FedEx, and USPS-type home pickups and deliveries. 
(2)  Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, home occupations located in any residential district that involve the following activities shall require the issuance of a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 18.62.020. Development Standards within Section 18.12.080, 18.14.090, and 18.16.090 shall be excluded from the following: 
a.  Personal contact with customers at the applicant's residence; 
b.  The making of merchandise for sale. A use permit may be issued provided that the storage of such merchandise does not exceed total allowable area for home occupations and does not require the transporting of material or finished product by means other than an automobile, pickup, or standard size van, and shall not create adverse levels of noise, dust, odors, or vibrations above the ambient levels in the surrounding neighborhood; 
c.  Reserved. 
d.  Three or more home occupations in a dwelling unit. 
(3)  Issuance of a permit for a home occupation shall be conditioned upon payment of a business license fee in the amount set by city resolution, payable at the time of issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 832B, §§ 1—22, 2-26-2008; Ord. 464B §1(part), 1984: Ord. 350B §6, 1978; Ord. No. 964B, § 2, 5-8-2018 )  
18.62.070 - Procedures for applying. 
Where a home occupation is permitted pursuant to subsection 18.62.060(1), an applicant must complete and sign a form provided by the planning department that acknowledges the conditions and limitations of an approved home occupation. Where the home occupation requires a use permit, an application for such use permit shall be made pursuant to Section 18.62.020 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 464B §1(part), 1984: Ord. 350B §7, 1978)  
18.62.080 - Existing home occupations. 
(a)  Any person conducting a home occupation within a residential zone at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall either discontinue such use or apply for a permit as provided in this section within 90 days after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and annually thereafter. 
The planning commission shall issue a permit upon making all of the following findings: 
(1)  The applicant was conducting a home occupation at the same dwelling for which the permit is requested at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter; 
(2)  Except for the first permit issued within 90 days after the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter, that the applicant has continued to do business at the same dwelling unit during the year since the last permit was obtained; 
(3)  There have either been no complaints by surrounding neighbors of noise or other nuisance or such complaints are found by the planning commission to be insubstantial. 
(b)  If the commission cannot make the findings in subsection (a) of this section, the applicant must either discontinue conducting a home occupation or apply for a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 18.62.020. 
(c)  Issuance of a permit for a home occupation shall be conditioned upon payment of a business license fee in the amount of $30.00 per year, payable at the time of issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. 464B §1(part), 1984)  
18.62.090 - Violations. 
Violation of any provision of this chapter or any condition of a use permit issued as provided in this chapter constitutes a misdemeanor. Any such violation is further declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated as provided by law. 
(Ord. 464B §1(part), 1984)  
CHAPTER 18.63 - TEMPORARY BUILDINGS IN INDUSTRIAL AREAS 
 
18.63.010 - Temporary buildings in industrial areas. 
Temporary buildings may be allowed in industrial areas provided that all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The temporary building will be for a use permitted by the applicable zoning; 
(2)  The business or industry which will utilize the temporary buildings must have been continually operating on the site for a minimum period of three years within a permanent existing building; 
(3)  The temporary building will be used adjacent to the existing permanent building; 
(4)  The business or industry intends to expand its existing permanent building within five years; 
(5)  The owners of the real property enter into an agreement, approved by the city, providing, among other things, that the owner will remove the temporary building in five years, will indemnify and hold harmless the city for any losses and damages should the city have to remove the temporary building and post a sufficient cash deposit as determined by the city, should the city need to remove the temporary building; 
(6)  Any temporary building shall be subject to design review process as provided in Chapter 18.64 et seq. of this code. 
(Ord. 554B §1(part), 1991)  
18.63.020 - Finding required. 
A temporary building shall not be allowed unless a finding is made that the erection, establishment, maintenance or operation of the temporary building will not, under the circumstances of the particular situation, be detrimental to the health, safety, peace, comfort or general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the city. 
(Ord. 554B §1(part), 1991)  
18.63.030 - Industrial areas. 
"Industrial area" as used in Section 18.63.010 is defined as follows: those areas designated in the city's land use plan, as amended, as "industrial," "light industrial" or "industrial planned unit development district." 
(Ord. 554B §1(part), 1991)  
18.63.040 - Applications. 
Applications for a temporary building shall be made in writing by the property owner or his agent to the planning commission on a form to be prescribed by the commission. The application shall include the following data: 
(1)  A map drawn to scale showing the proposed temporary building along with the existing permanent building, the property and the location of the buildings on the property and the property lines for property within 400 feet of the exterior boundary lines of the subject property; 
(2)  The names and mailing addresses of the owners of the property shown on the map; 
(3)  The proposed use of the temporary building; and 
(4)  Such other information as the planning commission may require. 
(Ord. 554B §1(part), 1991)  
18.63.050 - Public hearing. 
A public hearing shall be held by the planning commission after the filing of the application. Not less than ten days prior to the public hearing, notice by mail to all the property owners shown on the list furnished by the applicants shall be given. That notice shall include the name and address of the applicant, owner, agent, if any, a description of the proposed temporary building and the date, hour and place of the hearing. 
(Ord. 554B §1(part), 1991)  
18.63.060 - Miscellaneous procedures. 
The procedures for designating conditions, lapse from disuse, notice and finality of decision, revocation and modification, and reapplications after denial or revocation as provided in Chapter 18.54 of this code shall apply. 
(Ord. 554B §1(part), 1991)  
DIVISION VII. - DESIGN REVIEW  
CHAPTER 18.64 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
18.64.010 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this division shall not apply to single-family dwellings built on lands subdivided pursuant to a final or parcel map approved by the city council prior to July 1, 1979. Such single-family dwellings shall be subject to administrative design review as provided for in Chapter 18.68 of this title. 
(Ord. 678B §1, 1999: Ord. 585B §1(part), 1993: Ord. 361B §1, 1979: Ord. 357B §8.04.000, 1979)  
18.64.020 - Findings of council. 
The city council finds that there exist in the city conditions which promote disharmony and reduce land and property values. The council also finds that the lack of appropriate guidelines for the design of new buildings and structures on the city's streets contributes to these conditions. It further finds desirable the provision of such guidelines for the protection and enhancement of land and property values, for the creation and preservation of a high-quality environment and for the promotion of the health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
(Ord. 585B §1(part), 1993: Ord. 357B §8.01.000, 1979)  
18.64.030 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to: 
(1)  Recognize the interdependence of land values and aesthetics and to provide a method by which the city may implement this interdependence to its benefit; 
(2)  Encourage development of private property in harmony with the desired character of the city and in conformance with the guidelines provided in this division; including, but not limited to the goals, objectives, district design guidelines and standards described in the Lincoln downtown urban design plan, adopted by the city council by Resolution No. 92-95 and as may be amended, and provided that due regard and consideration is given to the public and private interest involved; 
(3)  Foster attainment of those sections of the city's general plan which specifically relate to preservation and enhancement of the particular character of the city, including, but not limited to, that described in the Lincoln downtown urban design plan, through encouraging private interests to assist in their implementation; 
(4)  Assure that the public benefits derived from expenditures of public funds for improvement and beautification of streets and other public structures and spaces including, but not limited to, that described in the Lincoln downtown urban design plan, shall be protected by the exercise of reasonable controls over the character and design of private buildings and open spaces. 
(Ord. 585B §1(part), 1993: Ord. 357B §8.01.010, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.66 - DESIGN REVIEW BOARD 
 
18.66.010 - Established—Membership. 
The city council creates the design review board. The membership of the design review board shall consist of the following persons: 
(1)  City engineer; 
(2)  City planner; 
(3)  City administrator or his designee; 
(4)  City fire chief or his designee; 
(5)  City police chief or his designee; 
(6)  A member of the planning commission appointed by the commission; 
(7)  A member of the public appointed by the city administrator. 
(Ord. 417B §1, 1982: Ord. 357B §8.02.000, 1979)  
18.66.020 - Duties. 
The duties of the design review board shall be to make recommendations on any matter requiring qualified aesthetic and/or architectural judgments to the end that the general appearance of any improvement shall preserve or enhance the physical environment and character of the community. 
(Ord. 357B §8.02.010, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.67 - REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES 
 
18.67.010 - Application required for all construction, moving or alteration—Materials to be filed. 
Prior to the construction, erection, alteration, moving, remodeling or other change in a building or structure within the city, the applicant shall file with the design review board the following, if required by the board: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The roof plan of the building; 
b.  Location of existing trees and structures, if any; 
c.  Locations and dimensions of streets and highway designations; 
d.  Location of off-street parking and loading facilities; 
e.  Location of points of entry and exit for vehicles and internal circulation patterns; 
f.  Location of walls and fences and indication of their height and material of construction; 
g.  Exterior lighting standards and devices; 
h.  Grading and slopes where these affect the relationship of the buildings. 
(2)  Architectural drawings of elevations, to include all sides of the development; 
(3)  Preliminary landscape plan, including the plant names; 
(4)  Site photographs or snapshots showing the site itself and adjacent properties to intersections; 
(5)  Color and texture chips or other samples of materials. 
(Ord. 357B §8.03.000, 1979)  
18.67.020 - Review by board. 
The design review board shall review the applications for permits throughout the city. The project designer or his representatives shall be present and shall participate in the review process. 
(Ord. 357B §8.03.010, 1979)  
18.67.030 - Evaluation considerations. 
The design review board shall examine the materials submitted with the application by considering the following aspects for conformance with the purpose of this division: 
(1)  General site-utilization considerations; 
(2)  General architectural considerations: 
a.  Height, bulk and area of the building; 
b.  Colors and types of buildings and installations; 
c.  Physical and architectural relation of buildings with existing and proposed structures; 
d.  Site layout, orientation and location of buildings in relationship with open areas and topography; 
e.  Height, materials, colors and variations in boundary walls and fences; 
f.  Location and type of landscaping, including but not limited to off-street parking areas; 
g.  Appropriateness of sign design and exterior lighting; 
h.  General landscape considerations; 
i.  Graphics. 
(Ord. 357B §8.03.020, 1979)  
18.67.040 - Planning commission approval or disapproval. 
The design review board shall make a report on each application to the city planning commission, which shall either approve, approve with conditions or overrule the recommendations of the design review board. 
(Ord. 357B §8.03.030, 1979)  
18.67.050 - Inspection for compliance. 
Before a building or structure may be occupied, it must be inspected by the building inspector for compliance with the recommendations of the design review board as approved by the planning commission. Occupancy shall not be permitted unless landscaping also complies with the approved plan. If for any reason landscaping cannot be accomplished at the time of construction, a performance bond shall be posted by the owner or builder. 
(Ord. 357B §8.03.040, 1979)  
18.67.060 - Expiration of approval. 
The recommendation of the design review board as approved by the planning commission shall remain in effect no longer than one year, at the end of which time, if the building is not completed or under construction, the applicant must apply for a new permit and initiate the review process. 
(Ord. 357B §8.03.050, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.68 - ADMINISTRATIVE DESIGN REVIEW 
 
18.68.010 - Administrative design review—single-family residences. 
The city council finds that there exists in the city, conditions with promote disharmony and reduce land and property values. The council also finds that the lack of appropriate guidelines for the design of new single-family structures and property contributes to these conditions. It further finds desirable the provision of such guidelines for the protection and enhancement of land and property values, for the creation and preservation of a high-quality environment and for the promotion of the health, safety and general welfare of the community. Based upon the above findings, the city council hereby establishes an administrative design review process for all newly constructed dwellings (including all modular/prefabricated dwellings) placed upon a single family lot subdivided pursuant to a final or parcel map approved by the city council prior to July 1, 1979, which pursuant to Section 18.64.010 is not subject to design review as provided in Division VII of Title 18 of this code. 
(Ord. 678B §2 (part), 1999)  
18.68.020 - Authority to act on administrative design review. 
The community development director or his/her designee shall have authority to approve an administrative design review application upon a determination that the criteria set forth in Section 18.68.030 have been met. Within ten days of receiving a complete application, the community development director will render a determination regarding the approval of the application. The director shall have the authority to approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application. The community development director may, at his or her discretion, schedule for review by the planning commission any application for approval. The planning commission shall have the authority to approve, approve with conditions or deny all applications for design review if so scheduled by director. 
(Ord. 678B §2 (part), 1999)  
18.68.030 - Criteria for approval. 
Single-family dwellings are required to meet the following criteria in order to be approved for administrative design review: 
(1)  The structure is covered with an exterior material customarily used in new residential structures in the surrounding neighborhood. This includes garages as well as the main structure. 
(2)  The exterior covering material extends to the ground. If a solid concrete or masonry perimeter foundation is used, the foundation shall be textured or colored to match the exterior covering material. Alternate skirting materials customarily used in residential structures in the surrounding neighborhood will be considered compatible. 
(3)  The roofing material is of a material customarily used on residential structures in the surrounding neighborhood. 
(4)  The roof pitch design is one customary to the pitch on residential structures in the surrounding neighborhood. 
(5)  The evaluations including the placement of doors, windows, eaves and gable overhangs are typical for those customarily used in residential structures in the surrounding neighborhood. 
(6)  The dwelling meets all of the requirements for the zoning district, including setbacks, lot coverage, off-street parking requirements and other development standards applicable to the district in which it is to be located. 
(7)  The façade that fronts on the street is designed with sufficient detail to make it visually compatible with residential structures in the area. 
(Ord. 678B §2 (part), 1999)  
18.68.040 - Appeal of action by director of community development. 
Any applicant or other person aggrieved by a decision made by the director of community development under Section 18.68.020 may appeal to the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 18.94. 
(Ord. 678B §2 (part), 1999)  
CHAPTER 18.69 - OAK TREE PRESERVATION 
 
18.69.000 - Purpose. 
The city council finds and determines that the oak trees within the city are beneficial to the health and welfare of the citizens of Lincoln in that they preserve and promote natural beauty, reduce soil erosion, enhance property values, improve air quality, help maintain climatic balance, decrease wind velocities, abate noise, aid in water absorption, and help reduce energy consumption for air cooling by providing shade, and that preservation of these oak trees is in the public interest. 
It shall be the policy of the city to preserve all oak trees possible through its development review process while at the same time recognizing individual rights to develop private property. 
(Ord. 459B §1, 1984)  
18.69.010 - Guidelines. 
The city council may adopt guidelines to regulate the preservation of oak trees located within the city limits. After adoption of the guidelines, the planning commission, the city council and/or the design review committee, as the case may be, shall utilize these guidelines in reviewing applications for projects including but not limited to rezonings, subdivision maps, parcel maps, development permits, conditional use permits, design review board approvals, and variances and shall impose conditions of approval on such projects consistent with said guidelines. 
(Ord. 459B §2, 1984)  
18.69.020 - Enforcement. 
Inspection for compliance with the conditions of project approval relating to the preservation of oak trees shall be part of the city's regular project inspections. Whenever the city building official or city planner determines that construction activities are not in compliance with the conditions of project approval, the building official shall issue a stop work order which shall prohibit any further development activity until the violation(s) have been corrected. The stop work order shall set forth in writing the violation(s) and shall list the remedies to be taken to correct the violation(s). 
(Ord. 459B §3, 1984)  
18.69.030 - Restoration and replacement of trees. 
If it is determined pursuant to the procedure set forth in Section 18.54.080 that an oak tree(s) has been removed or irrevocably harmed so that its death is imminent in violation of the conditions of project approval, the city may require one or more of the following to correct the violation: 
(1)  Replacement of the oak tree(s) removed or irrevocably harmed in violation of the conditions of project approval by planting replacement specimen trees of no less than 15 gallons in size, having a total combined diameter at the time of planting equal to the diameter of the removed tree(s). 
(2)  If the project site is not capable of supporting all the required replacement trees, a fee shall be paid to the city equal to the retail cost, at the time of the violation, of the replacement trees required in subsection (1) of this section, but which cannot be accommodated on the project site. Such fees shall be deposited in a separate fund and used to plant new trees in the city, to maintain existing trees owned by the city and to maintain trees located within the city's right-of-way. 
(3)  In addition to the remedies set forth in subsections (1) and (2) of this section, the city shall have recourse to any penalty which may be imposed under this title for failure to comply with conditions of project approval. 
(Ord. 459B §4, 1984)  
DIVISION VIII. - LINCOLN MUNICIPAL AIRPORT HAZARD ZONE  
CHAPTER 18.70 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
18.70.010 - Hazards declared nuisance—Prevention. 
(a)  It is hereby found that an airport hazard endangers the lives and property of users of Lincoln Municipal Airport, and property or occupants of land in its vicinity, and also that the obstruction types, in effect, reduce the size of area available for the landing, takeoff and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of the airport and the public investment in it. Accordingly, it is declared that: 
(1)  The creation or establishment of an airport hazard is a public nuisance and an injury to the region served by the airport; 
(2)  It is necessary, in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare, that the creation or establishment of airport hazards be prevented; 
(3)  The prevention of these hazards should be accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of police power. 
(b)  It is further declared that both the prevention of the creation or establishment of airport hazards and the elimination, removal, alteration, mitigation, or marking and lighting of existing airport hazards are public purposes for which cities may raise and expend public funds and acquire land or interests in land. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.01.000, 1979)  
18.70.020 - Conflicting regulations. 
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this division and any other regulations applicable to the same area in this title or any ordinance, regulation or statute, whether the conflict is with respect to the height of structures or trees, the use of land or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.01.010, 1979)  
18.70.030 - Airport zoning commission. 
The planning commission of the city is appointed as the airport zoning commission. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.01.020, 1979)  
18.70.040 - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following terms shall have the following meanings unless the context otherwise requires: 
(1)  "Airport" means the Lincoln Municipal Airport. 
(2)  "Airport elevation" means the highest point of the airport's usable landing area measured in feet from mean sea level. 
(3)  "Airport hazard" means any structure or object of natural growth located on or in the vicinity of a public airport, or any use of land near such airport which obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or takeoff at such airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or takeoff of aircraft. 
(4)  "Airport zoning commission" means a board consisting of the city planning commission. 
(5)  "Approach surface" means a surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in Chapter 18.72. In plan the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone. 
(6)  "Approach," "transitional," "horizontal" and "conical" zones: These zones are set forth in Chapter 18.72. 
(7)  "Conical surface" means a surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to one for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
(8)  "Height" means, for the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this division and shown on the zoning map, mean sea level elevation, unless otherwise specified. 
(9)  "Horizontal surface" means a horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone. 
(10)  "Lincoln airport authority" means the governing board of the airport. 
(11)  "Nonconforming use" means any preexisting structure, object of natural growth or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this division or an amendment thereto. 
(12)  "Nonprecision instrument runway" means a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area-type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned, and for which no precision approach facilities are planned or indicated on an FAA planning document or military service's military airport planning document. 
(13)  "Person" means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association or governmental entity. It includes a trustee, receiver, assignee or similar representative or any of them. 
(14)  "Precision instrument runway" means a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system (ILS) or a precision approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and so indicated on an FAA-approved airport layout plan, a military service's approved military airport layout plan, or any other FAA planning document or military service's military airport planning document. 
(15)  "Primary surface" means a surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the "primary surface" extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; but when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface or planned hard surface, the "primary surface" ends at each end of that runway. The width of the "primary surface" of a runway will be that width prescribed in Part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) for the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the "primary surface" is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
(16)  "Runway" means a defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length. 
(17)  "Structure" means an object constructed or installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks, earth formations and overhead transmission lines. 
(18)  "Transitional surfaces": These surfaces extend outward at 90-degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision approach surfaces which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface extend a distance of 5,000 feet, measured horizontally, from the edge of the approach surface and at 90-degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.01.030, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.72 - ZONES AND HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS  
Article I. - Designation of Zones 
 
18.72.010 - Zones established—Map—Location in more than one zone. 
In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying within the approach zones, transitional zones, horizontal zones and conical zones of the airport. Such zones are shown on the Lincoln Municipal Airport Hazard Zoning Map, consisting of one sheet prepared by Reinard W. Brandley and dated June 8, 1979, which is attached to this chapter and made a part hereof. An area located in more than one of the zones described in this article is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are established and defined as set out in this article. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.02.000(part), 1979)  
18.72.020 - Utility runway visual approach zone. 
The inner edge of the utility runway visual approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 250 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.02.000(a), 1979)  
18.72.030 - Utility runway nonprecision instrument approach zone. 
The inner edge of the utility runway nonprecision instrument approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 2,000 feet at a horizontal distance 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.02.000(b), 1979)  
18.72.040 - Runway-larger-than-utility visual approach zone. 
The inner edge of the runway-larger-than-utility approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.02.000(c), 1979)  
18.72.050 - Runway-larger-than-utility with a visibility minimum greater than three-fourths of a mile nonprecision instrument approach zone. 
The inner edge of the runway-larger-than-utility with a visibility minimum greater than three-fourths of a mile nonprecision instrument approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.02.000(d), 1979)  
18.72.060 - Runway-larger-than-utility with a visibility minimum as low as three-fourths of a mile nonprecision instrument approach zone. 
The inner edge of the runway-larger-than-utility with a visibility minimum as low as three-fourths of a mile nonprecision instrument approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 4,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.02.000(e), 1979)  
18.72.070 - Precision instrument runway approach zone. 
The inner edge of the precision instrument runway approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.02.000(f), 1979)  
18.72.080 - Transitional zones. 
Transitional zones are established as the area beneath the transitional surfaces. These surfaces extend outward and upward at 90-degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional zones for those portions of the precision approach zones which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface extend a distance of 5,000 feet, measured horizontally, from the edge of the approach zone and at 90-degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.02.000(g), 1979)  
18.72.090 - Horizontal zone. 
The horizontal zone is established by swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway, and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.02.000(h), 1979)  
18.72.100 - Conical zone. 
The conical zone is established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. The conical zone does not include the precision instrument approach zones and the transitional zones. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.02.000(i), 1979)  
Article II. - Height Limitations 
 
18.72.110 - Obstructions within limits prohibited—Location within more than one limitation. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow or be maintained in any zone created by this division to a height in excess of the applicable height limit established in this article for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are established for each of the zones in question. Where an area is covered by more than one height limitation, the more restrictive limitation shall prevail. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.02.010(part), 1979)  
18.72.120 - Utility runway visual approach zone. 
The utility runway visual approach zone slopes upward 20 feet horizontally for each foot vertically, beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.02.010(a), 1979)  
18.72.130 - Utility runway nonprecision instrument approach zone. 
The utility runway nonprecision instrument approach zone slopes upward 20 feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.02.010(b), 1979)  
18.72.140 - Runway-larger-than-utility visual approach zone. 
The runway-larger-than-utility visual approach zone slopes upward 20 feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.02.010(c), 1979)  
18.72.150 - Runway-larger-than-utility with a visibility minimum greater than three-fourths of a mile nonprecision instrument approach zone. 
The runway-larger-than-utility with a visibility greater than three-fourths of a mile nonprecision instrument approach zone slopes upward 34 feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.02.010(d), 1979)  
18.72.160 - Runway-larger-than-utility with a visibility minimum as low as three-fourths of a mile nonprecision instrument approach zone. 
The runway-larger-than-utility with a visibility minimum as low as three-fourths of a mile nonprecision instrument approach zone slopes upward 34 feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.02.010(e), 1979)  
18.72.170 - Precision instrument runway approach zone. 
The precision instrument runway approach zone slopes upward 50 feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline, then slopes upward 40 feet horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional horizontal distance of 40,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.02.010(f), 1979)  
18.72.180 - Transitional zones. 
The transitional zones slope upward and outward seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach zones, and extend to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation, which is 117 feet above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping upward and outward seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach zones, and extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, height limits sloping upward and outward seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically shall be maintained beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the precision instrument runway approach surface, and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet measured at 90-degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.02.010(g), 1979)  
18.72.190 - Horizontal zone. 
The horizontal zone extends 150 feet above the airport elevation or a height of 267 feet above mean sea level. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.02.010(h), 1979)  
18.72.200 - Conical zone. 
The conical zone slopes upward and outward 20 feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.02.010(i), 1979)  
18.72.210 - Exception for trees or structures up to 30 feet high. 
Nothing in this division shall be construed as prohibiting the growth, construction or maintenance of any tree or structure to a height up to 30 feet above the surface of the land. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.02.010(j), 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.74 - USE RESTRICTIONS 
 
18.74.010 - Uses with certain effects prohibited. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this division in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport or otherwise, in any way, create a hazard or endanger the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.03.000, 1979)  
18.74.020 - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Regulations not Retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this division shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or other changes or alterations of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of the ordinance provisions codified in this division, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this division, and is diligently prosecuted. 
(b)  Marking and Lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as are deemed necessary by the airport manager to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport hazards. Such markers and lights shall be approved, installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the Lincoln airport authority. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.03.010, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.76 - PERMITS, VARIANCES AND APPEALS 
 
18.76.010 - Permit-Required for changes in use, structures or trees. 
No material change shall be made in the use of land and no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted or otherwise established in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefor has been applied for and granted. 
(1)  However, a permit for a tree or structure of less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground shall not be required in the horizontal and conical zones or in any approach and transitional zones beyond a horizontal distance of 4,200 feet from each end of the runway except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour or topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for the respective zone. 
(2)  Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired with sufficient particulars to determine whether the resulting use, structure or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. 
(3)  Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction or alteration of any structure or growth of any tree in excess of any of the height limits established by this division or as set forth in Section 18.72.210. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.04.000, 1979)  
18.76.020 - Permit—Nonconforming uses. 
No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming structure or tree or nonconforming use to be made or become higher or become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of the provisions codified in this division or any amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made. No such permit shall be required to make maintenance repairs to or to replace parts of existing structures which do not enlarge or increase the height of the existing structure. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.04.010, 1979)  
18.76.030 - Abandoned or destroyed nonconforming uses. 
Whenever the planning director determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or more than 80 percent torn down, physically deteriorated or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit as established in this division or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.04.020, 1979)  
18.76.040 - Variances. 
Any person desiring to erect any structure, or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or otherwise use property not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this chapter, may apply to the planning commission for a variance from such regulation. The application for a variance shall be accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and relief granted will not be contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation but do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of the regulations of this division. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.04.030, 1979)  
18.76.050 - Permit and variance procedures. 
The provisions in Sections 18.76.060 through 18.76.110 shall apply equally to applications for permits and variances. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.04.040(part), 1979)  
18.76.060 - Applications. 
Applications for a permit or variance shall be made in writing by the property owner or his agent to the planning director on a form provided by the city. All applications shall include the following information: 
(1)  A map drawn to scale indicating the location and dimensions of the property for which a permit or variance is requested; 
(2)  A site plan drawn to scale indicating the height of all proposed and existing structures and trees as well as their relationship to the applicable airport zone; 
(3)  The information required pursuant to Section 18.54.030; 
(4)  Such other information as the planning commission may require. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.04.040(a), 1979)  
18.76.070 - Administrative review. 
Within 45 days after submission to the planning department of a complete application, staff shall review the proposal for the purpose of making its recommendations to the planning commission at its next scheduled meeting following the review period. In addition, a copy of either the variance request or permit shall be furnished to the airport manager for advice and comment as to the aeronautical effects of the proposal. Such written recommendations and comments that the airport manager makes shall be included in any staff report to the planning commission. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.04.040(b), 1979)  
18.76.080 - Public hearing before planning commission. 
A public hearing shall be held by the planning commission after the filing of an application. A notice of the time and place of the hearing, including a general explanation of the area affected, is to be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten calendar days before the hearing. The planning commission shall also give notice as provided for in Section 18.54.040. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.04.040(c), 1979)  
18.76.090 - Decision of planning commission. 
The planning commission may approve, disapprove or conditionally approve such applications. In granting conditional approval, the commission may require such provisions as it deems necessary to carry out the purpose of this division. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.04.040(d), 1979)  
18.76.100 - Markers and lights as conditions. 
Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this division and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to permit the airport authority, at its own expense, to install, operate and maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an airport hazard. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.04.040(e), 1979)  
18.76.110 - Fees. 
For the purpose of defraying the expense involved in connection with an application, the city council shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a collection procedure for applications under Section 18.76.060 et seq. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.04.040(f), 1979)  
18.76.120 - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected by, any decision of the planning commission may appeal to the city council. 
(b)  All appeals under this section must be taken within ten days following the action of the planning commission. Such appeals shall be filed in writing with the city clerk, specifying the grounds thereof. The city clerk shall transmit to the city council all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(c)  The city council shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(d)  The city council may, in conformity with the provisions of this division, reverse of affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.04.050, 1979)  
18.76.130 - Judicial review. 
Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the city council may appeal as provided in section 50485.11 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.04.060, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.78 - VIOLATIONS 
 
18.78.010 - Misdemeanor. 
Each violation of this division or of any regulation, order or ruling promulgated under this division constitutes a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 386B §1 (part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.05.000, 1979)  
18.78.020 - Civil action. 
The city may institute, in any court of competent jurisdiction, an action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate any violation of this division or of any regulation, order or ruling promulgated or made under this division. 
(Ord. 386B §1(part), 1981: Ord. 357B §9.05.010, 1981)  
DIVISION IX. - DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS  
CHAPTER 18.80 - GENERAL PROVISIONS, NOTICES AND RECORDS 
 
18.80.010 - Authority. 
This division is adopted pursuant to the authority of Government Code sections 65864 through 65869.5. 
(Ord. 415B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §10.01.010, 1979)  
18.80.020 - Exclusivity of provisions—Conflicting provisions. 
Unless otherwise expressed in this title, the provisions in this division are the exclusive procedures and rules relating to development agreements. In the event of any conflict these provisions shall prevail over any other provisions in this title. 
(Ord. 415B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §10.01.020, 1979)  
18.80.030 - Notice of public hearings. 
(a)  Notice of public hearings required by this division shall be given as provided in sections 65854, 65854.5 and 65856 of the Government Code, in addition to such other notice as may be required for other actions to be considered concurrently with the development agreement. 
(b)  The notice requirements referred to in subsection (a) of this section are as required by the laws existing at the time of adoption of the amendatory ordinance codified in this division (Government Code sections 65867, 65854, 65854.5 and 65856). If state law is amended to prescribe a different notice requirement, notice shall be given in that manner. 
(c)  The failure of any person to receive notice required by law of any hearing as required by this division shall not affect the authority of the council to enter into a development agreement. 
(Ord. 415B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §10.01.030, 1979)  
18.80.040 - Recording of agreements, modifications and cancellations. 
Within ten days after the effective date of a development agreement, or any modification or the cancellation thereof, the city clerk shall have the agreement, the modification or the notice of cancellation recorded with the county recorder. 
(Ord. 415B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §10.01.040, 1979)  
18.80.050 - Agreement file. 
The city clerk shall be the official custodian of the agreement file. The file shall include an executed copy of the agreement and the originals of all exhibits, reports of periodic review, amendments, modifications or cancellation, to the agreement. 
(Ord. 415B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §10.01.050, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.82 - APPLICATION 
 
18.82.010 - Initiation. 
A development agreement may be initiated by: 
(1)  An application of one or more qualified applicants as defined in Section 18.82.020; 
(2)  By resolution of intention of the city council; 
(3)  By resolution of intention of the planning commission. 
(Ord. 415B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §10.02.010, 1979)  
18.82.020 - Qualifications of applicant. 
Only a qualified applicant or his authorized agent may file an application pursuant to this division. A "qualified applicant" is a person who (which) has a legal or an equitable interest in the real property which is the subject of the development agreement. Such interest must be such that the applicant has or will have control of the use of the property during the proposed term of the agreement. The planning director may require an applicant to submit proof of his (its) interest in the real property and of the authority of the agent, if any, designated to act for the applicant. The planning director may require an applicant or agent to submit a title report from a reputable title insurance company or other evidence to verify the legal or equitable interest of the applicant in the property. 
(Ord. 415B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §10.02.015, 1979)  
18.82.030 - Application. 
(a)  Application for a development agreement shall be made in writing to the planning department on a form prescribed by the planning commission. The application shall be accompanied by those items specified in Section 18.92.030. 
(b)  In addition to the information required by subsection (a) of this section, the planning director may require a qualified applicant to submit such additional information and supporting data as the director considers necessary to process the application. 
(Ord. 415B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §10.02.020, 1979)  
18.82.040 - Fees. 
For the purpose of defraying the expense involved in connection with an application, the city council may establish by resolution a schedule of fees. The schedule of fees shall be available in the planning department and on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 415B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §10.02.025, 1979)  
18.82.050 - Withdrawal. 
An applicant may withdraw an application filed pursuant to this division at any time prior to city council action on the application. Any fee required for processing the application shall not be returned or refunded to the applicant. 
(Ord. 415B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §10.02.030, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.84 - CONSIDERATION 
 
18.84.010 - Form of agreement. 
(a)  The agreement shall contain all the matters required by Government Code section 65865.2 and such other matters as the city council determines to be appropriate. 
(b)  The agreement shall be drafted on paper eight and one-half by 11 inches in size and all attached exhibits shall be of a size to permit recording of the document pursuant to Section 18.80.040. 
(c)  The city attorney shall prepare a standard form of agreement which, when adopted by the city council, shall be used as the base document for each development agreement. Changes and additions to the standard form shall be made as individual circumstances dictate. An applicant may suggest modifications to the standard form. 
(Ord. 415B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §10.03.010, 1979)  
18.84.020 - Administrative review of application. 
(a)  The planning director shall review the application and shall accept it for filing if it is complete and accurate. 
(b)  The planning director shall review the application and shall prepare a staff report and recommendation to the planning commission with regard to the proposed agreement. 
(c)  The city attorney shall prepare a draft agreement and forward the same to the planning director. 
(Ord. 415B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §10.03.020, 1979)  
18.84.030 - Hearing before planning commission. 
The planning director shall transmit the application and the draft agreement to the planning commission for a public hearing when all of the necessary reports and recommendations are complete. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided in Section 18.80.030. The application for a development agreement may be considered concurrently with other discretionary permits or approvals for the project. 
(Ord. 415B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §10.03.025, 1979)  
18.84.040 - Report and recommendation of planning commission. 
After the planning commission has held a public hearing, it shall render its decision in the form of a written report and recommendation to the city council. The report and recommendation shall include proposed findings on the matters stated in Section 18.84.070. 
(Ord. 415B §1 (part), 1982: Ord. 357B §10.03.030, 1979)  
18.84.050 - Hearing before city council. 
Upon receipt of the recommendation and report of the planning commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided in Section 18.80.030. 
(Ord. 415B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §10.03.040(a), 1979)  
18.84.060 - City council action alternatives. 
After the council has held a public hearing, it may approve, modify and approve, or disapprove the development agreement. It may, but need not, refer matters not previously considered by the planning commission to the planning commission for a report and recommendation. The planning commission may, but need not, hold a public hearing on matters referred to it by the city council. 
(Ord. 415B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §10.03.040(b), 1979)  
18.84.070 - Findings required for council approval. 
The council shall not approve the development agreement unless it finds that the agreement: 
(1)  Is consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the general plan and any applicable specific plan; 
(2)  Is compatible with the uses authorized in and the regulations prescribed for the land use zone(s) in which the real property is located; 
(3)  Is in conformity with public convenience, general welfare and good land use practices; 
(4)  Will not be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of persons residing in the immediate area nor be detrimental or injurious to property or persons in the general neighborhood or to the general welfare of the residents of the city as a whole; 
(5)  Will not adversely affect the orderly development of property or the preservation of property values; 
(6)  Is consistent with the provisions of Government Code sections 65864 through 65869.5; 
(7)  Satisfies at least one of the findings in Section 15.32.240 of the municipal code. 
(Ord. 415B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §10.03.040(c), 1979; Ord. No. 913B , § 7(Exh. E), 6-28-2016)  
18.84.080 - Limiting regulations to date of execution. 
The agreement may provide that the rules, regulations and official policies governing the permitted uses of land, density, design, and improvement and construction standards, or any one of these, shall be those rules, regulations and official policies in force on the date of execution of the agreement. 
(Ord. 415B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §10.03.040(d), 1979)  
18.84.090 - Approval by city council. 
If the city council approves the development agreement, it shall adopt an amendment to this title approving the agreement and directing the mayor to execute the agreement after the effective date of the amendment to this title. 
(Ord. 415B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §10.03.050, 1979)  
18.84.100 - Amendment or cancellation. 
(a)  Any party to a development agreement may propose an amendment to or cancellation of the agreement in whole or in part. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this section and in Sections 18.86.030 through 18.86.060, the procedure for proposing and adopting an amendment to, or a cancellation in whole or in part of, the development agreement shall be the same as the procedure for entering into an agreement in the first instance. However, if the city initiates a proposed amendment to or a cancellation in whole or in part of the agreement, the city shall first give written notice to each party, other than the city, who executed the agreement of its intention to initiate such proceedings not less than 30 days in advance of giving public notice of the hearing to consider such amendment or cancellation. 
(c)  Any amendment to the development agreement which does not relate to the duration of the agreement, permitted uses of the property, density or intensity or use, height or size of proposed buildings, provisions for reservation or dedication of land, or to any conditions, terms, restrictions and requirements relating to subsequent discretionary actions related to design, improvement and construction standards and specifications, or any other condition or covenant relating to the use of the property shall not require a noticed public hearing before the parties may execute an amendment to the agreement. 
(Ord. 415B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §10.03.060, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.86 - PERIODIC REVIEW 
 
18.86.010 - Frequency—Notice to parties. 
(a)  The planning commission shall, not less than once every 12 months from the effective date of the development agreement, review the same for compliance with its terms and conditions. 
(b)  The planning director shall begin the review proceedings by giving notice of the periodic review of the development agreement to each party to the agreement other than the city. He shall give such notice by mail at least 15 days in advance of the time at which the matter will be considered by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 415B §1 (part), 1982: Ord. 357B §10.04.010, 1979)  
18.86.020 - Planning commission consideration and report. 
(a)  The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing, at which time the party or parties to the agreement, other than the city, must demonstrate good-faith compliance with the terms of the agreement. The burden of proof on this issue shall be upon such party or parties. 
(b)  The planning commission shall determine upon the basis of substantial evidence whether or not, for the period under review, there has been compliance in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement. 
(c)  After the public hearing, the planning commission shall render its determination in the form of a written report to the city council. If the planning commission determines that there has not been compliance in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement, the commission may include in its report a recommendation for the modification or termination of the agreement. 
(Ord. 415B §1 (part), 1982: Ord. 357B §10.04.020, 1979)  
18.86.030 - Council consideration—Scheduling. 
The council shall place the report of the commission on its agenda at the second regularly scheduled city council meeting following the planning commission meeting at which the report was made. 
(Ord. 415B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §10.04.030(a), 1979)  
18.86.040 - Council consideration—Hearing required when. 
(a)  If the planning commission reports that there has been compliance in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement for the period under review, the council shall accept the report for filing and shall not take any further action unless: 
(1)  The council, on its own motion, votes to set the matter for hearing; 
(2)  An appeal is filed from the determination of the planning commission pursuant to Section 18.94.050. 
(b)  If the planning commission reports that there has not been compliance in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement for the period under review the council shall hold a public hearing to consider the report and recommendation of the commission. 
(Ord. 415B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §10.04.030(b), 1979)  
18.86.050 - Hearing before council—Notice. 
Whenever the commission report is scheduled for hearing, notice of such hearing shall be given as provided in Section 18.80.030. Such notice shall provide: 
(1)  The time and place of the public hearing; 
(2)  A statement that the planning commission has or has not determined that there has not been compliance in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement for the period under review; 
(3)  A statement that the city council may terminate or modify the agreement at the conclusion of the hearing. 
(Ord. 415B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §10.04.030(c), 1979)  
18.86.060 - Hearing before council—Council action. 
At the conclusion of the public hearing, the council may refer the matter to the planning commission for a further report and recommendation or it may make a final determination on whether or not there has been compliance in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement. If the council finds and determines, on the basis of substantial evidence, that there has not been compliance in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement for the period under review, the council may terminate the agreement or the council may modify the agreement and impose those conditions which it considers necessary and appropriate to protect the interests of the city. Any court action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void or annul the final determination by the council shall be commenced within sixty days from the date upon which a final determination is made as set forth in Section 18.02.060. 
(Ord. 415B §1(part), 1982: Ord. 357B §10.04.030(d), 1979)  
DIVISION X. - ANNEXATION  
CHAPTER 18.88 - ESTABLISHMENT OF PROCEDURES AND FEES 
 
18.88.010 - Procedures. 
The city council authorizes and directs the city administrator to establish procedures for the acceptance and processing of applications for the annexation of unincorporated territory to the city. The city administrator is further authorized to amend the procedures as he, in his sole discretion, may determine from time to time to be necessary. 
(Ord. 393B §1, 1981)  
18.88.020 - Fees and charges. 
The city council shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees, charges and expenses for annexation applications and all other applications for entitlements relating to annexation, including but not limited to applications for prezoning, general plan amendments and environmental documents, and the processing of local agency formation commission applications. The city council may also provide by resolution for the reimbursement of fees paid under conditions it deems appropriate. 
(Ord. 398B §1, 1981: Ord. 393B §2, 1981)  
DIVISION XI. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES—FEES  
CHAPTER 18.90 - FEES 
 
18.90.010 - Schedule of fees, charges and expenses. 
For the purpose of defraying the expense involved in connection with an application or petition, the city council shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a collection procedure for amendments to this title. The schedule may be amended by subsequent resolution. The schedule of fees, charges and expenses shall be posted in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 357B §7.03.000, 1979)  
18.90.020 - Payment required for action. 
No action shall be taken on any application or petition until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full. No fee will be required or charged to persons whose property is included in resolutions of intention adopted by the planning commission or the city council initiating proceedings to amend this title. 
(Ord. 357B §7.03.010, 1979)  
18.90.030 - Refunds. 
(a)  Fees are not refundable except when all of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Expenditures have not been made by the city with regard to the application or petition; 
(2)  Investigation has not been made as a result of the application or petition; 
(3)  The application or petition has not been set for public hearing; 
(4)  The application or petition has been withdrawn. 
(b)  The determination of the planning commission shall be final in all questions relating to refunds. 
(Ord. 357B §7.03.020, 1979)  
18.90.040 - Schedule of city service fees and charges. 
The city council shall establish by resolution, a schedule of fees establishing the rates for the provision of local services. Fees listed in the master fee schedule are based upon the actual costs to provide the service. 
Such fees shall be contained in a master fee schedule. The city council shall review the master fee schedule annually, at the beginning of each fiscal year, for possible revisions and amendments. 
(Ord. No. 868B, §§ 1, 2, 7-24-2012; Ord. 710B §14, 2001; Ord. 689B, §1, 2000; Ord. 688B §1, 2000; Ord. 683B §1, 2000; Ord. 659B §1, 1998; Ord. 638B §1, 1996; Ord. 594B §1, Exh. A, 1993: Ord. 588B §1, Exh. A, 1993: Ord. 583B §1, Exh. A, 1992)  
CHAPTER 18.91 - TRAFFIC IMPACT MITIGATION FEES 
 
18.91.010 - Findings. 
The city council finds and determines that new residential, commercial and industrial development places an additional burden on the city's existing traffic circulation and street system and creates a need for new streets, traffic and transit improvements and facilities to serve the needs of new development. The city council further finds and determines that a traffic impact mitigation fee is necessary to mitigate the adverse impact of new development on traffic within the city and to assure that new development is consistent with the city's general plan and the traffic circulation element of this plan. Adequate streets, traffic and transit improvements and facilities contribute to and improve the quality of life within the city and are essential to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 447B §1(part), 1983)  
18.91.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide and maintain street, traffic and transit improvements and facilities to benefit new development and to provide a means of financing these improvements and facilities. 
(Ord. 447B §1(part), 1983)  
18.91.030 - Imposed. 
Zoning changes, conditional use permits and tentative maps whose approval will generate traffic shall be conditioned on the payment of a traffic impact mitigation fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council and in the manner set forth in this chapter. The amount of the traffic impact mitigation fee shall bear a reasonable relationship to the use of city streets, traffic and transit improvements and facilities by the future inhabitants and/or users of new development for which the zoning change, conditional use permit, or tentative map is granted. 
(Ord. 447B §1(part), 1983)  
18.91.040 - Fund—Use. 
Fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in a separate fund to be known as the traffic impact mitigation fund, and shall be used only for the improvement, construction, reconstruction and maintenance of new and existing street, traffic and transit improvements and facilities. Such improvements and facilities may include, but are not limited to, acquisition of traffic signals, street overlays, reconstruction, new street construction and other related traffic and transit system improvements. 
(Ord. 447B §1(part), 1983)  
18.91.050 - Commitment. 
Any fees collected under this chapter shall be committed within five years after the payment of such fees or the issuance of a building permit(s) for the use authorized by the zoning change, the conditional use permit or tentative map, whichever occurs last. If such fees are not committed within this five-year period, the fees shall be returned to the applicant. 
(Ord. 447B §1(part), 1983)  
18.91.060 - Schedule for use. 
The city council shall adopt by resolution a schedule specifying the projected use of funds collected under this chapter. The council may amend this schedule from time to time. 
(Ord. 447B §1(part), 1983)  
18.91.070 - When paid. 
Traffic impact mitigation fees imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be collected at the time of issuance of building permits. 
(Ord. 447B §1(part), 1983)  
18.91.080 - Traffic impact mitigation fee calculation. 
The traffic impact mitigation fee for non-residential land uses shall be determined by applying the city's transportation public facility fee per EDU to the most recent tables adopted by the South Placer Regional Transportation Authority (SPRTA) for the city of Lincoln, using the unit of measure and the DUE per unit for the applicable category as determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 863B, § 2, 3-13-2012) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 863B, § 2, adopted March 13, 2012, amended § 18.91.080 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former § 18.91.080 pertained to computation and derived from Ord. 447B § 1(part), adopted in 1983.  
18.91.090 - Application approval criteria. 
(a)  Prior to the approval of a zoning change, conditional use permit or tentative map, the decision-making body (the city council or the planning commission as the case may be) shall review the report and recommendation submitted by the city engineer and may approve, modify and approve or disapprove the report and recommendation. 
(b)  Prior to approval of an application for a zoning change, conditional use permit or tentative map, the decision-making body shall determine whether such approval will generate an increase in traffic. 
(1)  If the decision-making body finds that such approval will not generate an increase in traffic, the council shall not condition the zoning change, conditional use permit or tentative map on payment of a traffic impact mitigation fee. 
(2)  If the decision-making body finds that such approval may generate an increase in traffic, the decision-making body shall determine the average daily traffic generated by the proposed zoning change, conditional use permit or tentative map and the fee to be paid and shall condition its approval of the zoning change, conditional use permit or tentative map on payment of such traffic impact mitigation fee. 
(Ord. 447B §1(part), 1983)  
18.91.100 - Scope. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be read to limit the right of the city council or the planning commission to disapprove any application for a zoning change, conditional use permit or tentative map for any lawful reason, including but limited to the impact that such zoning change, conditional use permit or tentative map may have on streets, traffic or transit within the city which cannot be alleviated by this chapter. 
(Ord. 447B §1(part), 1983)  
18.91.110 - Advances from city's fund balances. 
The city council may, from time to time, advance money from the city's fund balances to the traffic impact mitigation fund to provide sufficient funds to finance street traffic or transit improvements and facilities. Any moneys advanced to the traffic impact mitigation fund from the city's fund balances may, in the council's discretion, be reimbursed to the city's fund balances from fees paid into the traffic impact mitigation fund. 
(Ord. 447B §1(part), 1983)  
CHAPTER 18.92 - AMENDMENTS 
 
18.92.010 - Procedure generally. 
This title may be amended by changing the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning maps or by changing the text whenever the public necessity, convenience or general welfare requires such amendment. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection B of this section, an amendment of this title may be initiated and adopted as other ordinances are initiated and adopted. 
(2)  An amendment of this title which changes any property from one district to another or imposes any regulation listed in section 65850 of the Government Code, state of California, not theretofore imposed, or removes or modifies any such regulation theretofore imposed, shall be adopted in the manner described in this chapter. 
(Ord. 357B §7.02.000, 1979)  
18.92.020 - Initiation. 
An amendment may be initiated by: 
(1)  The petition of one or more owners of property affected by the proposed amendment as provided by this chapter; 
(2)  Resolution of intention adopted by the city council, or resolution of intention adopted by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 357B §7.02.010, 1979)  
18.92.030 - Petitions. 
The planning commission shall prescribe the form of petitions filed to change property from one district to another. The petition shall be filed with the planning director and shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  A map, drawn to scale, showing the property for which the reclassification is requested and the exterior property lines of the property within 400 feet of the exterior boundary lines of the subject property; 
(2)  The names and mailing addresses of the property owners for the property shown on the map as listed on the last equalized assessment roll of the county; 
(3)  The legal description and street address of the subject property; 
(4)  A fee as specified in Chapter 18.90; 
(5)  The existing land use for the property shown on the map and the proposed use of the land for which the reclassification is requested; 
(6)  The planning commission may require additional information such as proposed development plans, proposed street plans, or information of a similar nature. 
(Ord. 357B §7.02.020, 1979)  
18.92.040 - Hearing before planning commission. 
The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on any proposed amendment. A notice of the time and place of the hearing, including a general explanation of the matter to be considered and including a general description of the area affected, shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten calendar days before the hearing. In addition to notice by publication, the planning commission shall give notice of the hearing as provided by Government Code section 65854. 
(Ord. 357B §7.02.030, 1979)  
18.92.050 - Commission abandonment of proceedings. 
The planning commission may abandon any proceeding which the commission has initiated. 
(Ord. 357B §7.02.040, 1979)  
18.92.060 - Report and recommendation of commission. 
After the commission has held a public hearing, it shall render its decision in the form of a written report and recommendation to the city council. The commission shall include within its report a determination as to whether the proposed reclassification is consistent with the general plan of the city. 
(Ord. 357B §7.02.050, 1979)  
18.92.070 - Hearing before city council. 
Upon receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing; provided, however, that if the matter under consideration is an amendment to this title to change property from one district to another, and the planning commission has recommended against the adoption of the amendment, the city council shall not take any further action thereon unless an interested party requests a public hearing by filing a written request with the city clerk within ten calendar days after the public hearing at which the planning commission made its recommendation or within five days after the planning commission files its recommendation, whichever date is last to occur. 
(Ord. 357B §7.02.060, 1979)  
18.92.080 - Action by city council. 
The city council may approve, modify or disapprove the recommendation of the planning commission, provided that any modification by the city council of the proposed ordinance or amendment as recommended by the planning commission shall first be referred to the planning commission for a report and recommendation on the proposed modification if the planning commission did not consider the proposed modification in its deliberations. The planning commission is not required to hold a public hearing on the referral by the city council. Failure of the planning commission to report within 40 days after the referral, or such longer period as may be designated by the city council, shall be deemed to be the approval of the proposed modification. The city council shall not approve the proposed modification unless it determines that the proposed modification is consistent with the general plan. 
(Ord. 357B §7.02.070, 1979)  
18.92.090 - Withdrawal of petition. 
The planning commission or the city council may, prior to action on a petition, permit the withdrawal of any petition or part thereof filed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 357B §7.02.080, 1979)  
18.92.100 - Reapplication for denied rezone. 
If a rezoning application is denied, another petition to rezone substantially the same property shall not be accepted within a one-year period unless specific approval for such filing is given by the planning commission or the city council. 
(Ord. 357B §7.02.090, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.94 - APPEALS 
 
18.94.010 - Scope—Who may appeal. 
Any person dissatisfied by an act or determination of an official of the city relating to the enforcement or interpretation of this title may appeal such act or determination to the city planning commission as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 357B §7.04.000, 1979)  
18.94.020 - Deadline for filing. 
Appeals of determinations or actions of officials of the city, as provided in Section 18.94.010, may be taken by filing written notice thereof with the planning commission not later than ten calendar days after the day on which the act or determination appealed from was made. The ten-day period for filing the notice of appeal is jurisdictional and shall not be waived. 
(Ord. 357B §7.04.010, 1979)  
18.94.030 - Filing stays permit or variance issuance. 
The filing of a notice of appeal shall have the effect of staying the issuance of any permit or variance until such time as the matter is disposed of on appeal. 
(Ord. 357B §7.04.020, 1979)  
18.94.040 - Planning commission action. 
The planning commission may review the entire proceedings relating to the act or decision being appealed and in the process of such review may rehear the matter de novo and make any order it deems just and equitable, including the granting of any variance or conditional use permit. Any hearing may be continued from time to time. 
(Ord. 357B §7.04.030, 1979)  
18.94.050 - Appeal to city council. 
Any person who is not satisfied with an action of the planning commission may, within ten days, appeal in writing to the city council. The city council shall hear the matter de novo and may make any order it deems just and equitable, including the granting of any variance or conditional use permit. Any hearing before the city council may be continued from time to time. An appeal, once decided by the city council, shall not be reconsidered. 
(Ord. 357B §7.04.040, 1979)  
18.94.060 - Published notice of appeal hearings. 
Appeals before the planning commission and city council are public hearings and notice thereof shall be placed in the newspaper ten calendar days prior to the public hearing. 
(Ord. 357B §7.04.050, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.96 - PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
18.96.010 - Rules of procedure. 
The planning commission shall adopt by resolution rules of operating procedure to govern its activities. Copies of the rules shall be made available to the public at a cost to be determined by the planning commission, and filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 357B §7.05.000, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.98 - ENFORCEMENT 
 
18.98.010 - Building inspector duties—Notice to violators. 
This title shall be administered and enforced by the building inspector of the city. If the building inspector shall find that any provision of this title is being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. 
(Ord. 357B §7.01.000, 1979)  
18.98.020 - Right of entry for inspection. 
The building inspector or his authorized representative may, upon presentation of credentials to the occupant or owner, enter any premises, building or structure at any reasonable time for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the premises, building or structure to determine if the same are being used in compliance with the provisions of this title. If admission or entry is refused, the building inspector shall apply to the city attorney to obtain an inspection warrant. 
(Ord. 357B §7.01.010, 1979)  
18.98.030 - Permits or licenses in violation. 
Officers and employees of the city vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the provisions of this title. Any permit or license which would authorize the permittee or licensee to erect, alter or enlarge any building or structure or to use property in any manner in conflict with the provisions of this title intentionally or otherwise shall be null and void. 
(Ord. 357B §7.01.020, 1979)  
18.98.040 - Infraction. 
(a)  Except for violations referred to in Chapter 18.78, a violation of the provisions of this title or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violations of conditions in safeguards established in connection with grants of variances, conditional use permits, site plans or planned unit developments, constitutes an infraction. 
(b)  The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises or parts thereof, or any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains a violation of this title may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 562B §1, 1991: Ord. 357B §7.01.030, 1979)  
18.98.050 - Abatement. 
Any building, structure, mobile home or recreational vehicle set up, erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title and any use of land, buildings or premises conducted, operated or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title or contrary to a permit or variance or the terms or conditions imposed therein is unlawful and a public nuisance, and the building inspector shall cause to be commenced action or proceedings for the abatement and removal and enjoinment thereof in a manner provided by law. 
(Ord. 357B §7.01.040, 1979)  
CHAPTER 18.99 - PUBLIC FACILITIES FEE 
 
18.99.010 - Purpose. 
In order to implement the goals and objectives of the Lincoln public facilities plan and to mitigate the anticipated growth caused by new development in the Lincoln area, certain public facilities such as roads and community facilities must be constructed. The city council has determined that a public facilities fee is needed in order to finance these public improvements and to pay for the development's fair share of the construction costs of these improvements. In establishing the fee described in the following sections, the city council finds the fee to be consistent with its general plan and, pursuant to Government Code section 65913.2, has considered the effects of the fee with respect to the city's housing needs as established in the housing element of the general plan. 
(Ord. 517B §1(part), 1989)  
18.99.020 - Lincoln public facilities fee. 
A public facilities fee is established on issuance of all building permits for new development to pay for community facilities and roads. The city council shall in council resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fee, describe the benefit and impact area on which the development fee is imposed, list the specific public improvements to be financed, describe the reasonable relationship between this fee and the various types of new developments and set forth time for payment. As described in the fee resolution, this development fee shall be paid by each developer prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the commercial or industrial project or the respective dwelling units in a residential project. On an annual basis, the city council shall review this fee to determine whether the fee amounts are reasonably related to the impacts of developments and whether the described public facilities are still needed. 
(Ord. 517B §1(part), 1989)  
18.99.030 - Limited use of fees. 
The revenues raised by payment of this fee shall be placed in a separate and special account and such revenues, along with any interest earnings on that account, shall be used solely to: 
(1)  Pay for the city's future construction of facilities described in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 18.99.020, or to reimburse the city for those described or listed facilities constructed by the city with funds advanced by the city from other sources, or 
(2)  Reimburse developers who have entered into reimbursement agreements pursuant to Section 18.99.040. 
(Ord. 517B §1(part), 1989)  
18.99.040 - Developer construction of facilities. 
Whenever a developer is required, as a condition of approval of a development permit, to construct a public facility described in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 18.99.020, which facility is determined by the city to have the impacts of that development, and when such construction is necessary to ensure efficient and timely construction of the facilities network, a reimbursement agreement with the developer and a credit against the fee which would otherwise be charged pursuant to this chapter on the development project, shall be offered. The reimbursement amount shall not include the cost for that portion of the improvement needed to mitigate the burdens created by the development. 
(Ord. 517B §1(part), 1989)  
18.99.050 - Fee adjustment. 
A developer of any project subject to the fee described in Section 18.99.020 may apply to the city council for a reduction, adjustment, or a waiver of that fee, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the impacts of the development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk not later than (1) 60 days prior to the public hearing on the development permit application for the project, or (2) if no development permit is required, at the time of the filing of the request for a building permit. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction, or adjustment. The city council shall consider the application at the public hearing on the permit application or at a separate hearing held within 60 days after the filing of the fee adjustment application, whichever is later. The city council shall approve the application in whole or in part only upon finding that due to specific and specified factors particular to the proposed development, the charge of the fee or the type of facility is not applicable to or of benefit to the development. The decision of the city council shall be final. If a reduction, adjustment, or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment, or reduction of the fee. 
(Ord. 517B §1(part), 1989)  
Title 20 - LINCOLN MUNICIPAL AIRPORT  
CHAPTER 20.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
20.04.010 - Definitions. 
"Aircraft parking space" means an area for parking and storing of aircraft, for loading and unloading of passengers, baggage, freight, mail and other cargo upon and from aircraft; for performing of operations incidental to the immediate preparation of aircraft for departure such as inspection, cleaning and servicing with fuel, lubricants and other supplies; for making minor and emergency repairs to aircraft; and for parking mobile equipment used in connection with the foregoing. 
"Airport" means any or all of the airports under the control of the city's department of airport operations (hereafter referred to as the "department") except when otherwise noted and includes all property and improvements within the property or boundary lines of the airport. 
"Aviation operator" means any persons engaged in business of an aviation nature or being authorized to conduct such business by virtue of a contract, license or permit with the city or department. 
"Commercial vehicle" means any type whatsoever, used or maintained for the transportation of person for hire, for compensation or for profit; or designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of persons for hire, for compensation, of for profit; or designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of goods or property. 
"Director" means the director of public works, also herein referred to as airport manager, as appointed by the city manager. The director may delegate authority as he/she deems fit and as set out in the table of organization. 
"Fixed base operator" includes a business or person that is providing, but is not limited to: charter flights, refueling, sale of aviation petroleum products (whether or not conducted in conjunction with other aeronautical activity), pilot training, aircraft rental and sightseeing, aerial photography, crop-dusting and sales, repair and maintenance of aircraft. This business or person must have a city business license and may be required to have either a permit or contract with the city or department. 
"Lincoln Municipal Airport" means LMA or the airport located in the city of Lincoln, California, along Nicolaus Road and Flightline Drive. 
"Motor vehicle" means motor vehicle as defined in the Vehicle Code of the state of California, as amended from time to time. 
"Nonflight commercial activities" means any activity conducted by any person engaged in any business authorized by contract, license or permit with the city and by which business is other than that of an aviation operator, certified air carrier, fixed base operator, mechanic or commercial aircraft use. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company, association, organization, joint stock assignee or other similar representative thereof. 
"Public aircraft facilities" means facilities provided and made available by the department for public use by aircraft operator. 
"Restricted areas" means fuel farms and other posted facilities are restricted areas. All restricted areas will be posted with signs whenever and wherever practical. 
"Runway" means an area for landing and the taking off of aircraft. 
"Supervised areas" means all aprons, hangars, aircraft operations areas are supervised areas. 
"Taxiway" means an area for the ground movement of aircraft. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.04.020 - Scope. 
(a)  All users of, and persons on the airport shall be governed by these regulations and the directions of the city manager and the director. These regulations are subject to change by the city at any time. The city manager or his/her designee shall have authority to take such actions as may be necessary to safeguard persons and property at the airport; and to make and enforce such rules and regulations, in addition to those provided herein, as shall be required in any emergency or abnormal condition. 
(b)  These regulations are not intended to amend, modify or supersede any provisions of federal, state or local law, or any specific contractual agreement of the city through the department with which they may conflict; provided, however that these regulations shall, insofar as possible, be interpreted so that such a conflict shall not exist. 
(c)  If any portion of these regulations is declared invalid or unenforceable, all other portions shall remain in effect and be construed to achieve the purposes hereof. 
(d)  In the operation and use of the airport, all users of and persons on the airport shall neither discriminate nor permit discrimination against any person or group of persons on the grounds of race, color or national origin in any manner prohibited by the Federal Aviation Regulations, 49 CFR Part 21, Nondiscrimination in Federally-Assisted Programs of the Department of Transportation-Effectuation of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (F.A.R.). 
(e)  All users of and persons on the airport shall furnish service on a fair, equal and nondiscriminatory basis and charge fair, reasonable and nondiscriminatory prices for each unit or service; provided, all users of and persons on the airport may make reasonable and nondiscriminatory discounts, rebates or other similar types of price reductions to volume purchasers. 
(f)  Within the meaning of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958, Section 308(a), all users of and persons on the airport understand as follows: "There shall be no exclusive right for the use of any landing area of air navigation facility upon which federal funds have been expended." 
(g)  All users of and persons on the airport shall obey all rules and regulations relating to the use of facilities of the airport. This includes all fire, safety and health regulations, as well as rules and regulations relating to the use of areas specifically designated for tiedown and outdoor parking of aircraft. Each person shall obey the Laws and Regulations of the United States, the state and the city, and the orders and regulations of any office thereof. Each person shall obey the rules and regulations of the airport as now existing or hereafter amended as well as all Federal Aviation Regulations. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.04.030 - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person operating or handling any aircraft, operating any vehicle, equipment or apparatus, or using the airport or any of its facilities, in violation of any of the rules and regulations contained herein, or refusing to comply therewith, may be removed from the airport by or under the authority of the director. Any person may be deprived of and refused the further use of the airport and its facilities for such length of time as the director deems necessary in order to safeguard the public, the airport and its facilities. 
(b)  Any person or persons who violate, or who aid or abet a violation of any of the provisions of this title are guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, except as otherwise provided thereof, except as otherwise provided herein, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.04.040 - Liability. 
(a)  The permission granted by the city to use the airport and its facilities shall be conditioned upon the assumption of full responsibility by every person exercising or using such permission. As a consideration for the use of the airport and its facilities, each person using the airport and its facilities shall release from, hold harmless of and indemnify the city and its officers, agents and employees, from any and all responsibility, liability, loss or damage, caused by or on the behalf of such person using the airport and its facilities. 
(b)  The use of the airport by any person for any purpose, or the paying of any fees therefor or the operation of any aircraft thereon, shall be in itself an acknowledgment that such persons accept such privileges on the conditions set forth. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.04.050 - Insurance. 
(a)  All tenant fixed base operators as defined in aviation and as further defined in Section 20.04.010, shall be covered by airport-operations liability insurance or comprehensive general liability insurance and automobile liability insurance or comprehensive general liability insurance and automobile liability insurance for licensed vehicles utilized on the leased premises or the airport apron, in the minimum amounts of $1,000.000.00 combined single limit, at their own expense, to assure payments of damages occasioned by operators' operation in and upon the airport including aircraft and ramp vehicles. The coverage shall include bodily injury and property damage. The city shall be named as an additional insured in any of the insurance policies described in this subsection except the automobile policies. Each operator must provide, if requested by the director, and keep current a certificate of insurance indicating the coverage and its limits and providing for 30 days' written notice to the city before cancellation or material change in the coverage. 
(b)  Every tenant conducting nonflight commercial activities at the airport or using its facilities as defined in Section 20.04.010, shall be covered by comprehensive general liability insurance and automobile liability insurance for licensed and unlicensed vehicles utilized on the leased premises or the airport apron, in the minimum amounts of $1,000,000.00, at their own expense, to assure payments of damages occasioned by their conduct of commercial activities in and upon the airport proper. The coverage shall include bodily injury, property damage, cross liability, completed operations liability, liquor liability for any facility serving alcoholic beverages and contractual liability. Liability coverage shall also be provided, at the tenants' expense, for any nonowned property under the care, custody and control of the tenants, in an amount adequate to cover the replacement cost of the nonowned property. The city shall be named as an additional insured in any of the insurance policies described in this subsection. Each operator must provide and keep current a certificate of insurance with the director indicating the coverage and its limits and providing for 30 days' written notice to city before cancellation or material change in the coverage. 
(c)  All nontenant or commercial operators authorized by permit or contract to do business on the airport, including fixed base operators, certificated air carriers, scheduled and nonscheduled air taxi operators, nonflight commercial operators, including commercial ground vehicles, as defined in Section 20.04.010 shall be covered, at their expense, by the same insurance as required for like tenant operators, as described in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, excluding the requirement for airport operations liability insurance or comprehensive general liability insurance. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.04.060 - Accident reports. 
Every person involved in any accident requiring medical attention excluding normal injuries reported to FBO's workman's compensation carrier, occurring on the airport shall make a full report to the director as soon after the accident as possible but not later than 24 hours. Every person involved in any accident that results in property damage of $1,000.00 or more including but not limited to pedestrian, aircraft or automotive, occurring on the airport shall make a full report to the director as soon after the accident as possible but not later than 24 hours. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.04.070 - Enforcement. 
The Lincoln public safety department and city attorney shall enforce this title, as it applies to the airport. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
CHAPTER 20.08 - VEHICLES  
Article I. 
 
20.08.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, and notwithstanding the provisions of Section 20.04.010, the terms defined by Sections 20.08.020 through 20.08.050 shall be ascribed the meanings indicated therein, unless the context indicated otherwise. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.08.020 - Same—Director. 
The term "director" shall mean the public works director, and any subordinate city officer or employee to whom he or she delegates duty or authority imposed or conferred by this chapter. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.08.035 - Same—Lincoln Municipal Airport or LMA. 
The term "LMA" shall mean the Lincoln Municipal Airport, consisting of the entire premises thereof. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.08.055 - Notice. 
Any notice or other writing authorized or required by this chapter shall be deemed served and effective for all purposes on the date when it is reduced to writing and is either personally delivered to the party to whom it is directed or is deposited in the United States Mail, postage prepaid, and addressed to the party to whom it is directed. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.08.060 - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided, the director is charged with the responsibility of administering the provisions of this chapter, and shall be authorized from time to time to promulgate and enforce such rules or regulations consistent with the purposes, intent and express terms of this chapter as he or she deems necessary to implement such purposes, intent and express terms. Such rules and regulations may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The establishment of speed limits upon the roads and streets of the airport's premises; 
(2)  The establishment of passenger vehicle parking areas, no parking areas and timed limit parking area zones; 
(3)  The establishment of one-way streets, and regulations governing the directional flow of motor vehicle traffic; 
(4)  Regulations governing the safety and a condition of commercial vehicles which enter the premises of airport; 
(5)  Regulations governing the conduct of drivers and other persons associated with commercial vehicles; and 
(6)  Any and all other regulations necessary and appropriate to insure the efficient, expeditious and safe movement, operation and parking of motor vehicles on the premises of the airport and the operation of the airport. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
Article II. 
 
20.08.105 - Application. 
As provided for in Sections 21, 21001 and 21113(c) of the California Vehicle Code, all provisions of the Vehicle Code relating to traffic upon highways are applicable and shall be enforced on traffic operating on Lincoln Municipal Airport. Methods of enforcement, either citation or arrest, shall be the same on Lincoln Municipal Airport as any other highways as defined in the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.08.110 - Qualifications of drivers. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle, whether a private automobile or commercial vehicle, unless the operator possesses a current and valid operator's license as required by the Vehicle Code for the type of vehicle being operated. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.08.115 - Speed limits. 
Unless otherwise posted pursuant to regulations issued by the director, it is unlawful to operate a motor vehicle at a speed which exceeds: 
(1)  Twenty-five miles per hour upon a street or road; 
(2)  Ten miles per hour in an automobile parking lot; 
(3)  Except as otherwise provided, 35 miles per hour in a runway, taxiway, aircraft parking space or terminal apron space area; 
(4)  Ten miles per hour if within 15 feet from any parked aircraft, parked motor vehicle or other parked equipment in a runway, taxiway, aircraft parking space or terminal apron space area; 
(5)  At a speed which exceeds a limit posted pursuant to administrative regulations issued by the director pursuant to Section 20.08.060; and 
(6)  At a speed greater than is reasonable or prudent having regard for weather, visibility, traffic on, and the surface and width of, the airport street, road or other area, and in no event at a speed which endangers the safety of persons or property. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.08.120 - Reckless driving. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle recklessly and shall be enforced as provided in the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.08.125 - Traffic and other signs. 
It is unlawful for any person: 
(1)  To fail to bring a motor vehicle to a complete stop behind any stop sign, before proceeding, or to proceed after completing the stop unless the operator may proceed safely; 
(2)  To operate a motor vehicle in a direction prohibited by a traffic direction sign; 
(3)  To operate a motor vehicle within an area posted to prohibit the entry or operation of motor vehicles; or 
(4)  Remove, deface or damage any sign on airport property. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.08.130 - Right-of-way. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in violation of any of the following right-of-way regulations: 
(1)  Pedestrian traffic and taxiing aircraft shall at all times have the right-of-way over motor vehicle traffic. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.08.135 - Intoxication—Motor vehicle. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or any drug, or under the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and any drug and shall be enforced as provided in the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.08.137 - Intoxication—Aircraft. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate an aircraft while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or any drug, or under the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and any drug. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.08.140 - Vehicle occupancies and loads. 
It is unlawful for a person to operate any motor vehicle which is overloaded or carrying more passengers than that for which the vehicle is designed or rated. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.08.145 - Hangars. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in any hangar unless the vehicle is equipped with exhausts protected by screens or baffles to prevent the escape of the propagation of flame. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.08.150 - Runways. 
Only emergency street vehicles such as police vehicles, fire vehicles, ambulance vehicles, maintenance vehicles and city staff vehicles are allowed access to the runway unless vehicle has permission of the director. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.08.155 - Vehicle lights and reflectors. 
Between the hours of sunset and sunrise, it is unlawful in a runway, taxiway, aircraft parking space or terminal apron space area to operate a motor vehicle which does not display the following: normal operating headlights and taillights; two red reflectors on each side and on the rear of the vehicle. It is unlawful to operate a nonmotor propelled cart or trailer in such areas which does not display two amber reflectors on each side, two amber reflectors on the front and two amber reflectors on the rear. All reflectors required by this section shall be visible for at least 500 feet when reflecting normal vehicle headlights. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.08.160 - Fuel tenders. 
Except as otherwise provided by regulations issued by the director pursuant to Section 20.08.060, it is unlawful for the operator of a fuel tender to position such vehicle for aircraft fueling purposes in such a manner that such vehicle's rapid removal from the area is impeded or obstructed. It is unlawful for any person to impede or obstruct in any manner whatsoever the movement or removal of any fuel tender in an aircraft fueling position. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.08.175 - Emergency vehicles. 
Upon approach of a police, ambulance, fire truck or other emergency vehicle emitting an audible or visible signal, the operator of a motor vehicle shall drive the vehicle parallel with, and as near as possible to, the right-hand edge of the road, clear of all intersections, and stay at that location until the emergency vehicle has stopped or passed, unless otherwise directed by the airport employee or peace officer. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.08.180 - Violation. 
Violation of any section of this article, or any subsection thereof, shall constitute an infraction except as otherwise provided herein. Each such violation shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions of the California Penal Code or Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
CHAPTER 20.12 - AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS 
 
20.12.010 - Aeronautical activities. 
A person shall not navigate any aircraft over, or land it upon, or fly it from the airport; or service, maintain or repair any aircraft on the airport; or conduct any aircraft operations on or from the airport otherwise than in conformity with the requirements herein contained; orders issued by the director; regulations established by the FAA under authority of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (Public Law 85-726) and amendments thereto, together with any FAA registrations and revisions or amendments thereof; and any state rules and regulations, governing aircraft, not in conflict with rules and regulations of the United States of America. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.12.020 - Registration of aircraft. 
(a)  The owner of an aircraft based on the airport shall register the aircraft with the manager's office. Any change in ownership will require a change in registration. 
(b)  The pilot of an aircraft, whose owner or lessee does not have a contract or permit with the Lincoln Municipal Airport, and who intends to be at the airport overnight, shall register at the airport flight line operations office after landing and prior to takeoff. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.12.030 - Payment. 
Any payment for use of airport facilities, storage, repairs, supplies or other services, rendered by the airport department, shall be made before flight departure unless credit arrangements are authorized by the director. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.12.040 - Refusal of clearance. 
The director may delay or restrict any flight or other operations at the airport for a violation of this title or for reasons of safety to persons or property. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.12.060 - Disabled aircraft. 
(a)  Disabled aircraft and parts thereof shall be removed promptly from the runways or taxiways to a designated area by owners, at their own expense. 
(b)  If the owner or pilot refuses to move an aircraft, as directed by the director, the aircraft may be towed away and stored at the owner's expense. The city shall not incur any liability for damage which may result in the course of or after such moving. 
(c)  If an aircraft is disabled on a runway of the airport, the director may take whatever action is necessary to make the runway safe for other aircraft. The aircraft owner shall bear the expense of such action as well as the expense of any and all damages caused to the disabled aircraft except when permission is required as described in the FARs. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.12.070 - Aircraft storage and repairs. 
Aircraft shall be stored and repairs made in the spaces designated for that purpose by the director. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.12.080 - Engine warm-up. 
Engine run-up prior to takeoff shall be accomplished on run-up pads or other areas provided for this purpose. No engine run-up shall be permitted in any areas that would create a hazard to persons, aircraft or other property. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.12.090 - Parking and security of aircraft. 
A person shall park aircraft only in an area on the airport prescribed by the director. Aircraft shall not be left unattended on the airport, unless it is secured or within a hangar. Owners of such aircraft shall be held responsible for any damage resulting from failure to comply with this rule. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.12.110 - Lighting facility damage. 
Any person damaging any light or fixture by means of contact with aircraft in any manner whatsoever shall report such damage to the airport office immediately and shall be fully responsible for any costs required to repair or replace the damaged facility. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.12.150 - Taxiing rules. 
(a)  A person shall not taxi an aircraft until he has ascertained that there is not any danger of collision with any person or object in the immediate area by visual inspection of the area. 
(b)  An aircraft shall be operated only in a careful manner or taxied at a safe and reasonable speed. 
(c)  Aircraft shall be taxied in accordance with the prescribed taxiing patterns established by the airport. 
(d)  A person shall not run the engine or engines of any aircraft at any location on the airport in such manner as to cause damage to other aircraft or property or in such manner as to blow paper, dirt or other materials across taxiways or runways in such manner as to endanger the safety of operations of the airport. 
(e)  Each person operating an aircraft on the airport or part of the airport shall comply with the orders, signals and directions of the director or his/her designee except when this conflicts with a pilot's responsibilities as defined in the FARs. 
(f)  A person may neither start nor taxi any aircraft on the airport in a place where the exhaust blast is likely to cause injury to persons or property. If the aircraft cannot be taxied without violating this subsection, the operator must have it towed to the desired designation. 
(g)  A person may not move a rotorcraft at a place on the airport (other than a heliport) while its rotors are turning unless there is a clear area of a least 50 feet from the outer tip of each rotor. A person may not move a rotorcraft at a heliport while its rotors are turning unless there is a clear area of at least 20 feet from the outer tip of each rotor. 
(h)  A person shall not taxi aircraft or rotorcraft into or out of hangars under any circumstances. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.12.160 - Confinement of aircraft operations. 
A person may operate an aircraft on the airport only on a surface area prepared for that purpose unless otherwise authorized by the director. A person may use a taxi strip on the airport for a takeoff or landing only if authorized by the director. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.12.170 - Glider towing. 
A person shall neither tow nor pull a glider by airplane, motor vehicle or any other method, where such towing or pulling is for the purpose of taking off until the director decides that it may be done without danger to life or property and without interfering with the operations of the airport; and issues a permit. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.12.180 - Parachute jumping. 
Parachute jumping within the confines of the airport boundaries, flight patterns, approach zones or 45-degree entry legs, or in any other area around or near the airport is permitted when in compliance with the procedure established hereunder: 
(1)  The jumper and the aircraft operator must notify the airport office and request permission at least 24 hours before the operation. 
(2)  The jumper and the aircraft operator must observe all of the airport rules and regulations for safe operations and use the same pattern and runway as other aircraft in the pattern. 
(3)  The jumper and the aircraft operator must provide a current certificate of liability insurance to the airport office before permission will be granted. 
(4)  The jumper or the aircraft operator must pay a use fee to be established by city council resolution. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.12.185 - Restricted operations. 
Operation of ultralight aircraft vehicles, airships, dirigibles, balloons, motorless aircraft, kites and unmanned rockets is permitted when in compliance with the procedures established by the city council and the airport manager. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.12.190 - Specific operation instructions. 
(a)  Lincoln Municipal Airport is an uncontrolled airport and operates without a control tower. The airport only provides advisory information through a unicom system. Aircraft pilots operating into or out of Lincoln shall be very alert in watching for other aircraft operations. Aircraft using Lincoln shall operate in accordance with Federal Aviation Regulations pertaining to operation at an airport without an air traffic control tower. 
(b)  All landings and takeoffs shall be made on the runways except as provided in Section 20.12.060. 
(c)  Prior authorization of the director is required for landings and takeoffs of aircraft of more than 60,000 pounds maximum certificated takeoff weight for all dual axle aircraft and 30,000 pounds for single axle aircraft. 
(d)  Helicopters shall not be operated within 100 feet of any area when unsecured light aircraft are parked or operating. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.12.210 - Agricultural operations. 
(a)  Agricultural aircraft operators must request permission to operate at the Lincoln Municipal Airport by giving the airport office a 24-hour advance notice. 
(b)  Agricultural aircraft operators must observe all of the airport rules and regulations for safe operations, follow the guidelines as set by Advisory Circular 137-1, and use the same pattern and runway as other aircraft in the pattern. 
(c)  Agricultural aircraft operators must provide a current certificate of liability insurance to the airport office before permission will be granted. 
(d)  Agricultural aircraft operators must pay a deposit fee and a daily use fee to be established by city council resolution. 
(e)  The agricultural aircraft operator must provide material safety data sheets (MSDS) on all chemicals to be used/applied. 
(f)  Trucks and/or trailers containing chemicals are not permitted to park on airport property overnight. 
(g)  The designated agricultural operations loading area is located on the westside abandoned runway. 
(h)  The agricultural aircraft operator will not be permitted to use airport water for mixing purposes or for the cleaning of aircraft, equipment, trucks, etc. on airport property. 
(i)  The disposal of any chemicals or containers on airport property is prohibited. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
CHAPTER 20.16 - FIRE HAZARDS, FUELING AND FLAMMABLES 
 
20.16.005 - Application. 
As provided for in Article 24 of the 1991 Uniform Fire Code, all provisions of Article 24 relating to fire hazards, fueling and flammables are applicable and shall be enforced at the LMA. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.16.010 - Cleaning of aircraft. 
A person shall not use flammable volatile liquid, having a flash point of less than 100 degrees Fahrenheit, on the airport in the cleaning of aircraft engines, propellers or appliances, unless such operations are conducted in open air, or in a room specifically set aside for that purpose. The room must be properly fireproofed and equipped with adequate and readily accessible fire extinguishing apparatus. The director shall designate the open air areas for the cleaning of aircraft as described above. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.16.020 - Storage. 
(a)  A person shall neither keep nor store flammable liquids, gases, signal flares or other similar material in the hangars or in any building on the airport; provided that such materials may be kept in an aircraft in the proper receptacles installed in the aircraft for such purpose; or in rooms or areas specifically approved for such storage by the director; or in National Board of Fire Underwriter's approved safety cans. 
(b)  Lessees and concessionaires shall provide suitable metal receptacles with metal covers for the storage of waste, rags and other rubbish. All used waste and rags or other rubbish shall be removed by the lessees and concessionaires daily or in regular scheduled pickups but not less than one a week. Lessees may contract with other agencies or persons for removal of this material. Method and pickup point are subject to approval of the director. 
(c)  Waste oil may be disposed of in the oil recovery tank located on the south side of the fuel farm. Disposal on the ground or storm drains of waste oil and other hazardous materials is strictly prohibited. FBOs must dispose of waste oil and other hazardous material in a manner approved by the director. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.16.030 - Doping. 
(a)  Doping processes shall be conducted only in properly designated, fireproofed and ventilated rooms or buildings in which all illumination, wiring, heating, ventilation equipment, switches, outlets and fixtures shall be explosionproof, sparkproof and vaporproof, and all windows and doors shall open easily. A person shall neither enter nor work in a dope room while doping processes are being conducted unless such person wears sparkproof shoes. A person shall not smoke while doping. The room or building and the process for doping shall comply with the requirements of the Industrial Safety Division of the state. 
(b)  Doping of airplanes in open areas outside of buildings is allowed with the prior permit of the director who shall designate the area in which the doping may be done. The doping processes shall be done in the designated area in which all illumination, wiring, heating, ventilation equipment, switches, outlets and fixtures shall be explosionproof, sparkproof and vaporproof. A person shall neither enter nor work in the designated doping area while doping processes are being conducted unless such person wears sparkproof shoes. A person shall not smoke while doping. The process for doping shall comply with the requirements of the Industrial Safety Division of the state. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.16.040 - Fueling operations. 
The following rules govern the fueling and defueling of aircraft: 
(1)  All aircraft, except aircraft designed for agricultural operations, shall neither be fueled nor defueled while the engine is running, or being warmed by applications of exterior heat, or while such aircraft is in a storage hangar or enclosed space, unless permitted by the director. 
(2)  A person shall not smoke within 50 feet of an aircraft being fueled or defueled. 
(3)  A person shall not operate any radio transmitter or receiver; nor switch electrical appliances off or on in an aircraft during fueling or defueling. 
(4)  During refueling, the aircraft and the fueling dispensing apparatus shall both be grounded to a point or points of zero electrical potential. 
(5)  A person shall not use any material during fueling or defueling of aircraft which is likely to cause a spark or be a source of ignition. 
(6)  Adequate fire extinguishers shall be within ready reach of all persons engaged in fueling or defueling aircraft. 
(7)  Fueling hoses and equipment shall be maintained in a safe, sound and nonleaking condition and shall be of design and make approved by National Board of Fire Underwriters. 
(8)  All hoses, funnels and appurtenances used in fueling and defueling operations shall be equipped with a grounding device to prevent ignition of volatile liquids. 
(9)  Persons engaged in the fueling and defueling of aircraft shall exercise care to prevent overflow of fuel. Persons in charge shall take proper measures to remove volatile liquid when it is spilled during transfer. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.16.050 - Storage in apron area. 
Gasoline, oil and solvent drums or receptacles shall not be stored on apron and ramp areas in excess of amounts actually needed as current stock. Any material of this type that is kept enclosed and covered shall be in a housing of a design and type as meets the approval of the director. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.16.060 - Fire equipment. 
A person shall neither remove nor cause to be removed from its holder, container, reel or bracket any equipment or device used in fire protection, except in case of emergency or fire. In any event, such equipment shall not be taken from any hangar or building for standby use by any person or for any use other than for which it is intended, without permission from the director. Use of such equipment shall be reported immediately to the director. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.16.070 - Other regulations. 
All regulations and recommendations of the California Industrial Safety Division, National Fire Protection Association, and the Federal Aviation Administration shall be adhered to with regard to all aspects of fueling and handling of inflammables. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.16.080 - Liquid disposal. 
Fuel, oils, dopes, paints, solvents or acids shall neither be disposed of nor dumped in drains, basins or ditches or elsewhere on the airport. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
CHAPTER 20.20 - PUBLIC AND TENANT USAGE 
 
20.20.040 - Supervised areas. 
Any person who is not an owner or renter, or guest of either, who has an aircraft parked in a supervised area may be restricted from these areas for cause by the director. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.20.050 - Sanitation. 
Dogs and other domestic pets must be kept on a leash or kept in a vehicle or a container. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.20.060 - Restricted areas. 
A person shall not enter upon the field area, utilities and service rooms or areas, or other restricted areas as defined in Section 20.04.010. A person is not allowed in these areas without prior permission of the director. After receiving permission the permittee must be accompanied in the area by a member of the airport department except for: 
(1)  Persons assigned to duty therein; 
(2)  Persons permitted by the director; 
(3)  Passengers, under appropriate supervision, entering the apron for the purpose of enplaning and deplaning; 
(4)  Except that a person permitted to enter a supervised area as defined in Section 20.04.010 may traverse a taxiway in order to arrive at the supervised area. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.20.070 - Litter. 
A person shall not throw paper, cigars, cigarettes, bottles or any other material from windows or roofs of any buildings or structures on the airport nor onto any sidewalk, street, apron, walkway, taxiway or other areas of the airport. A fine of $200.00 shall be imposed for such behavior. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.20.080 - Passenger gates and areas. 
A fixed base operator shall put back all gate chains and doors and other public safeguards under its control unless such gates, doors or safeguards are continually supervised or locked in a manner to protect all persons. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.20.090 - Loitering and refusal to comply. 
A person shall not loiter on any part of the airport or in any building on the airport. A person shall not come upon or use the airport, after having been refused the use of the airport by the director or public safety director except while traveling through as a passenger on or in a licensed common carrier transportation vehicle or while enplaning or deplaning as a passenger on an aircraft operating on the airport. Any person or persons who refuse to comply with the rules and regulations of the airport after proper request to do so by the director is a trespasser. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.20.100 - Use of shop areas. 
The shops, garages, equipment and facilities on the airport are for the conduct of the owner's or lessee's business and operations. A person shall neither make use of these facilities nor loiter around such premises unless he has permission of the owner or lessee. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.20.105 - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  As used in this section, "prohibited activity" means and includes any solicitation of any thing of value for any purpose, the sale or distribution of any written matter or thing, the conduct of any activity which tends to obstruct passenger traffic or use of airport facilities, or the conduct of any activity which causes persons to congregate. "Prohibited activity" shall not include the conduct of any airport related business carried on pursuant to a contract with the city, nor the normal use of airport facilities by passengers, persons delivering or picking up passengers or the press. 
(b)  Accidents or emergencies as declared by the director, public safety director or city manager, shall immediately grant broad authority to the incident commander or director. Such declaration shall provide for the ability to restrict any and all persons regardless of rank from entering the incident area. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.20.110 - Conduct of business or commercial activity. 
A person shall neither engage in any business nor commercial activity of any nature whatsoever on the airport, including flight instruction and aircraft engine repair, until such person has entered into a written contract and been issued a permit by the city. The following activities shall be permitted as defined below: 
(1)  A person shall repair an aircraft, aircraft engine, propeller or apparatus only in an area of the airport designated for such purpose by the director. Minor adjustments may be done while the aircraft is on a loading ramp preparatory to taxi and takeoff when such adjustment is necessary to prevent a delayed departure; 
(2)  An owner(s) of an aircraft may perform repairs upon owned aircraft providing such individuals are permitted to do such work under current Federal Aviation Regulations; provided further that such work is conducted so as not to create any hazards or nuisance to other aircraft, persons or operator upon the airport. The work must be performed in an area approved by the director. The approval will include without further designation those persons who may assist the owner as described in subsection (3) of this section; 
(3)  A person holding a current appropriate FAA certificate may assist an owner, instruct an owner or supervise permitted work as defined in subsection (2) of this section. This person will not be deemed an aviation operator in business on the airport which requires a contract with or permit from the city because he assists, instructs or supervises an owner who performs such permitted work; 
(4)  A person holding a current FAA flight instruction license, who gives occasional flight instruction to an owner of an aircraft in the owner's aircraft, shall not be deemed an aviation operator in business on the airport requiring a contract with the city or a permit from the director; 
(5)  The director may issue permits to individuals or companies to perform maintenance: on aircraft under unusual circumstances, i.e., repair to flyaway status, by owner of aircraft not based upon airports; on aircraft of unusual design, size or age; aircraft and components for which there is not any qualified certificated operator upon the airport; 
(6)  The registered owner of an aircraft is not prohibited from offering his aircraft for sale or from selling his aircraft; 
(7)  A purchaser of goods or services from an aviation operator or permittee in business on the airport may freely do so without a permit, contract or permission from the director; 
(8)  a.  An owner will not be prevented from performing a service for himself or from obtaining any service or labor from persons, other than aviation operators in business on the airport, when the owner is unable or unwilling to either obtain the needed service or goods on the airport involved or unable or unwilling to reach agreement with the available aviation operators on the airport. 
b.  A permit, issued by the director, is required to be obtained by any person rendering services or labor to the aircraft owner as described in subsection (8)a. of this section. The permit shall be obtained prior to performing any service or labor for the owner as described in subsection (8)a. of this section. 
(9)  The permit as described in subsection (8) of this section shall be issued by the director under the following terms and conditions: 
a.  The director shall determine what amount of insurance shall be required to be carried by the permittee. The permit may be issued on an annual basis or for a single entry by the permittee onto the airport. 
b.  The director may not refuse to issue a permit as described in subsection (8) of this section to any person described in subsection (8) of this section except under the following circumstances: if the person applying for the permit is in violation of any provision of this title or has been excluded from the airport for cause under any applicable section of this title at the time the person makes application for a permit; if space is not available for the intended work; and if the proposed activity will cause a hazard by the nature of its operation and its location to other users of the airport. 
c.  All airport commercial activity taking place at the airport as of January 1, 1990, will not be subject to this section until January 1, 1992; 
(10)  The city council may determine by resolution what fee, if any, shall be charged for the issuance of permits under this section. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.20.120 - Open flame operations. 
A person shall neither conduct any open flame operations in any building nor have an open fire outside of a building on the airport until the director has issued a permit. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.20.130 - Smoking. 
A person shall neither smoke on the airport apron, within 50 feet of any fueling or defueling operation, nor in any building, room or area on the airport where smoking is prohibited by the director. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.20.140 - Trash containers. 
A person shall use only covered trash containers in any area. A vehicle used for hauling trash, dirt or any other materials, shall be operated on the airport only when the vehicle is constructed to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom. Areas to be used for trash or garbage containers shall be designated by the director. Such areas shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.20.150 - Apron and floor surfaces. 
(a)  Each lessee or concessionaire on the airport shall keep the floors of the hangar areas and terminal apron and ramp areas, leased by them, or used in their operations, clean and free of oil, grease and other materials or stains which would cause a fire hazard or a slippery or unsafe condition. 
(b)  A person shall not use any material (such as oil absorbents or similar material) that creates an eye hazard when picked up, swirled or blown about by the blast of air from an aircraft engine in any passenger loading area or other public area. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.20.160 - Storage of equipment. 
A lessee or concessionaire on the airport shall store or stack material or equipment in such a manner as to prevent being a hazard to personnel or property. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.20.170 - Equipment and miscellaneous in apron area. 
Ramp equipment shall be parked or stored in designated area, and kept in a neat and orderly manner. Receptacles, chests, cases or housing shall not remain on the apron or ramp area unless the director has issued a permit. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.20.180 - Fire equipment. 
Each lessee, licensee or concessionaire shall supply and maintain adequate and readily accessible fire extinguishers, as are approved by the National Board of Fire Underwriters, for its particular area, occupancy and hazards. The director may designate the location of the extinguishers. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.20.190 - Structural and decorative changes. 
Lessees or concessionaires shall make major (over $1,000.00) structural or decorative changes only with prior written permission of the director. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.20.200 - Signs, posters and stickers. 
A person shall post, distribute or display a sign, poster, sticker, advertisement, circular or other written or printed matter on the airport premises or in public viewing areas only with the prior written permission of the director. For sale signs may be placed in aircraft on the airport. All signs posted on the airport must comply with all federal, state and city laws and ordinances. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.20.210 - Commercial photography. 
A person may take a still, motion or sound picture on the airport for commercial or business purposes only with the written permission of the director except for the following purposes: to provide news coverage of events on the airport; or to stimulate interest in air commerce or travel; or for nonprofit or personal purpose. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.20.220 - Games. 
A person shall not prepare to operate or release a kite, parachute, balloon, model aircraft or rocket or practice or play football, baseball, golf, tennis or any other game on the airport in which a ball, stone or other substance is thrown, struck, flown in the air or otherwise propelled, except during a period of time and in an area designated by the director. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.20.230 - Impersonation. 
A person, except a member of the airport staff, shall not: 
(1)  Represent himself as a member of such department; 
(2)  Assume or exercise the functions, powers, duties or privileges of a member of such department; 
(3)  Wear or have in his possession a badge, uniform or other insignia that is, or purports to be, a badge, uniform or other insignia worn by a member of the department. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.20.250 - Implementation. 
The director and the city manager may adopt any and all rules and regulations which they deem appropriate and necessary in order to implement the provisions and intent of this title. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.20.260 - Notice of violation. 
The director shall give written notice to any person in violation of the provisions of this title. The notice shall specify the specific section of the title being violated by the person. The notice shall also direct the person to either refrain from doing the act which constitutes a violation of this title or direct the person to do some affirmative act which shall cause compliance with the provisions of the title being violated. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.20.270 - Setting of lease rates. 
The director shall administer all leases at the airport with the objective of securing operating revenues for the airport and future expansions. The city manager shall be responsible for creating lease/rent rates and updating same. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.20.280 - Appeals. 
Any person who is dissatisfied with a decision made by the airport manager under the terms of this title may appeal the decision to the city council. At the hearing, the city council shall review the decision of the director and determine whether or not the decision of the director was correct and reasonable in light of the facts of the given situation. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
CHAPTER 20.24 - AIRPORT SECURITY 
(RESERVED)  
CHAPTER 20.28 - AIRPORT NOISE STANDARDS 
(RESERVED)  
CHAPTER 20.32 - RATES, FEES AND CHARGES FOR USE OF FACILITIES AT LINCOLN MUNICIPAL AIRPORT 
(RESERVED)  
CHAPTER 20.36 - FUEL FLOWAGE FEES ON GENERAL AVIATION FUEL AT LINCOLN MUNICIPAL AIRPORT 
 
20.36.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a fuel flowage fee on aviation fuel delivered to commercial fuelers and self-fuelers at Lincoln Municipal Airport. Said fees are established in order to provide revenues for the operation of said airport and as a reasonable means of securing compensation for the privilege of conducting aircraft fueling activity by general aviation fixed-base operators or aircraft owners or operators at said airport. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.36.015 - Definitions. 
"Airport" means the Lincoln Municipal Airport. 
"Aviation fuel" means any fuel intended for use in an aircraft, including, but not limited to, aviation gas, jet fuel and motor vehicle grade fuels. 
"Commercial fueler" means any person, firm or corporation engaged in the retailing or delivery of aviation fuel at Lincoln Municipal Airport to other users at said airport. 
"Self-fueler" means any person, firm or corporation owning or operating an aircraft and who self-fuels said aircraft at Lincoln Municipal Airport. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.36.020 - Fuel flowage fees for commercial fueling. 
Any commercial fueler shall pay to the city of Lincoln a fuel flowage fee in the amount of $0.11 for each gallon of aviation fuel received during a calendar month by said commercial fueler at its fueling facility at the airport. The city council may set by resolution the flowage fee. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.36.030 - Fuel flowage fees for self-fueling. 
Any self-fueler shall pay to the city a fuel flowage fee in the amount of $0.11 for each gallon of aviation fuel received during a calendar month by said self-fueler at its fueling facility at the airport. The city council may set by resolution the flowage fee. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.36.040 - Reports and fee and interest payment. 
Every commercial fueler or self-fueler shall submit monthly activity reports to the director of the city concerning fueling activity at the airport in such form and detail, and at such time or times, as the director may prescribe. The fuel flowage fee shall be paid by the fuelers by the tenth day of each calendar month for the previous month's fuel deliveries. Any payment not received within seven days after the due date shall accrue interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month from the due date until paid in full. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.36.050 - Permits. 
No person, firm or corporation shall conduct either commercial fueling or self-fueling of aircraft at the Lincoln Municipal Airport without obtaining a permit issued by the director. The director is authorized to issue revocable permits for such commercial fueling and/or self-fueling. The city council may determine by resolution what fee, if any, shall be charged for the issuance of permits under this section. The director shall determine what amount of insurance shall be required to be carried by the fuelers. The director is further authorized to include provisions in the permits protecting the city and the public health, safety and welfare in the conduct of fueling activities on the airport, including safety and service requirements and compliance with the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993)  
20.36.060 - Discounts. 
The director is authorized to set up discount policies and special sales to encourage use of the airport and increase fuel sales. 
(Ord. 597B §2(part), 1993) 
