MORGAN HILL, CALIFORNIA 
MUNICIPAL CODE 
1987 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances 
of the city of Morgan Hill, California 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 26, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
  
> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF MORGAN HILL, CALIFORNIA 
____________ 
Rich Constantine 
Mayor 
____________ 
Rene Spring 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Larry Carr 
Yvonne Martínez Beltrán 
John K. McKay 
City Council 
____________ 
Michelle Wilson 
Deputy City Clerk 
____________ 
Christina Turner 
City Manager 
PREFACE 
The Morgan Hill, California Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1987, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 26, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of Marc Hynes, city attorney, and Barbara A. Howard, city clerk. 
The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the Title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 26, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance 2302 N.S., passed May 15, 2019. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
Beginning with Supplement No. 26, a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
As of Supplement No. 26, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Beginning with Supplement No. 26, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 26, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement No. 26, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
 
1.01.010 - Adoption of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 50022.1 through 50022.10 of the Government Code of the state of California, there is adopted the "Morgan Hill Municipal Code," 1987 edition, as published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington, including the following secondary codes incorporated therein by reference in whole or in part: 
A.  "Uniform Building Code, 1997 Edition," "California Building Code, 2001 Edition," promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials; 
B.  "Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition," promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials; 
C.  "Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition," promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials; 
D.  "Uniform Mechanical Code, 2000 Edition," "California Mechanical Code, 2001 Edition," promulgated by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials; 
E.  "Uniform Plumbing Code, 2000 Edition," "California Plumbing Code, 2001 Edition," promulgated by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials; 
F.  "Uniform Fire Code, 1997 Edition," "California Fire Code, 1998 Edition," promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials and the Western Fire Chiefs Association; 
G.  "National Electrical Code, 2002 Edition," "California Electrical Code 2004 Edition," promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association; 
H.  "Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition," promulgated by the International Conference of Building Officials, save and except those portions of the preceding secondary codes as are deleted, modified or amended by provisions of said Morgan Hill Municipal Code, 1987 edition. 
From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the Morgan Hill Municipal Code, 1987 edition, shall constitute the penal and regulatory ordinances of the city of Morgan Hill. 
(Ord. 1736 N.S. § 1, 2005; Ord. 1593 N.S. § 1, 2002: Ord. 1447 N.S. § A, 1999: Ord. 1254 N.S. § A, 1995: Ord. 1210 N.S. § 1, 1995: Ord. 820 N.S. § 1, 1987)  
1.01.020 - Amendments to Morgan Hill Municipal Code. 
Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to affect the validity of ordinances, commencing with Ordinance No. 700, adopted or to be adopted amending the Morgan Hill Municipal Code, which ordinances the city clerk is directed to cause to be incorporated in the Morgan Hill Municipal Code, 1987 edition, upon their respective effective dates. 
(Ord. 820 N.S. § 2, 1987)  
1.01.030 - Maintenance of Morgan Hill Municipal Code. 
Not less than three copies of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code, 1987 edition, shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the city clerk. At least three copies, duly certified by the city clerk, shall be permanently bound and maintained on file in her office. Copies thereof shall be distributed to the departments and divisions of the city as shall be prescribed by the city manager. 
Upon the adoption of any amendment or addition to said code, or upon the repeal of any of its provisions, the city clerk shall certify thereto and shall make an appropriate notation in the volumes of the code of the taking of such action, noting thereon the number and date of the ordinances pursuant to which such action is taken. 
Duly certified copies of each ordinance making changes in the code shall be filed in the office of the city clerk in books for such purpose, duly indexed for ready reference. 
The city clerk is further directed to incorporate as regular supplements to the code all amendments, additions or deletions adopted by the council. 
(Ord. 820 N.S. § 3, 1987)  
1.01.040 - Tables of contents and index not part of code. 
The tables of contents appearing at the beginning of each title and chapter, as well as the tables and index in the back of the code, are not adopted as part of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code, 1987 edition, but are included for convenience only. Said tables of contents, tables and index shall not be deemed to limit or modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section. 
(Ord. 820 N.S. § 5, 1987)  
1.01.050 - Effective date. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter, adopting the Morgan Hill Municipal Code, 1987 edition, was an urgency measure necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, was based upon the recitals set forth and incorporated therein as findings, and took effect immediately upon its passage on July 1, 1987. 
(Ord. 820 N.S. § 6, 1987)  
1.01.060 - Title—Citation—Reference. 
This code shall be known as the "Morgan Hill Municipal Code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the "Morgan Hill Municipal Code" in any prosecution for violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "Morgan Hill Municipal Code." Further, reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the "Morgan Hill Municipal Code" and such reference shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. 
(Ord. 820 N.S. § 7, 1987)  
1.01.070 - Effect of code on past actions and obligations. 
Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment thereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 820 N.S. § 8, 1987)  
1.01.080 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 820 N.S. § 9, 1987)  
1.01.090 - Constitutionality. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council hereby declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 820 N.S. § 10, 1987)  
Chapter 1.08 - CORPORATE NAME 
 
1.08.010 - City substituted for town. 
The word "town" is eliminated from the corporate name of Morgan Hill, and the word "city" is substituted in its place and stead. 
(Ord. 54 N.S., 1955)  
Chapter 1.12 - LEGAL HOLIDAYS 
 
1.12.010 - City holidays. 
Those holidays set forth in the memorandum of understanding, city of Morgan Hill American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees, July 1, 1995—July 30, 1997, or any subsequent memorandum of understanding(s), are city holidays. All city offices shall be closed on such holidays. 
(Ord. 1383 N.S. § 1, 1998)  
1.12.040 - Time off to vote on election days. 
Every city employee who is a registered voter and does not have sufficient time outside his working hours within which to vote at any election, may, without loss of pay, take off sufficient time to enable him to vote, as provided for in the California Elections Code. Such time may be taken off only at the beginning or end of the regular working shift, whichever allows him to the most free time for voting, and the employee must, if possible give his department head at least two working days' notice of his need to take time off to vote. 
(Ord. 174 N.S. § 4, 1974)  
Chapter 1.16 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2258 N.S., § 1, adopted Sep. 6, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 1.16, §§ 1.16.010—1.16.040, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 1.16 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 790 N.S., §§ 1—3, adopted in 1987; and Ord. No. 2225 N.S., § 1, adopted Jan. 18, 2017. 
 
1.16.010 - General municipal elections coincide with statewide general election. 
The general municipal election of the city shall be held on the same day as the statewide general election on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of even-numbered years. 
(Ord. No. 2258 N.S., § 1, 9-6-2017)  
1.16.020 - Election of city council members. 
A.  As established by measures D and E, enacted by the voters on March 26, 1996, the mayor shall be elected directly by the electors for a term of two-years. 
B.  Beginning with the November 2018 general municipal election, a person elected as a member of the city council other than the mayor shall be a resident of his or her respective council district as set forth in Section 1.16.030 (and as subsequently reapportioned as provided by applicable law.) Elections shall take place on a by-district basis as that term is defined in California Government Code Section 34871; meaning one member of the city council shall be elected from each district, by the voters of that district alone, except for the mayor, who shall be elected citywide. Each council member shall serve a four-year term until his or her successor has qualified, except for the Mayor, who shall serve a two-year term as authorized by measure E, enacted by the voters on March 26, 1996. 
C.  Except as provided in subsection C of Section 1.16.040, the council member elected to represent a district must reside in that district and be a registered voter in that district, and any candidate for City Council must live in, and be a registered voter in, the district in which he or she seeks election at the time nomination papers are issued, pursuant to California Government Code Section 34882 and California Elections Code Section 10227. Termination of residency in a district by a Council Member shall create an immediate vacancy for that council district unless a substitute residence within the district is established within 30 days after the termination of residency. 
(Ord. No. 2258 N.S., § 1, 9-6-2017)  
1.16.030 - Establishment of council districts. 
Boundaries for each of the four districts and their letter designations are as shown on the attached Exhibit A entitled "City of Morgan Hill District Boundary Map," a copy of which shall be posted on the city's website and on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 2258 N.S., § 1, 9-6-2017)  
1.16.040 - Transition. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection C, council members shall be elected in council districts B and D at the general municipal election in November 2018, and at the general municipal election every four years thereafter. [Sequence subject to change depending on final map selection] 
B.  Council members shall be elected in council districts A and C at the general municipal election in November 2020, and at the general municipal election every four years thereafter. [Sequence subject to change depending on final map selection] 
C.  Any member of the city council in office at the time this chapter takes effect (or any person selected by appointment or election to fill a vacancy created by a council member elected prior to the effective date of this chapter) shall continue in office until the expiration of the respective term to which he or she was elected and until his or her respective successors are qualified. At the end of the term of each council member, that member's successor shall be elected on a by-district basis in the districts established in Section 1.16.030. A vacancy in a councilmember office elected by-district shall be filled by a person qualified to hold the office, who is a resident and registered voter in the district. 
(Ord. No. 2258 N.S., § 1, 9-6-2017)  
1.16.050 - Electronic filing of campaign statements. 
A.  Any elected officer, candidate, committee, or other person required to file statements, reports or other documents described by Chapter 4 (Campaign Disclosure) of Title 9 (Political Reform) of the California Government Code that has received contributions or made expenditures of two thousand dollars or more in a calendar year shall electronically file such statements using procedures established by the city clerk. 
B.  Once an elected officer, candidate, committee, or other person files a statement, report, or other document electronically pursuant to subsection A, all future statements, reports, or other documents on behalf of that filer shall be filed electronically. 
C.  In any instance in which an original statement, report, or other document must be filed with the California Secretary of State and a copy of that statement, report, or other document is required to be filed with the city clerk, the filer may, but is not required to, file such copy electronically. 
D.  If the city clerk's electronic filing system is not capable of accepting a particular type of statement, report, or other document, an elected officer, candidate, committee, or other person shall file that document with the city clerk in an alternative format. 
(Ord. No. 2258 N.S., § 1, 9-6-2017)  
Chapter 1.17 - FILLING OF CITY COUNCIL VACANCIES 
 
1.17.010 - Statutory authority. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted pursuant to authority set forth in Government Code Section 36512(c)(3). 
(Ord. 1325 N.S. (part), 1997)  
1.17.020 - Appointment and election. 
Any person appointed to fill a vacancy on the city council, holds office only until the date of a special election which shall immediately be called to fill the remainder of the term. The special election may be held on the date of the next regularly established election or regularly scheduled municipal election to be held throughout the city not less than one hundred fourteen days from the call of the special election. 
(Ord. 1325 N.S. (part), 1997)  
1.17.030 - Sunset clause. 
Chapter 1.17, Filling of City Council Vacancies, and all ordinances included therein, including but not limited to 1.17.010 through 1.17.040 shall be repealed and ineffective after the certification of the November, 1997 election and the seating of the newly elected councilmember or December 31, 1997 whichever shall occur first. 
(Ord. 1325 N.S. (part), 1997)  
1.17.040 - Appointment and election. 
The ordinance codified in this section shall only become effective should Section 1.17.020 Appointment and election be invalidated. Any person appointed to fill a vacancy on the city council, holds office only until the date of a special election which shall immediately be called to fill the remainder of the term. The special election may be held on the date of the next regularly established election or regularly scheduled municipal election to be held throughout the city not less than one hundred fourteen days from the call of the special election. 
(Ord. 1326 N.S. (part), 1997)  
1.17.050 - Sunset clause. 
Chapter 1.17, Filling of City Council Vacancies, and all ordinances included therein, including but not limited to 1.17.010 through 1.17.050 shall be repealed and ineffective after the certification of the November, 1997 election and the seating of the newly elected councilmember or December 31, 1997 whichever shall occur first. 
(Ord. 1326 N.S. (part), 1997)  
Chapter 1.18 - ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES 
 
1.18.010 - Applicability to nuisance as described. 
Unless a statute or another ordinance exclusively requires another method of abatement, the provisions of this section as to the manner of abatement of a nuisance shall be applicable to the abatement of any nuisance heretofore or hereafter described as a nuisance by an ordinance of the city of Morgan Hill, Chapter 9.15 of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code or any other applicable municipal code provision or resolution of the city council of Morgan Hill or statute of the state of California. 
(Ord. 1362 N.S. § 2 (part), 1997)  
1.18.020 - Remedies cumulative. 
The remedies provided in this section for the abatement of a nuisance are in addition to such civil or criminal remedies as may exist by law for abatement of nuisances. The use of this chapter for the abatement of nuisances shall not preclude resort to other remedies authorized by law for the abatement of nuisances. 
(Ord. 1362 N.S. § 2 (part), 1997)  
1.18.030 - Procedure for giving notice. 
Unless otherwise specified, all notices required by this section shall be given in writing, and shall be served as follows: 
By personal service, or by certified mail, postage prepaid and return receipt requested, addressed to the party to whom said notice is to be given as his or her address appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county of Santa Clara, California, or as is known to the city manager of the city of Morgan Hill. If said address cannot be ascertained from said assessment roll or is not known to the city manager, a copy shall be mailed to the party to whom said notice is given addressed c/o General Delivery, Morgan Hill, California and at least one copy of said notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon real or personal property which constitutes said nuisance or on which said nuisance is located. 
(Ord. 1362 N.S. § 2 (part), 1997)  
1.18.040 - Filing of affidavit of giving of notice. 
The person giving notice on behalf of the city of Morgan Hill shall file with the city manager an affidavit of service of mailing or posting of said notice. 
(Ord. 1362 N.S. § 2 (part), 1997)  
1.18.050 - Abatement by city—Remedies. 
A.  In addition to such other remedies as the law allows, the city may cause the abatement of a nuisance by: 
1.  Judicial action (see Section 1.18.060); or 
2.  Administrative action (see Sections 1.18.070 through 1.18.110). 
B.  The city may recover the cost of abatement by: 
1.  Imposing the cost of abatement as a special assessment against the property on which the nuisance is maintained; 
2.  Imposing the cost of abatement as a lien upon the land on which the nuisance is maintained; or 
3.  Causing suit to be filed for the cost of abatement against the person or persons creating or maintaining the nuisance and the person or persons who own, possess and control the land on which said nuisance is maintained. 
(Ord. 1362 N.S. § 2 (part), 1997)  
1.18.055 - Cost of abatement—Definition. 
For purposes of this chapter, "cost of abatement" shall include, but is not limited to: 
A.  Any staff time spent to process, prosecute or abate said nuisance; 
B.  Any costs incurred to process, prosecute or abate said nuisance; 
C.  Any staff time or costs incurred to impose a lien or special assessment against the land upon which the nuisance is maintained to recover such time or costs; 
D.  Any costs or fees for consultants and/or contractors to perform such tasks; and 
E.  Any costs or fees for attorneys to perform such tasks. Recovery of reasonable attorneys' fees shall be limited to those obtainable by the prevailing party and only in those individual actions or proceedings in which the city elects, at the initiation of that action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorneys' fees. 
(Ord. 1657 N.S. § 1, 2004)  
1.18.060 - Abatement by judicial action. 
The city attorney is empowered to institute proceedings in an appropriate court to seek abatement of the nuisance by appropriate remedy as allowed by law and for damages, if any, caused by said nuisance. 
(Ord. 1362 N.S. § 2 (part), 1997)  
1.18.070 - Administrative abatement—Hearing officer. 
The city manager or his or her designee shall serve as the hearing officer to hear nuisance complaint(s) brought by authorized city personnel. 
(Ord. 1362 N.S. § 2 (part), 1997)  
1.18.080 - Nuisance hearing—Form of notice. 
Notice shall be given directing the owner of the land on which a nuisance is located to appear before the hearing officer at a stated time and place and show cause why said nuisance should not be abated as herein provided. Said notice shall be headed "Order to Show Cause Re Abatement of Nuisance" and shall be in substantially the following form: 
ORDER TO SHOW CAUSE 
RE: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE 
To: ________ 
 You are hereby notified to appear before the Hearing Officer of the City of Morgan Hill on _______, 20___, at City Hall, 17555 Peak Avenue, Morgan Hill, California, at the hour of _____ o'clock ___.m., and show cause, if any you have, why that certain (description of nuisance) should not be declared to be a public nuisance and said nuisance be abated in the manner provided by law. 
DATED:_______ 
By________ 
(Ord. 1362 N.S. § 2 (part), 1997)  
1.18.090 - Hearing of testimony. 
At the time fixed in said notice, the hearing officer shall hear the testimony of city employees, the testimony of the respondent, if present and the testimony of other persons respecting the alleged nuisance. 
The hearing may, upon the request of the respondent or with the respondent's consent, be continued to a time, place and date subsequent to that given in the original notice. After the hearing is opened, the hearing officer may grant continuances from time to time for good cause shown or upon his or her own motion. 
Upon conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer may determine that the alleged nuisance exists and declare it a nuisance. The hearing officer may order its abatement by the city or by the respondent by a date certain to be determined by the hearing officer (which shall be not less than fifteen days following the giving of notice of said order of abatement), or by the city if respondent subsequently fails to abate the nuisance by the date certain. 
(Ord. 1362 N.S. § 2 (part), 1997)  
1.18.095 - Appeals. 
The determination of the hearing officer pursuant to Section 1.18.090 may be appealed in writing to the council as set forth in Section 1.20.010. 
(Ord. 1362 N.S. § 2 (part), 1997)  
1.18.100 - Cost of abatement a personal obligation. 
All persons owning, possessing or controlling land on which a nuisance is created, caused, committed or maintained and all persons creating, causing, committing or maintaining a nuisance shall be jointly and severally responsible for its removal. The cost of abatement of a nuisance shall be the personal obligation of each person owning, possessing or controlling land on which a nuisance is created, caused, committed or maintained and each person creating, causing, committing or maintaining a nuisance who shall be jointly and severally liable therefor. 
(Ord. 1362 N.S. § 2 (part), 1997)  
1.18.110 - Abatement by city. 
A.  The hearing officer may direct the abatement of the nuisance by the city, and the city shall be empowered to use its own staff to abate the nuisance or to cause the actual work of abatement to be undertaken by an independent contractor. 
B.  The city employee charged with the responsibility for the abatement of the nuisance shall follow all laws regarding abatement warrants and shall keep an itemized account of the cost of abating the nuisance which shall be filed in a report with the city clerk. Such costs shall include fully burdened personnel costs for city employees, which may include time spent by administrative staff. 
C.  Notice of Report. The city clerk shall then post a copy of such report in a conspicuous place in the main lobby of the city offices, together with a notice of the filing thereof. The posting of said notice shall be made at least three days before the time such report shall be heard by the city council. Such notice shall be substantially in the following form: 
NOTICE OF HEARING ON REPORT 
AND ASSESSMENT 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on ________, 19___, there was filed with the City Clerk a report on abatement of a nuisance, located at ___________, Morgan Hill, California, consisting of _____ copies of which are posted in the main lobby of the City Hall. 
NOTICE IS FURTHER GIVEN that on ________, 19___, at the hour of _____ o'clock ___, in the Chambers of the City Council, City Hall, 17555 Peak Avenue, Morgan Hill, California, said report will be presented for consideration and confirmation. The City Council may cause all or a portion of the costs of abating said nuisance to be made a special assessment or lien on the land referred to in said reports to be collected in the same manner as taxes, all as provided by law. Any and all persons interested, having any objections to said report may appear and be heard. 
Dated this _____ day of ________ 19___ 
City Manager 
City of Morgan Hill 
D.  Mailing Notice. A copy of said report and notice of hearing shall be mailed at least fifteen days before the hearing to confirm and assess costs to the owner of the land on which the nuisance is maintained and to all persons known to the city manager to have an interest therein. 
E.  Hearing and Confirmation. At the hearing, the city council shall hear the report together with any objections of the property owners liable to be assessed. The council may make such modifications in the proposed assessments therefor as it may deem necessary, after which such assessment shall be confirmed. 
(Ord. 1362 N.S. § 2 (part), 1997)  
1.18.120 - Cost of abatement as a special assessment. 
A.  The city council may impose the cost of abatement as a special assessment pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.5. The amount of the cost of abating such nuisance upon the property referred to in such report, shall constitute special assessments against such respective parcels of land. 
B.  Recordation—Transmittal to Tax Collector Collection with Taxes. The city clerk shall cause a certified copy of a notice of assessment to be filed with the county tax assessor and collector's office and with the county auditor's office on or before August tenth of each year. Thereafter, such amount shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as general taxes are collected on said property and shall be subject to the same penalties and interest and the same procedure for sale in the case of delinquency as provided for said taxes. All laws and ordinances applicable to the levy collection, and enforcement of taxes are hereby made applicable to such special assessment. 
C.  Reimbursement of Costs. The city may add to the special assessed amount and thereby recover from the property owner any costs incurred by the city for processing and/or recording of the assessment. 
D.  Form of Notice of Assessment. The notice of assessment shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT 
FOR COSTS OF ABATING NUISANCE 
On _______ a Hearing Officer of the City of Morgan Hill, California, ordered a nuisance to be abated on the real property hereafter described. On _______ the City Council of the City of Morgan Hill determined that the costs of abating said nuisance were to be assessed in the sum of $_____. Neither said sum nor any part thereof has been paid, and the City of Morgan Hill hereby claims an assessment against the real property hereafter described for the sum of $_____ which sum shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as general taxes are collected on said realty and shall be subject to the same penalties and same interest and the same procedure for sale in the case of delinquency as said taxes. Said property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. 
The real property upon which said assessment is claimed is the real property in the City of Morgan Hill, County of Santa Clara, State of California known as "Assessor's Parcel Number _______ Santa Clara County Assessor" (_______ Street, Morgan Hill, California) and more particularly described as follows: 
The owners of said real property as appearing on the last equalized assessment roll in Santa Clara County, California are 
(State names of all owners in fee) 
Date________ 
City Council of Morgan Hill 
By___________ 
City Manager 
E.  Notification of Property Owner. A copy of the notice of assessment shall be sent to the property owners named therein. 
(Ord. 1362 N.S. § 2 (part), 1997)  
1.18.130 - Cost of abatement as a lien. 
As an alternate to special assessment, the city council may impose the cost of abatement as a lien pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.1. 
A.  Notice. Notice shall be served in a manner consistent with this chapter, and the lien shall be recorded in the county recorder's office in the county in which the parcel of land is located. 
B.  Specifications. The lien shall specify the amount of the lien, the name of the agency on whose behalf the lien is imposed, the date of the abatement order, the street address, legal description and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel. 
C.  Notice of Discharge. In the event that the lien is discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge shall be recorded by the city. A lien and the release of the lien shall be indexed in the grantor-grantee index. 
D.  Foreclosure of Lien. A nuisance abatement lien may be foreclosed by an action brought by the city for a money judgment. 
E.  Reimbursement of Costs. The city may recover from the property owner any costs incurred regarding the processing and recording of the lien and providing notice to the property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien. 
(Ord. 1362 N.S. § 2 (part), 1997)  
1.18.140 - Court action for recovery of the cost of abatement. 
As an alternative to imposing the cost of abatement as a special assessment or a lien, the city may order the city attorney to institute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction against persons owning, possessing and controlling the land on which the nuisance was located for the cost of abatement thereof as a personal obligation. If there are other persons who created, caused, committed or maintained said nuisance, and if said other persons were named in and given notice as required by Section 1.18.030, the city may also institute action in any court of competent jurisdiction against said other persons for the cost of abatement thereof as a personal obligation. 
(Ord. 1362 N.S. § 2 (part), 1997)  
1.18.150 - Summary abatement without notice. 
In the event of: 
A.  A nuisance defined by statute, ordinance or resolution as a public nuisance which constitutes an immediate danger to persons or property; or 
B.  A nuisance defined by statute, ordinance or resolution as a public nuisance which is located or maintained on public property including, but not limited to, any street, highway, easement, park or building; or 
C.  Any obstruction or encroachment to free passage upon any public property (which is hereby declared to be a public nuisance) including, but not limited to, any street, highway, easement, park or building the city (acting by or through the city manager, the city engineer, the chief of police, the fire chief or the building official or any of their authorized deputies) may, forthwith and without notice or prior order of the city council, abate said nuisance. No notice need be given to the person or persons who created, caused, committed or maintained said nuisance or to any landowner of any land on which said nuisance was located prior to abatement thereof. The giving of any notice, however, in any form whatsoever shall not be a waiver of the provisions of this section. The city employee causing the abatement of a nuisance under this section shall file a written report with the city manager, setting forth the circumstances which justified the abatement. 
(Ord. 1362 N.S. § 2 (part), 1997)  
1.18.160 - Material recovered from summary abatement. 
The materials contained in any structure abated by the process described in Section 1.18.140 may be used or destroyed if their value to the city is less than twenty-five dollars; otherwise, they shall be sold at public sale or delivered to the person owning the property constituting the nuisance upon payment by him of costs of abatement. In the event that the cost of abatement exceeds the money received from the sale of any material, the city may maintain an action in any court of competent jurisdiction against the person or persons who created, caused, committed or maintained said nuisance; in the event that the amount received from any sale of any material exceeds the cost of abatement, the excess shall be disposed of as provided by law. 
(Ord. 1362 N.S. § 2 (part), 1997)  
Chapter 1.19 - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS AND FINES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 1, adopted May 2, 2018, repealed the former Ch. 1.19, §§ 1.19.010—1.19.130, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 1.19 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 1850 N.S. § 2(part), adopted in 2007; Ord. No. 1950 N.S., § 1, adopted Oct. 7, 2009; Ord. No. 2235 N.S., § 1, adopted May 17, 2017. 
 
1.19.010 - Applicability. 
A.  This chapter provides for an administrative citation process that may be used by the city to address any violation of the municipal code, or any regulations adopted under the authority of the municipal code, including state laws delegated by statute to any city department for enforcement. References to "municipal code" include adopted regulations. 
B.  This chapter establishes the administrative procedures for the imposition, enforcement, collection, and administrative review of fines pursuant to California Government Code Section 53069.4, as amended from time to time, or successor legislative enactment. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available under federal, state, or local law. 
D.  Use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 1, 5-2-2018)  
1.19.020 - Enforcement officer—Defined. 
For purposes of this chapter, "enforcement officer" shall mean any city employee or agent of the city with the authority to enforce any provision of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 1, 5-2-2018)  
1.19.030 - Issuance of an administrative citation. 
A.  Whenever an enforcement officer charged with the enforcement of any provision of this code determines that a violation of that provision has occurred, the enforcement officer shall have the authority to issue an administrative citation to any person responsible for the violation. An administrative citation for building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning codes, as specified in Section 1.19.040, may be issued following the correction period specified in the notice of violation unless the violation(s) create an immediate danger to health or safety. 
B.  Each administrative citation shall contain the following information: 
1.  The date of the violation or, if the date of the violation is unknown, then the date the violation is identified; 
2.  The address or a definite description of the location where the violation occurred; 
3.  The section of this code violated and a description of the violation; 
4.  The amount of the fine for the code violation; 
5.  A description of the fine payment process, including a description of the time within which and the place to which the fine shall be paid; 
6.  An order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the Code violation(s) described in the administrative citation; 
7.  A description of the administrative citation review process, including the time within which the administrative citation may be contested and the place from which a request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation may be obtained; and 
8.  The name and signature of the citing enforcement officer. 
C.  Each section of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code violated constitutes a separate violation. Each day such violation is committed, continued, or permitted to continue, shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 1, 5-2-2018)  
1.19.040 - Issuance of a notice of violation for continuing violations of building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning issues. 
A.  When an enforcement officer determines that a responsible person has committed a violation of a building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning code, the enforcement officer may issue a notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice shall serve as a written warning of responsibility and require action by the responsible person to abate the violation(s). A notice of violation shall specify a reasonable time for the responsible person to correct or otherwise remedy the violation. Such reasonable time shall be at least five days from the issuance of the notice of violation unless an enforcement officer determines that the violation creates an immediate danger to health or safety. 
B.  On such form as may be provided by the city, any responsible person cited for violation(s) of a building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning code that does not cause immediate danger to health or safety may petition the enforcement officer for an extension of time to correct the violation(s) so long as the petition is received before the end of the correction period, as stated in the notice of violation. The enforcement officer may, in his or her sole discretion, grant an extension of time to correct the violation(s) if the enforcement officer determines that the responsible person has supplied sufficient evidence showing that the correction(s) cannot reasonably be made within the stated period. The enforcement officer's decision shall be final and, notwithstanding any other provision of this code, not subject to appeal except in an appeal challenging the issuance of an administrative citation. 
C.  No administrative citation may be issued for a continuing violation of building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning issues unless a notice of violation has first been issued to a responsible person in accordance with this section. Such notice must provide for a reasonable time to cure the violation(s) unless the violations create an immediate danger to health or safety. If, after the correction period, the violation(s) are not abated, the enforcement officer may issue an administrative citation assessing fines in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 1, 5-2-2018)  
1.19.050 - Notice of violation recordation. 
A.  Recording of notice of violation. The enforcement officer may record a notice of violation with the county recorder on the property which is the subject of the violation after the time limit for compliance if the violation has not been cured within the time limit set for compliance, or the owner or responsible person fails to provide sufficient evidence to establish reasonable doubt that a violation exists, or, if a hearing is held, after the hearing officer has determined responsibility. The notice shall include a description of the property, a description of the violation. 
B.  Right of appeal. If, following recordation of the notice of violation, the owner, responsible person or his or her authorized agent disagrees with the determination that a violation of this code exists on the property and such determination has not already been made as a result of a hearing under this Chapter, he or she may apply for a "cancellation of notice of violation" by requesting a hearing before the hearing officer pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Cancellation of notice of violation. The enforcement officer shall submit the "cancellation of notice of violation" to the county recorder for recordation when the violation no longer exists, all required work to abate the violation has been completed, and all related abatement and administrative costs have been reimbursed to the city and approved as determined by the enforcement officer or hearing officer on appeal. A fee shall be paid by the owner or occupant for processing the "cancellation of notice of violation" as set by city council. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 1, 5-2-2018)  
1.19.060 - Amount of fines. 
A.  Unless a different amount is specified in this code, the amount of the fine payable to the city for an administrative citation shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
B.  If no specific fine amount is set, the amount of the fine shall be one hundred dollars for a first violation, two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year, and five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year. 
C.  For violations of local building and safety codes, the amount of the fine shall be one hundred dollars for a first violation, five hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year, and one thousand dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year. 
D.  Between July 1 and July 7 and between December 30 and January 2 of each year, the fine for a violation of the following sections will be three times the amount that would otherwise be assessed under subsection B: 
1.  Section 08.32.010: Sale or possession of fireworks—Prohibited; 
2.  Section 09.04.010: Discharge—Permit required; 
3.  Section 09.08.010: Drinking in public—Permit requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 1, 5-2-2018)  
1.19.070 - Payment of the fine. 
A.  The fine shall be paid to the city within thirty days from the date of service of the administrative citation. 
B.  Any administrative citation fine paid pursuant to subsection A shall be refunded in accordance with Section 1.19.110 if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person charged in the administrative citation was not responsible for the violation(s) or that there were no violation(s) as charged in the administrative citation. 
C.  Payment of a fine under this chapter shall not excuse or discharge any continuation or repeated occurrence of the code violation(s) that are the subject of the administrative citation. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 1, 5-2-2018)  
1.19.080 - Hearing request. 
A.  Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation of the code or that he or she is the responsible party by completing a request for hearing form and returning it to the city within thirty days from the date of service of the administrative citation, together with an advance deposit of the fine or notice that a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver has been filed pursuant to Section 1.19.080. 
B.  A request for hearing form may be obtained from the department specified on the administrative citation. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 1, 5-2-2018)  
1.19.090 - Advance deposit hardship waiver. 
A.  Any person who intends to request a hearing to contest that there was a violation of the code or that he or she is the responsible party and who is financially unable to make the advance deposit of the fine as required in Section 1.19.080(A) may file a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver. 
B.  The request shall be filed with the department of finance on an advance deposit hardship waiver application form, available from the department of finance, within fifteen days of the date of service of the administrative citation. 
C.  The requirement of depositing the full amount of the fine as described in Section 1.19.080(A) shall be stayed unless or until the director of finance or designee makes a determination not to issue the advance deposit hardship waiver. 
D.  The director of finance or designee may waive the requirement of an advance deposit set forth in Section 1.19.080(A) and issue the advance deposit hardship waiver only if the cited party submits to the director of finance or designee a sworn affidavit, together with any supporting documents or materials, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the director of finance or designee the person's actual financial inability to deposit with the city the full amount of the fine in advance of the hearing. 
E.  If the director of finance or designee determines not to issue an advance deposit hardship waiver, the person shall remit the deposit to the city within ten days of the date of that decision or thirty days from the date of service of the administrative citation, whichever is later. 
F.  The director of finance or designee shall issue a written determination listing the reason for his or her determination to issue or not issue the advance deposit hardship waiver. The written determination of the director of finance or designee shall be final. 
G.  The written determination of the director of finance or designee shall be served upon the person who applied for the advance deposit hardship waiver. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 1, 5-2-2018)  
1.19.100 - Hearing officer. 
The city manager shall designate the hearing officer for the administrative citation hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 1, 5-2-2018)  
1.19.110 - Hearing procedure. 
A.  No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a hearing officer shall be held unless the fine has been deposited in advance in accordance with Section 1.19.080 or an advance deposit hardship waiver has been issued in accordance with Section 1.19.090. 
B.  A hearing before the hearing officer shall be set for a date that is not less than fifteen days and not more than sixty days from the date that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless this time is extended based upon agreement of the parties 
C.  The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the date, time and place set for the hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. 
D.  If the enforcement officer submits an additional written report concerning the administrative citation to the hearing officer for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of this report also shall be mailed to the person requesting the hearing at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. 
E.  After a hearing date is set, the enforcement officer or responsible person may apply to the hearing officer for a continuance within ten working days following the time the party discovered or reasonably should have discovered the event or occurrence which establishes the good cause for the continuance. A continuance may be granted for good cause after the ten working days have lapsed if the party seeking the continuance is not responsible for and has made a good faith effort to prevent the condition or event establishing the good cause. 
F.  The administrative citation and any additional report submitted by the enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents. 
G.  At the hearing, the city and the party contesting the administrative citation shall be given the opportunity to testify, to present evidence, and to call and examine witnesses concerning the administrative citation. 
H.  The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the enforcement officer or the recipient of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision. 
I.  The hearing officer may conduct the hearing informally, both as to rules of procedure and admission of evidence, in any manner which will provide a fair hearing. 
J.  Evidence sought to be introduced is not limited by any legal rules of evidence except for the rule that it must be relevant and material to the issues to be decided. 
K.  The failure of any recipient of an administrative citation to appear at the administrative citation hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine and a failure to exhaust their administrative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 1, 5-2-2018)  
1.19.120 - Hearing officer's decision. 
A.  After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision within thirty days of the conclusion of the hearing to uphold or cancel the administrative citation and shall list in the decision the reason or reasons for that decision. The written decision of the hearing officer shall be final and is an exhaustion of administrative remedies. 
B.  The standard of proof shall be by a preponderance of the evidence. 
C.  If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, then the fine amount on deposit with the city shall be retained by the city. 
D.  If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld and the fine has not been deposited pursuant to an advance deposit hardship waiver, the hearing officer shall set forth in the decision a payment schedule for the fine. 
E.  If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, and the city has requested administrative costs, the hearing officer may order payment of the administrative costs by the responsible person to the city. 
F.  Administrative costs may include any and all costs incurred by the City (both direct and indirect costs) in investigating and commencing administrative proceedings for the violation as well as any and all costs incurred by the city in connection with the hearing before the hearing officer, including but not limited to costs of the code enforcement officer incurred in preparation for the hearing and for participating in the hearing itself and costs of the city to conduct the hearing. 
G.  If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be canceled and the fine was deposited with the city, then the City shall promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine. 
H.  The recipient of the administrative citation shall be served with a copy of the hearing officer's written decision. 
I.  The employment, performance evaluation, compensation, and benefits of the hearing officer shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the amount of administrative citation fines upheld by the hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 1, 5-2-2018)  
1.19.130 - Late payment charges. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided in this Code, any person who fails to timely pay, in full, any fine imposed pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, on or before the date that fine is due, shall also be liable for the payment of a late payment charge of ten percent of the amount of the delinquent fine. 
B.  Any person who fails to timely pay, in full, any fine imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, on or before thirty days after its due date shall also pay a second penalty of ten percent of the delinquent amount. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 1, 5-2-2018)  
1.19.140 - Recovery of administrative citation fines and costs. 
A.  The city may collect any past due administrative citation fine, administrative costs, or late payment charge by use of all available legal means, including filing a civil lawsuit. 
B.  Any person who fails to pay any obligation shall be liable in any action brought by the city for all costs incurred in securing payment of the delinquent amount, including, but not limited to, administrative costs and attorneys' fees. 
C.  Collection costs shall be in addition to any penalties, interest, and/or late charges imposed upon the delinquent obligation. 
D.  Collection costs imposed under this provision shall be added to and become a part of the underlying obligation. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 1, 5-2-2018)  
1.19.150 - Right to judicial review. 
Any person aggrieved by an administrative decision of a hearing officer on an administrative citation may obtain review of the administrative decision by filing a petition for review with the superior court in Santa Clara County in accordance with the timelines and provisions set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 1, 5-2-2018)  
1.19.160 - Service. 
A.  The enforcement officer may issue a notice of violation, administrative citation, or any other notice, order, or other document required to be given by this chapter by personal service, mail, or posting as specified below. 
1.  For personal service, the enforcement officer shall attempt to locate and personally serve the responsible person. If an agent, manager, or representative of a responsible person is personally served, a copy of the document(s) served shall also be mailed to the responsible person at his/her last-known business or residence address as the same appears in the records of the city, or, if the city lacks such records, the county. In such instances, the date a copy of the document(s) is deposited with the U.S. Postal Service shall constitute the service date. 
2.  For service by mail, the enforcement officer shall mail the document(s) by first class mail with a requested return receipt at the recipient's last-known business or residence address as the same appears in public records of the city, or, if the city lacks such records, the county. The date a copy of the document(s) is deposited with the U.S. Postal Service shall constitute the service date. 
3.  For violations involving real property, if the enforcement officer is not able to serve the responsible party in person or by mail, the enforcement officer shall post the document(s) on any real property within the city that is the subject of the notice of violation or administrative citation. The date of posting shall constitute the date of service. 
B.  Failure to receive any notice specified in this chapter does not affect the validity of proceedings conducted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 1, 5-2-2018)  
Chapter 1.20 - APPELLATE PROCEDURE 
 
1.20.010 - Right to appeal—Procedure. 
Except where an appeals procedure is otherwise specifically provided in this code, any person excepting to the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit applied for or held by him pursuant to any provision of this code, or to any administrative decision made by any official of the city, if the denial, suspension or revocation of such permit or the determination of such administrative decision involves the exercise of administrative discretion or personal judgment exercised pursuant to any of the provisions of this code, may appeal in writing to the council by filing with the city clerk a written notice of such appeal, setting forth the specific grounds thereof. Employment decisions regarding at-will employees, e.g., department directors, are not subject to the appeals process. 
(Ord. 1197 N.S. § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 292 N.S. § A (part), 1971)  
1.20.020 - Decision to appeal—Notification of department head. 
No appeal may be taken to any such administrative decision made by an official of the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter unless such decision to appeal has been first taken up with the department head concerned. 
(Ord. 292 N.S. § A (part), 1971)  
1.20.030 - Ministerial decisions—No right to appeal. 
No right of appeal to the council from any administrative decision made by an official of the city pursuant to any of the provisions of this code shall exist when such decision is ministerial and thus does not involve the exercise of administrative discretion or personal judgment exercised pursuant to any of the provisions of this code, whether the administrative decision involves the denial, suspension or revocation of a permit or any other administrative decision. 
(Ord. 292 N.S. § A (part), 1971)  
1.20.040 - Filing notice of appeal—Time limitations. 
The appellant shall file a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days after receipt of written notice of administrative decision concerned. 
(Ord. 292 N.S. § A (part), 1971)  
1.20.050 - Public hearing before council—Notification procedures. 
Upon receipt of the filing of the notice of appeal in proper form, the city clerk shall set a public hearing thereon before the city council to be held within thirty days from the receipt of the notice of appeal. The city clerk shall cause written notice of the time and place of the hearing to be given to the appellant not less than five days prior to such hearing, unless such notice is waived in writing by the applicant. No publication of the notice of hearing need be made unless required by state law. 
(Ord. 292 N.S. § A (part), 1971)  
1.20.060 - Matters to be heard—Council determinations. 
At such hearing, the appellant shall show cause on the grounds specified in the notice of appeal why the action appealed from should not be approved. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall, within fifteen days, declare its findings based upon the facts presented to it on the appeal. The council may continue the hearing from time to time, but in no case more than sixty days. It may sustain, modify, reject or overrule any recommendations or rulings of the agency or department head from which the appeal was taken. The council shall make written findings which can be incorporated in the minutes within fifteen days after the conclusion of the hearing, and its findings on the appeal shall be final and conclusive in the matter. 
(Ord. 292 N.S. § A (part), 1971)  
1.20.070 - Relocation assistance appeals. 
The relocation appeals board created pursuant to Health & Safety Code Section 33417.5 is designated to hear appeals on the eligibility for, or the amount of, any payment(s) of relocation assistance authorized by Chapter 16 (Section 7260, et seq.) of Division 7 of Title 1 of the Government Code. Any entity or person appealing any determination by any officer, body, department or agency of the City of Morgan Hill regarding the eligibility for, or the amount of, any payment of said relocation assistance shall file an appeal with the relocation appeals board and all such appeals shall be governed by the grievance and appeals procedures adopted by the Morgan Hill Redevelopment Agency. 
(Ord. No. 1924 N.S., § 1, 3-18-2009)  
Chapter 1.24 - GENERAL PENALTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 2, adopted May 2, 2018, amended Ch. 1.24 to read as set out herein. The former Ch. 1.24, §§ 1.24.010, 1.24.020, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 225 N.S. §§ 6, 7, adopted in 1968; Ord. 496 N.S. § A, adopted in 1979; Ord. 778 N.S. § 1 (part), adopted in 1986; Ord. 820 N.S. § 4 (part), adopted in 1987; Ord. 906 N.S. § 12, adopted in 1989; Ord. 918 N.S. § 1, adopted in 1989; Ord. 1109 N.S. § 1, adopted in 1993; Ord. 1129 N.S. § 1, adopted in 1993; Ord. 1130 N.S. § 2, adopted in 1993; Ord. 1172 N.S. § 1, adopted in 1994; Ord. 1192 N.S. § 1, adopted in 1994; Ord. 1198 N.S. § 3, adopted in 1994; Ord. 1320 N.S., §§ 1, 2, adopted in 1997; Ord. 1362 N.S. § 3, adopted in 1997; Ord. 1442 N.S. § 18, adopted in 1999; Ord. 1528 N.S. § 5, adopted in 2001; Ord. 1838 N.S. § 1 (part), adopted in 2007; Ord. 1850 N.S. § 2 (part), adopted in 2007; Ord. No. 1951 N.S., § 1, adopted Oct. 7, 2009; Ord. No. 1967 N.S., § 2, 1-27-2010; Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 2, 4-7-2010; Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 2, adopted in June 2, 2010; Ord. No. 1993 N.S., § 2, adopted Oct. 6, 2010; Ord. No. 2104 N.S., § 2, adopted April 16, 2014. 
 
1.24.010 - Violations deemed a misdemeanor—Penalty. 
A.  Except as provided in Title 10 pertaining to civil penalties for parking violations, whenever in this code, any act is prohibited or is made or is declared to be unlawful, or an offense, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or , the violation of any such provision of this code shall be considered a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months or by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars or by both such imprisonment and fine. The city attorney, in his or her discretion, may prosecute a violation of this code as an infraction, rather than as a misdemeanor, or reduce a previously filed misdemeanor to an infraction if such reduction would serve the interests of justice. Each day such violation continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
B.  Each infraction shall be punishable by: (1) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation by the same person of the same ordinance within one year of the date of the first violation; and (3) a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for a third and each additional violation by the same person of the same ordinance within one year of the date of the first violation. 
C.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1.24.010(B), any violation of Title 15 (Buildings and Construction) determined to be an infraction shall be punished by (1) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for a second violation by the same person of the same ordinance within one year; and (3) a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars for each additional violation by the same person of the same ordinance within one year of the date of the first violation. 
D.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this code and in addition to the penalties provided by this section, the city may prosecute any violation of this code by issuing an administrative citation pursuant to Chapter 1.19. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 2, 5-2-2018)  
1.24.020 - Violations deemed a nuisance. 
In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this code, is a public nuisance. Any nuisance may be abated as provided in Chapter 1.18 of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 2, 5-2-2018)  
1.24.030 - Separate offenses and violations. 
Each section of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code violated constitutes a separate violation. Each day such violation is committed, continued, or permitted to continue, shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. Every person continuing, committing, or permitting any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day of such violation of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 2, 5-2-2018)  
1.24.040 - Power of arrest for violations. 
Any employee authorized to enforce the provisions of this code shall have the power of arrest as provided in California Penal Code Section 836.5. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 2, 5-2-2018)  
1.24.050 - Remedies cumulative. 
The provisions and remedies of this chapter or any other provision of this code are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available under federal, state, or local law. Nothing in this code bars any legal, equitable, administrative, or summary remedy to which any aggrieved person, the county, or any official may otherwise be entitled. Paying a fine or serving a jail sentence shall not relieve any person from the responsibility for correcting any condition which violates any provision of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 2, 5-2-2018)  
1.24.060 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings as defined in this section: 
A.  "Administrative costs" shall mean costs incurred by the city for enforcement of any provision of this code, including costs of inspection or investigation and costs of abatement. 
B.  "Person" shall mean any natural person, firm, partnership, association, company, corporation or organization of any kind. 
C.  "Responsible person" shall mean the person responsible for violation of the code. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 2, 5-2-2018)  
1.24.070 - Interference with enforcing officers. 
A.  Interference or Obstruction. It is unlawful for any person to interfere or obstruct, or to attempt to interfere or obstruct, any official in the performance of such official's duties as specified in this code or as may otherwise be received pursuant to the rules, regulations, or policies of the City of Morgan Hill. 
B.  False Information. No person shall give, either orally or in writing, information to an enforcement officer that the person knows or has reason to know is false. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 2, 5-2-2018)  
1.24.080 - Administrative costs. 
City shall have the authority to recover administrative costs from responsible persons. Such administrative costs shall consist of the total direct and indirect costs of enforcement that are reasonably and necessarily incurred by the city to investigate, inspect, or cure any violation or monitor the recurrence of any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 2, 5-2-2018)  
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapters:  
Chapter 2.04 - CITY COUNCIL 
Sections: 
 
2.04.010 - Meetings—Time and location. 
The regular meeting of the city council shall be held on the first, third, and fourth Wednesdays of every month. If at any time a regular meeting falls on a city holiday, such regular meeting shall be cancelled. All meetings shall be held in the Council Chambers located at the Civic Center, 17555 Peak Avenue, Morgan Hill, California, at seven p.m., or at another time or location as designated by minute order of the city council. 
(Ord. 1762 N.S. § 1, 2006: Ord. 1267 N.S., 1996: Ord. 981 N.S. § 1, 1990: Ord. 690 N.S. § A, 1984: Ord. 470 N.S. § B (part), 1978) 
(Ord. 2071, § 1, 6-19-2013; Ord. No. 2175, § 1, 11-4-2015)  
2.04.020 - Salary of council members. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 36516 of the Government Code, each of the members of the city council shall receive a monthly salary of three hundred dollars thirteen dollars payable at the same intervals as other city employees are paid. This amount was calculated by first taking the existing monthly city council member salary of three hundred dollars and increasing this amount by the two and one half percent "change in the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers" for the San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose, California local area for the year ended December 2004, and then by increasing that product by the one and seven tenths percent "change in the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers" for the San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose, California local area for the year ended December 2005. 
Pursuant to Section 36516.5 of the Government Code, this section shall take effect whenever one or more members of the city council begins a new term of office, after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section. 
(Ord. 1780 N.S. § 1, 2006: Ord. 734 N.S. § A, 1985: Ord. 470 N.S. § B (part), 1978)  
2.04.030 - Salary of the mayor. 
Pursuant to Section 36516.1 of the Government Code, which permits a mayor elected pursuant to Sections 34900 to 34904, inclusive, of the Government Code to be provided with compensation in addition to that which he or she receives as a council member, the mayor of the city shall receive a monthly salary of five hundred twenty-one dollars payable at the same intervals as other city employees are paid. This amount was calculated by taking the existing monthly incremental mayoral salary of five hundred dollars and increasing this amount by the two and one half percent "change in the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers" for the year ended December 2004, and then by increasing that product by the one and seven tenths percent "change in the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers" for the year ended December 2005. This salary is to be paid in addition to the amount specified in Section 2.04.020 (Salary of council members). 
Pursuant to Section 36516.5 of the Government Code, this section shall take effect whenever one or more members of the city council begins a new term of office, after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section. 
(Ord. 1780 N.S. § 2, 2006: Ord. 1292 N.S., 1996)  
Chapter 2.08 - CITY MANAGER 
Sections: 
 
2.08.010 - Office created. 
The office of city manager is created and established. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council on the basis of his experience, administrative and executive ability. He shall hold office at and during the pleasure of the city council. 
(Ord. 400 N.S. § 1, 1975)  
2.08.030 - Eligibility—Corporate surety bond. 
A.  No person elected or appointed as a councilman of the city shall, subsequent to taking office as councilman, be eligible for appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed after such councilmember shall have ceased to be a member of the city council. 
B.  The city manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to the city conditioned upon the faithful performance of his/her duties in the penal sum of six hundred thousand dollars. The premium paid for such bond shall be paid by the city. 
(Ord. 1197 N.S. § 1 (part), 1994; Ord. 400 N.S. § 3, 1975)  
2.08.040 - Powers and duties. 
The city manager shall be the administrative head of the city government acting under the direction and control of the city council. In addition to the city manager's general powers as chief administrator, and not as a limitation thereon, the city manager shall have the powers and duties set forth in the following subsections: 
A.  To see that all laws and ordinances of the city are duly enforced and that all franchises, permits, licenses and privileges granted by the city are faithfully performed and observed; 
B.  To perform all financial and accounting duties imposed on the city clerk by Government Code Sections 40802 through 40805. Pursuant to Section 40805.5 of the Government Code, these duties are transferred to the city manager or his/her designee; 
C.  To control, order and give directions to all directors of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under the city manager's jurisdiction through their department director; 
D.  The services and facilities of the city clerk, city treasurer and city attorney shall be made available to the city manager in the same manner that such services are available to the city council; 
E.  The city manager shall have authority to appoint, discipline and dismiss any and all officers and employees of the city, except the city attorney and those elected by the electors of the city. All department directors, persons holding those positions listed in section A of the resolution adopting selected salary ranges and job titles for management, professional and confidential employees, are "at-will" employees and may be removed at any time by the city manager without cause and without right of appeal. 
F.  To attend all meetings of the city council unless excused there from by the city council; 
G.  To recommend to the city council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he or she deems necessary or expedient; 
H.  To keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the city; 
I.  To prepare and submit to the city council the annual budget and to administer it after adoption; 
J.  To purchase or cause to be purchased all supplies for all of the departments or divisions of the city. No expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the city council except on report and approval of the city manager; 
K.  To make investigation into the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof and any contract or the proper performance of any obligation pertaining to the city; 
L.  To investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the city and in regard to the services maintained by public utilities in the city, and to see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed; 
M.  To execute general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, streets and other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the city council; 
N.  Reserved. 
O.  To receive and open all official mail and communications addressed either to the mayor or to the city council, unless a councilmember has filed a written request with the city manager to forward all mail and communications unopened to the councilmember. The councilmember requesting the forwarding of unopened mail shall assume all responsibility to comply with all laws. The mayor will not have the option to file a request to have his or her mail forwarded unopened; 
P.  To make reports and recommendations as may be desirable or as requested by the city council; 
Q.  To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to the city manager from time to time by ordinance, resolution or other action of the city council; 
R.  To sign the following instruments on behalf of the city: 
1.  Without prior approval from the city council: 
a.  Rights of entry onto city property where the city manager determines no reasonable risk of hazard, harm or danger is presented by such entry; 
b.  Written contracts, letters of intent or similar memoranda of understanding made or entered into by city where city council previously has made sufficient appropriation therefore and the total amount to be expended by city under such contract or other written instrument equals the amount authorized to be performed by the employees of a public agency for public projects per State of California's Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act or less; 
c.  Written contracts, letters of intent or similar memoranda of understanding where the amount or value to be received by city equals the amount authorized to be performed by the employees of a public agency for public projects per State of California's Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act or less; 
d.  Emergency purchases pursuant to the applicable provisions of Chapter 2.44 or Chapter 3.04 of this code; and 
2.  Whenever authorized by the city council: 
a.  All warrants drawn on the city treasury, 
b.  All written contracts and conveyances made or entered into by the city where the amount to be expended or received by the city exceeds the amount authorized to be performed by the employees of a public agency for public projects per State of California's Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act, and 
c.  All instruments requiring the city seal; and 
S.  All claims and actions against the city or any officer or any employee thereof shall be filed, served and processed in accordance with applicable state law. All claims shall be filed with the city clerk. Pursuant to Section 935.4 of the Government Code, the city manager or said manager's designee shall be authorized to accept, settle or reject, without prior approval of the council, claims against the city, provided that no allowance, compromise, or settlement shall exceed twenty thousand dollars. Upon the written order of the city manager or said manager's designee, the director of finance shall cause to be issued a warrant upon the treasury of the city in the amount for which a claim has been allowed, compromised or settled. The city manager or said manager's designee is further authorized to compromise or settle, without prior approval of the council, except on a matter of policy, any actions in which the city is the plaintiff, provided that the amounts of such compromise or settlement shall not exceed twenty thousand dollars. 
(Ord. 1225 N.S. § 1, 1995; Ord. 1197 N.S. § 1 (part), 1994; Ord. 747 N.S. § 1, 1985; Ord. 586 N.S., 1982; Ord. 400 N.S. § 4, 1975) 
(Ord. No 1930 N.S., § 1, 4-22-2009; Ord. No. 2171, § 1, 10-7-2015; Ord. No. 2284 N.S., § 1, 10-17-2018)  
2.08.050 - Council orders and instructions—Restrictions. 
The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager. The city manager shall take his orders and instructions from the city council only when given at a duly held meeting of the city council, and no individual councilman shall give any orders or instructions to the city manager. 
(Ord. 400 N.S. § 5, 1975)  
2.08.060 - Attendance at meetings. 
The city manager may attend any and all meetings of any commission or board heretofore or hereafter created by the city council, upon his own volition or upon direction of the city council. At any such meetings at which the city manager attends, he shall be heard by such commissions and boards as to all matters upon which he wishes to address the members thereof, and he shall inform such members as to the status of any matters being considered by the city council. He shall cooperate fully with the members of all commissions, boards or committees appointed by the city council. 
(Ord. 400 N.S. § 6, 1975)  
2.08.070 - Temporary absence or disability—Appointment of duties to assistant city manager. 
In the event of the temporary absence or disability of the city manager, the assistant city manager may, at the direction of the city council, perform the duties of the city manager during the period of his absence or disability; provided, however, that such person or anyone else performing the duties of city manager furnishes a bond as set forth in Section 2.08.030 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 400 N.S. § 7, 1975)  
2.08.080 - Compensation and reimbursement. 
A.  The compensation of the city manager, as well as provisions for his vacation time and sick leave, shall be set forth in a resolution of the city council. 
B.  The city manager shall be reimbursed for all legitimate expenses paid by him in the conduct of city business, including traveling expenses outside the city limits; provided, however, that no reimbursement shall be made except upon a verified, itemized claim presented to and allowed by the city council. 
(Ord. 400 N.S. § 8, 1975)  
2.08.090 - Suspension, removal and resignation. 
A.  The removal of the city manager shall be only upon a three member vote of the city council. The city manager may be removed at any time by the city council without cause and without right of appeal as the city manager is an "at-will" employee serving at the pleasure of the city council. 
B.  At the time set for the hearing, the city manager shall have an opportunity to answer the reason or reasons given for his removal. Nothing contained in this chapter, however, shall be construed to require the council or any of its members to substantiate or prove the reasons for such removal as a condition of the removal, it being the intention of the council that the city manager shall hold office only at the discretion of the council and may be removed at any time by following the procedure set forth in this section. At the hearing the council shall take final action on the resolution of intention either to carry out his removal or to retain him. If the action is to remove the city manager, his removal shall not be effective until at least two weeks have expired from the date of the hearing. Failure of the council to adopt a motion or resolution for his removal shall be deemed a rescission of the resolution of intention. 
C.  The city manager shall be entitled to receive his regular compensation during the period between the effective date of his removal and passage of the resolution of intention of removal. 
D.  The city manager may resign from his position upon at least four weeks notice in writing given to the city council. 
(Ord. 400 N.S. § 9, 1975)  
Chapter 2.09 - CITY ATTORNEY 
Sections: 
 
2.09.010 - Office created. 
The office of city attorney is established. There shall be a city attorney appointed by the city council on the basis of his or her experience and ability. The city attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The city attorney may be employed through and subject to a written contract, notwithstanding any appointive or removal authority otherwise provided for in this municipal code or personnel policies of the city. 
(Ord. 1417 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
2.09.020 - Powers and duties. 
The city attorney shall have the power and be required to: 
A.  Represent and advise the city council and all city officers and employees in all matters of law pertaining to their offices; 
B.  Represent and appear for the city, its council, boards and commissions, in any or all legal actions or proceedings in which they or any of them are concerned or are a party; 
C.  Upon request of a current or former officer or employee of the city, defend such officer or employee in any legal action or proceeding brought against such officer or employee, either in their official or individual capacity or both, on account of any act or omission in the scope of their employment as an officer or employee of the city, and whenever the city is required by state law to provide such defense or whenever the council elects to provide such defense even though not required to do so. Provided, however, that the city attorney may refuse to provide such defense whenever, in his or her opinion, provision of such a defense would conflict with other duties or responsibilities, in which event the city shall provide other legal counsel if required to do so under state law or if the council elects to do so; 
D.  Attend meetings of the city council and redevelopment agency, attend other boards and commissions as deemed necessary by the city attorney, provide advice or opinion verbally and/or in writing whenever requested to do so by the city council, boards, commissions or other officers of the city; 
E.  Approve the form of all bonds given to and all contracts made by the city, endorsing approval thereon in writing; 
F.  Prepare any and all proposed ordinances or resolutions for the city, and amendments thereto; 
G.  Prosecute on behalf of the people all criminal cases for violation of the municipal code and state law as appropriate; 
H.  Subject to the approval of the city council, determine the composition of the staff of the city attorney's office. Notwithstanding other provisions of this code or personnel rules, regulations or practices to the contrary, the city attorney shall appoint, supervise, discipline and dismiss such staff in his or her discretion, provided, however, that salary and benefits of such staff are subject to establishment by the city council. For purposes of this chapter, the term staff shall be defined as including deputy and assistant city attorneys, paralegals, law clerks, interns and clerical support personnel; 
I.  Author and administer the department budget, submitting the same to the city council for its approval; 
J.  Ensure that in his or her absence or disability, an acting city attorney is duly designated and available to the city council and staff; 
K.  On vacating the office, surrender to his or her successor all books, papers, files and documents pertaining to the city's affairs; 
L.  Perform such other legal functions and duties incident to the execution of the foregoing powers as may be necessary, and perform such other legal services as may be required by the city council or imposed by law. 
M.  To initiate and settle, without prior approval of the city council, any small claims action within the jurisdiction of California Code of Civil Procedure Section 116.220, or successor statute, to collect outstanding debt owed to the city. 
The city attorney shall have control of all legal business and proceedings, including the employment, in the city attorney's discretion, of other attorneys, appraisers or other technical and expert services to assist with or to take charge of any litigation or matter. 
(Ord. 1417 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998) 
(Ord. No. 1996 N.S., § 1, 12-1-2010)  
2.09.030 - Council orders and instructions—Restrictions. 
The city council and its members shall deal with the legal services of the city only through the city attorney, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the city council nor any members thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city attorney. The city attorney shall take his or her orders and instructions, when necessary, from the city council only when given at a duly held meeting or under the direction of the legal subcommittee (as directed by the city council), and no individual council member shall give any orders or instructions to the city attorney. 
(Ord. 1417 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
Chapter 2.10 - MANAGEMENT OF CITY RECORDS 
Sections: 
 
2.10.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish procedures for the management of city records. 
(Ord. 705 N.S. § 1 (III-6-1.01), 1984)  
2.10.020 - Policy. 
The policy of the city is to provide for efficient, economical and effective controls over creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use and disposition of all city records. 
(Ord. 705 N.S. § 1 (III-6-1.02), 1984)  
2.10.030 - Authority. 
The city clerk shall be responsible for the administration of a uniform records management program assisting all city departments. 
(Ord. 705 N.S. § 1 (III-6-1.03), 1984)  
2.10.040 - Definitions. 
A.  "Appraisal" means the process of determining the value and thus the disposition of records based upon their (1) administrative, legal, fiscal and historical uses; (2) relative activity; (3) relationship to other records; and (4) evidentiary and informational value. 
B.  "Disposition" means actions taken with regard to records and nonrecords following their appraisal. These actions include the transfer of inactive records to the Records Center or the destruction of records or nonrecords no longer required in the course of the city's business. 
C.  "Duplicate record" means copies or reproductions of original records, whether or not in the same physical form as the original, which are retained for personal reference or for operational requirements. 
D.  "Maintain" means to provide custody and care for a record. 
E.  "Nonrecord" means material which is not retained in the regular course of business or is a temporary aid, not created for the purpose of preserving its own documentary or informational content for future reference. This includes but is not limited to: 
1.  Transmittal letters and acknowledgements which do not add any information to the material transmitted; 
2.  Requests for printed material after the requests have been filled; 
3.  Informal notes, worksheets, and rough drafts of letters, memoranda or reports that do not represent basic steps in the preparation of documents; 
4.  Shorthand notes, including stenographic notebooks and stenotype tapes, and dictating media which have been transcribed; 
5.  Miscellaneous notices of community affairs, employee meetings, or holidays; 
6.  Stocks of publications or unused blank forms that are kept for supply purposes only; 
7.  Tickler, follow-up or suspense copies of correspondence; 
8.  Extra copies of documents already in an official file; 
9.  Publications or reference materials received or acquired from outside sources such as professional organizations, conferences, seminars or workshops; 
10.  Library and museum materials made or acquired and preserved solely for reference or exhibition purposes; 
11.  Tapes of city council meetings and/or meetings of any other city boards or commissions following transcription into minutes and approval and adoption of such minutes by the appropriate body has been made. 
F.  "Official record" means any record containing information relating to the conduct of the public's business, prepared, owned, used or retained by any city department, regardless of physical form or characteristics. 
G.  "Original record" means the first or initial documentation, that of which anything else is a copy or reproduction; or, a duplicate record with any original documentation. 
H.  "Record" means all books, papers, maps, exhibits, magnetic or paper tapes, photographic films and prints, punched cards and other documentary material, regardless of physical form or characteristics, produced, received, owned or used by a city department and preserved because of the informational value of data in them or as evidence of the organization, functions, policies, decisions, procedures, operations or other activities of the city. 
I.  "Record copy" means a reproduction of an original record which is retained in lieu of the original record as the official record of the city. 
J.  "Records disposition schedule" means a listing of records series by department, indicating for each series the length of time records are to be maintained in office areas and in the Records Center. The schedule constitutes authority for the destruction of records listed thereon, after required retention periods have lapsed. 
K.  "Record series" means file units or documents arranged in accordance with a filing system or maintained as a unit because they relate to a particular subject or function, result from the same activity, have a particular form, or because of some other relationship arising out of their creation, receipt or use. Record series may consist of records of a single type or format and can be described, handled and disposed of or retained as a unit. 
L.  "Writing" means handwriting, typewriting, printing, photostating, photographing and every other means of recording upon any form of communication or representation, including letters, words, pictures, sounds or symbols, or combination thereof, and all papers, maps, magnetic or paper tapes, photographic films and prints, magnetic or punched cards, discs, drums and other documents, retained in the ordinary course of business. Writings are record or nonrecord material. 
(Ord. 705 N.S. § 1 (III-6-1.04), 1984)  
2.10.050 - Records disposition schedule. 
A.  The records disposition schedule will serve as the basis for the city's records management program. The head of each department shall prepare a records disposition schedule for his/her department and any subsequent proposed amendments thereto. With the assistance of the records management officer, this preparation shall include: 
1.  A physical inventory and appraisal of all records to determine their administrative, fiscal, legal and historical value; 
2.  Identification of an official record series title for all department records and specific and accurate descriptions of records listed thereunder in accordance with guidelines developed by the city clerk. Terms used as record series titles or as description of files on the records disposition schedule, or any revision thereto, shall be descriptive. They shall not include the use of the words "miscellaneous" or "various," or words of similar connotation; nor shall any such schedule or request bearing such nomenclature be submitted to the city clerk and the city attorney for their consideration and approval; 
3.  A periodic review or audit of records to make sure they are properly covered by the records disposition schedule. 
B.  Following the review or audit, the city clerk will be notified of any proposed amendments to the records disposition schedule that are needed. Such amendments may include the addition of new record series titles to the records disposition schedule, or requests to have superseded record series titles removed from the records disposition schedule. 
C.  Final approval of the records disposition schedule shall require the written consent of the department head, the city attorney and the city clerk. The records disposition schedule must then be approved by the city council by resolution. Amendments and revisions thereto shall require the written consent of the department head, the city attorney and the city clerk. 
(Ord. 705 N.S. § 1 (III-6-1.05), 1984)  
2.10.060 - Responsibilities. 
A.  The city clerk shall: 
1.  Be responsible for the maintenance of all official records, with the following exceptions: 
a.  Records identified pursuant to this chapter in the records disposition schedule, which are entrusted to the custody of other city officers or departments, 
b.  Newly created or unidentified record series, which shall be the responsibility of the originating department, until properly identified within the records disposition schedule, 
c.  Inactive records which have been transferred to non-city organizations, 
d.  Records which are legally maintained by other government agencies; 
2.  Be responsible for the administration of a uniform records management program assisting all city departments, and for the development, administration and coordination of procedures thereunder; 
3.  Administer a Records Center for the efficient and economical storage, maintenance and servicing of inactive city records; 
4.  Appoint a records management officer who shall serve in the office of the city clerk as the head of the records management program. 
B.  The records management officer, under the direction of the city clerk, shall: 
1.  Provide effective control over the identification appraisal, maintenance, protection, preservation, transfer, retention and disposition of all city records. This shall include: 
a.  Providing assistance and guidelines to departments in the preparation of their records disposition schedules and amendments thereto, 
b.  Establishing proper procedures for securing necessary revisions to the records disposition schedule, with the approval of the city attorney, 
c.  Providing direct technical assistance and guidance to departments that will aid in resolving specific files and related records problems; 
2.  Operate the Records Center in an orderly and efficient manner. This operation shall include: 
a.  Providing information, assistance and records to using departments to ensure optimum utilization of the Records Center, 
b.  Notifying using departments periodically when records held by the Records Center are eligible for destruction, 
c.  Causing to be destroyed records held by the Records Center only after receiving proper authorization from the responsible department head. 
C.  Each department head shall: 
1.  Cooperate with the city clerk to assure proper administration and implementation of the city's records management program; 
2.  Ensure the proper application of the records disposition schedule to his/her department's records; 
3.  Ensure that records are transferred to the Records Center for storage at the end of the office retention period listed in the records disposition schedule; 
4.  Review the records disposition schedule and recommend to the city clerk any amendments thereto which are necessary due to changing requirements; 
5.  Comply with procedures mentioned in this chapter regarding the destruction of records and nonrecords; 
6.  Appoint a records coordinator to serve as liaison between the records management officer and the department and to assist in the implementation of the records management program. 
(Ord. 705 N.S. § 1 (III-6-1.06), 1984)  
2.10.070 - Destruction of records. 
A.  Eligibility. No record shall be destroyed until it has been properly inventoried, appraised and entered in the records disposition schedule. Furthermore, before a record is eligible for destruction, the department head must first make the following determinations: 
1.  Required retention periods listed in the records disposition schedule have lapsed; 
2.  The record is maintained by said department; 
3.  The record is no longer required to fulfill any administrative, fiscal, legal or historical interests of the city or the public; 
4.  The record series title is descriptive and does not include the use of the words "miscellaneous" or "various," or words of similar connotation. 
B.  Procedures. Before records are destroyed, the department head shall: 
1.  In compliance with the records disposition schedule, exercise a final review over all records eligible for destruction for the purpose of determining any further administrative, fiscal, legal or historical needs; 
2.  Ensure that if the records disposition schedule does not specify records for transfer to the Records Center, the records shall be destroyed at the end of the listed office retention period in compliance with the records disposition schedule; 
3.  Ensure that if the records disposition schedule does specify records for transfer to the Records Center, and this has not occurred, the records shall be destroyed, providing they have exceeded their total retention requirement (office plus Records Center); 
4.  Destroy duplicate records and nonrecords when they are no longer needed in the course of the city's business. 
(Ord. 705 N.S. § 1 (III-6-1.07), 1984)  
Chapter 2.12 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT* 
Sections: 
 
2.12.010 - Department established. 
There is established a department under the jurisdiction of the city manager entitled the community development department. At a minimum, this department shall consist of two sections; namely, a planning section and a building section. 
(Ord. 1197 N.S. § 1, 1994)  
2.12.020 - Planning division duties. 
The duties and responsibilities of the planning division shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
A.  Administration of the city planning function including keeping all records of applications and actions thereon; 
B.  Processing zoning and other related planning functions, including setting and giving notice of public hearings, preparing agendas and reviewing use permits and requests for time extensions thereon; 
C.  Coordinating planning functions with other city departments and county and state agencies; 
D.  Act as a liaison between the city planning commission and other city agencies and assist the planning commission in its functions, such as preparing agendas, recording meeting minutes and making staff recommendations on the matters before the planning commission; 
E.  Updating regularly the general plan and its elements and reviewing those use permits which have an expiration date; 
F.  Supervising the preparation of all ordinances pertaining to the functions of the planning commission and planning function, and making recommendations to the city council for adoption of such legislation; 
G.  Approve or disapprove, in whole or in part, applications for permits or plan approvals pursuant to Chapters 18.75 through 18.76 of this code, or as amended; 
H.  Render advice and guidance on the restoration, alteration, landscaping or maintenance of any cultural resource, including landmark, landmark site, historic district or neighborhood property within public view; 
I.  Nothing shall permit the city manager from assigning planning division duties differently than stated above in Sections 2.12.010(A) through (H) as he/she deems appropriate for the good of the city. 
(Ord. 1495 N.S. § 1, 2001; Ord. 1197 N.S. § 1, 1994)  
2.12.030 - Building division duties. 
The duties and responsibilities of the building division shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
A.  Administering the Uniform Building Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, electrical and all other such codes adopted by city ordinance; 
B.  Administering regulations, laws and rules of the state relating to structures and/or housing; 
C.  Enforcing city codes pertaining to signs, zones and off-street parking requirements for businesses and industry; 
D.  Establishing and administering programs and procedures for the investigation of structural conditions and or the coordination of other departments and agencies, including the fire department, health department, Division of Housing of the state, and such other jurisdictions as may be concerned with dilapidation and its abatement; preparing reports and recommendations relative to abatement; presenting information and analytical data to the council in the event of appeals from the building official's orders and directives or the institution of condemnation proceedings; 
E.  Establishing and maintaining a system of records relating to building permits, a sign code and related matters; 
F.  Conferring and coordinating with other agencies and departments including the public works department and the fire department, to the end that construction shall be in conformance with city plans for land use and the adequacy of public facilities; 
G.  Nothing shall permit the city manager from assigning building division duties differently than stated above in Sections 2.12.010(A) through (H) and he/she deems appropriate for the good of the city. 
(Ord. 1197 N.S. § 1, 1994)  
Chapter 2.14 - INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
Sections: 
 
2.14.010 - Created—Statutory authority. 
It is found and declared that there is a need for the industrial development authority of the city of Morgan Hill created by Section 91520 of the California Industrial Development Financing Act, and that such authority shall function in the city; and said authority is hereby authorized to transact business and to exercise all powers permitted by law. 
(Ord. 728 N.S. § 1, 1985)  
Chapter 2.16 - FIRE DEPARTMENT* 
Sections: 
 
2.16.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the fire department shall be the prevention and suppression of fire and the protection of life and property within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. 1197 N.S. § 1 (part), 1994)  
2.16.020 - Staffing. 
The city manager shall advise the city council on all matters of staffing as he/she deems necessary for the effective operation of the fire department. 
(Ord. 1197 N.S. § 1 (part), 1994)  
2.16.030 - Fire chief—Appointment. 
The city manager shall appoint the fire chief. The fire chief is an "at-will" employee and serves at the pleasure of the city manager. The fire chief may be dismissed/terminated by the city manager at any time without cause and without right of appeal. 
(Ord. 1197 N.S. § 1 (part), 1994)  
2.16.040 - Fire chief—Powers and duties. 
A.  The fire chief shall be the director of the fire department, subject to the laws of the state, county, ordinances of the city and the rules and regulations that are adopted in this chapter, and that may hereafter be amended or adopted. 
B.  The fire chief shall be held responsible for the general condition and effective operation of the department, the training of fire department employees and the performance of all other duties imposed upon him/her by the city manager. 
C.  The fire chief, with the approval of the city manager, shall formulate and administer a set of departmental polices to govern the department, and shall be responsible to the city manager for the personnel, morale and general efficiency of the department. 
D.  The fire chief will prepare and promulgate a standard operating procedures manual to cover all operating procedures. 
E.  The fire chief shall conduct or require suitable drills or instruction in the operation and handling of all fire equipment, procedures of fire sprinkler operation and hookup, first-aid and rescue work, salvage, a study of building within the city, fire prevention, water supplies and all other matters generally considered essential to good firefighting practices and safety of life and property from fire. 
F.  The fire chief shall see that complete records are kept of all fires, inspections, apparatus and minor equipment, personnel and other information about the work of the department. 
G.  Nothing shall permit the city manager from directing the fire chief to operate the fire department as he/she deems appropriate for the good of the city. 
(Ord. 1197 N.S. § 1 (part), 1994)  
2.16.050 - Volunteer firefighters. 
There is established a volunteer firefighter auxiliary whose primary function is to enhance or augment the personnel, duties and educational efforts of the fire department to the extent allowed by applicable laws, regulations and policies. Volunteer firefighters shall be trained for such duties and meet the minimum qualifications set forth by the fire chief and may be called to duty by the fire chief insofar as possible to enhance response to alarms of fire or other emergency situations or educational efforts. Volunteer firefighter personnel will serve under the direction and management of the fire chief and adhere to all rules and regulations of the city and fire department where applicable. 
(Ord. 1197 N.S., § 1 (part), 1994; Ord. No. 2103 N.S., § 1, 4-2-2014)  
2.16.060 - Equipment—Acquisition and maintenance. 
The department shall be equipped with such apparatus and other equipment as may be required from time to time to maintain its efficiency to properly protect life and property from fire. Recommendations of apparatus and equipment needed shall be made by the fire chief, and approved by the city manager and city council following city purchasing procedures. 
(Ord. 1197 N.S. § 1 (part), 1994)  
2.16.070 - Equipment—Access by authorized personnel—Calls for outside service. 
No person shall enter any place where fire apparatus is housed or handle any apparatus or equipment belonging to the fire department unless accompanied by, or have special permission of, an officer or authorized member of the fire department. No apparatus shall be hired out or permitted to leave the city in response to a call for aid at a fire or other emergency or for resuscitator service in a neighboring community, unless an appropriate mutual aid agreement or contract shall have been duly executed. The officer in charge shall have power to assign equipment for response to call for outside aide in accordance with such agreements only when the absence of such equipment will not jeopardize protection in the city. 
(Ord. 1197 N.S. § 1 (part), 1994)  
Chapter 2.20 - LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER TRAINING 
Sections: 
 
2.20.010 - Election to receive state assistance. 
The city council declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state under the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code. 
(Ord. 300 N.S. § 1, 1971)  
2.20.020 - Adherence to state recruitment and training procedures. 
Pursuant to Section 13522 of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code, the city will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. 
(Ord. 300 N.S. § 2, 1971)  
2.20.030 - Public safety dispatchers—Election to receive state assistance. 
The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state under the provisions of Section 13522, Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code. 
(Ord. 1026 N.S. § 1, 1991)  
2.20.040 - Public safety dispatchers—Adherence to state recruitment and training procedures. 
Pursuant to Section 13510(c), Chapter 1 of the California Penal Code, the city police department will adhere to standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officers Standards and Training (POST). 
(Ord. 1026 N.S. § 2, 1991)  
2.20.050 - Public safety dispatchers—State commission inspections. 
Pursuant to Section 13512, Chapter 1 of the California Penal Code, the Commission and its representatives may make such inquiries as deemed appropriate by the Commission to ascertain that the city police department's public safety dispatcher personnel adhere to standards for selection and training established by the Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. 
(Ord. 1026 N.S. § 3, 1991)  
Chapter 2.21 - DISPOSITION OF FOUND OR UNCLAIMED MONEY AND BICYCLES 
Sections: 
 
2.21.010 - Chief of police to hold found and abandoned property and money. 
A.  The chief of police shall make provisions for the receiving and safekeeping of found or unclaimed property and money delivered to him or coming into his possession, and he shall make provision for safekeeping of all property abandoned in the city or otherwise coming into his possession where no owner can be found, subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The finder of money or property of the value of ten dollars or more who turns the money or property over to the police department in compliance with the provisions of Section 2080.1 of the Civil Code as it exists or is hereafter amended, shall make the affidavit required by the section; and the police shall make a reasonable effort to ascertain and notify the owner thereof. 
(Ord. 1079 N.S. § 1 (part), 1992)  
2.21.020 - True owner may claim property or money. 
If the true owner appears within ninety days after receipt of the property by the police department, proves his ownership, and pays the charges hereinafter provided, the police division shall restore the property to him. Found money shall be paid to the true owner upon written order to the finance director and city treasurer from the chief of police. The chief of police shall make such order upon the same proof of ownership and with the same notice as prescribed in the case of property. Charges for the care of the property or money not exceeding ten percent of the value of the property or the amount of the money may be charged for its safekeeping. If ownership cannot be determined to the satisfaction of the chief of police, he may refuse to deliver such property or order the payment of such money to anyone until ordered to do so by a court. 
(Ord. 1079 N.S. § 1 (part), 1992)  
2.21.030 - Advertisement—Vesting in finder. 
If the reported value of property is fifty dollars or more and no owner appears and proves his ownership of the property within ninety days, the chief of police within the next thirty days shall cause to be published at least once in the official newspaper of the city a notice of the found, saved or unclaimed property. If after seven days following the first publication of the notice, no owner appears and claims ownership of the money or property, then the money or property shall be delivered back to the finder unless the property was found in the course of employment by an employee of any public agency, in which case the property, other than money, shall be sold at public auction. Charges may be imposed upon the finder at time of delivery to him of the property sufficient to defray the costs of advertising and storage. If the reported value of the property is less than fifty dollars and no owner appears and proves his ownership of the property within ninety days, then the money or property shall be delivered back to the finder unless the property was found in the course of employment by an employee of any public agency, in which case the property, other than money, shall be sold at public auction. 
(Ord. 1079 N.S. § 1 (part), 1992)  
2.21.040 - Money to be deposited in the general fund. 
All money received by the police, as to which ownership cannot be satisfactorily shown or established, shall be deposited in the general budget fund. 
(Ord. 1079 N.S. § 1 (part), 1992)  
2.21.050 - Property to be sold or used by the city. 
Property received and not delivered to the true owner or finder within four months after the receipt of property by the police shall be disposed of by public auction to the highest bidder. Such auction shall be held not less than five days after a notice describing the article to be disposed of announcing the date, time and place of the auction is published once in the official newspaper of the city. 
(Ord. 1079 N.S. § 1 (part), 1992)  
2.21.060 - Quick sale. 
The police department may sell property by public auction in the manner and upon the notice of sale of personal property under execution, if it is a thing which is commonly the subject of sale in the following cases: (a) when the owner being found refuses upon demand to pay the charges in Section 2.21.020 when such charges amount to two-thirds of its value, or (b) the property is in danger of perishing or of losing the greater part of its value. 
(Ord. 1079 N.S. § 1 (part), 1992)  
2.21.070 - When property may be used by city. 
The city may appropriate to its own use found or unclaimed property if such property is not redeemed or redeemable as provided in this article. 
(Ord. 1079 N.S. § 1 (part), 1992)  
2.21.080 - Dangerous or perishable property. 
Any property coming into the possession of the police department which is dangerous or perishable may be disposed of immediately without notice, in such manner as is determined to be in the public interest. 
(Ord. 1079 N.S. § 1 (part), 1992)  
2.21.090 - Proceeds to be deposited in general fund. 
After such auction under this chapter is completed, the chief of police shall deliver the proceeds of the auction to the director of finance for deposit in the general budget fund. 
(Ord. 1079 N.S. § 1 (part), 1992)  
2.21.100 - Unsalable and unusable property. 
Any property advertised and offered for sale but not sold and not suitable for appropriation to the use of the city shall be deemed to be of no value and shall be disposed of in such manner as the city manager directs. 
(Ord. 1079 N.S. § 1 (part), 1992)  
2.21.110 - Disposition of bicycles to prevent juvenile delinquency. 
A.  Pursuant to the provisions of Welfare and Institutions Code Section 217, as it exists or is hereafter amended, any bicycles in the possession of the police department which have been unclaimed for a period of at least sixty days may, instead of being sold at public auction to the highest bidder pursuant to the provisions of Section 2080.5 of the Civil Code, be turned over to any charitable or nonprofit organization which is authorized under its articles of incorporation to participate in a program or activity designed to prevent juvenile delinquency and which is exempt from income taxation under federal or state law, or both, for use in any program or activity designed to prevent juvenile delinquency. 
B.  The city manager, or designee, shall have authority to designate one or more nonprofit agencies meeting the requirements of Section 217 of the Welfare and institutions Code, to receive any bicycles which have been in the possession of the police department and unclaimed for a period of at least sixty days, to receive such unclaimed bicycles and use them in a program or activity designed to prevent juvenile delinquency. The city manager, or designee, may determine from time to time whether unclaimed bicycles should be sold at auction or disposed of for use in a program or activity designed to prevent juvenile delinquency, pursuant to the provision of this section. 
(Ord. 1079 N.S. § 1 (part), 1992)  
2.21.120 - When chapter not applicable. 
This chapter does not apply to property held by the chief of police as evidence except that property classified as evidence which has fulfilled its evidentiary purpose or has ceased to be needed for the purpose for any reason and which for any reason cannot be returned to its rightful owner shall be reclassified as unclaimed property for disposition pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1079 N.S. § 1 (part), 1992)  
Chapter 2.22 - MASTER PROVISIONS FOR BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS* 
Sections: 
 
2.22.010 - Establishment of boards and commissions. 
A.  There are established within the city the following boards and commissions: 
1.  Planning commission; 
2.  Parks and recreation commission; 
3.  Library, culture and arts commission; and 
4.  Disaster council. 
B.  Unless otherwise set forth, all members of boards, commissions and committees shall be residents of the city and shall continue to be residents of the city during their terms of office. Notwithstanding the foregoing, individuals who reside within the Morgan Hill Unified School District boundary and who do not otherwise reside in any city other than Morgan Hill may be appointed to boards, commissions and committees provided that no more than thirty percent of the members of any board, commission or committee shall be non-Morgan Hill residents. 
C.  Members shall be appointed by the mayor subject to approval of a majority vote of the city council and may be removed without cause by vote of any three members of the city council. 
D.  The appointment terms of members may be extended, at the discretion of the city council, until such time as a successor member may be appointed and take office. 
E.  Vacancies in the commission occurring other than by expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as original appointments. 
F.  The members of the commission shall organize the commission and shall elect from its members a chair and vice-chair and such other officers as may be necessary in accordance with adopted city council policy. 
(Ord. 1778 N.S. § 2 (part), 2006) 
(Ord. No 1930 N.S., § 2, 4-22-2009; Ord. No. 1935 N.S., § 1, 6-3-2009)  
2.22.030 - Clerk and secretary. 
The city clerk or designate shall also act as clerk for each of the boards and commissions and shall have authority to sign any official notices and also to certify any resolution of the commissions or boards. The city council may appoint a person not a member of the commission or board to act as secretary of the commission or board. The secretary shall keep a record of all proceedings of said board or commission, its resolutions, its findings and actions, which records shall be a public record and kept with the city clerk in the City Hall building. 
(Ord. 1778 N.S. § 2 (part), 2006)  
2.22.040 - Rules of procedure. 
A.  The chair shall preside at all meetings of the board or commission. The vice chair shall assume the duties of the chair in the absence of or in case of inability of the chair. 
B.  A majority of the members of the commission or board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
C.  Unless otherwise specified herein, each board or commission may adopt its own rules and regulations for the transaction of its business. Such rules shall be subject to approval of the city council before becoming effective. 
(Ord. 1778 N.S. § 2 (part), 2006)  
2.22.050 - Rules of attendance. 
If any member is absent from three of any six consecutive regular board or commission meetings, unless such absence is with the permission of the chair, or vice chair in absence of the chair, expressed in the official minutes, the member's seat shall be deemed vacated. The city manager shall so notify the city council and the council shall take action to fill the seat within a reasonable period of time. 
(Ord. 1778 N.S. § 2 (part), 2006)  
2.22.060 - Meetings. 
Unless otherwise specified, the commission shall hold regular meetings once every two months at a designated time and place which shall be fixed and determined by the commission and entered upon in its minutes. Special meetings of the commission may be called at any time by the chair or by a majority of the members of the board upon notice being given to all members of the board and to all news media at least twenty-four hours in advance of the meetings, as required by the laws of the state of California. 
(Ord. 1778 N.S. § 2 (part), 2006) 
(Ord. No. 1930 N.S., § 3, 4-22-2009)  
2.22.070 - Compensation. 
Members of the boards and commissions shall serve without compensation but may receive reimbursement for actual and necessary expenditures made or incurred in the performance of their prescribed duties in accordance with state law and the Municipal Code and policies of the city of Morgan Hill. 
(Ord. 1778 N.S. § 2 (part), 2006)  
2.22.080 - Effect. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as restricting or curtailing any of the powers of the city council or city officers as defined by the laws of the state of California or by this Municipal Code. Except as otherwise set forth in Chapter 2.36, the city council declares that the public interest and convenience require the appointment of the boards and commissions established pursuant to Section 2.22.010 to act purely in an advisory capacity to the city council. 
(Ord. 1778 N.S. § 2 (part), 2006)  
Chapter 2.32 - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION* 
Sections: 
 
2.32.010 - Created. 
There is established a new commission which is entitled the "Morgan Hill parks and recreation commission" to serve in an advisory capacity to the city council. 
(Ord. 1778 N.S. § 4 (part), 2006)  
2.32.020 - Membership—Terms of office. 
The commission shall consist of seven members. Members shall not be officials or employees of the city nor be paid members of any organization receiving financial support from the city. Notwithstanding any language to the contrary, the mayor and city council may appoint a Morgan Hill Unified School District official as a member of the commission. 
For the first seven members appointed, the terms of three of the members shall expire on May 1, 1999, and the terms of four of the members shall expire on May 1, 2000. All new full term appointments after April 1, 2006 shall be for a period of four years. 
(Ord. 1778 N.S. § 4 (part), 2006)  
2.32.030 - Powers and duties. 
The powers and functions of the commission shall be as follows, provided that nothing in this Chapter 2.32 shall be construed to give the commission power or duty to supervise or administer any public buildings, public parks, streets or other public property or programs: 
A.  To hold hearings on matters pertaining to planning and development of parks, trails, recreation programs for all segments of the population, bicycle facilities, and capital expenditures related to parks, trails, recreational facilities, and bicycle facilities; 
B.  To facilitate coordination of the efficient and effective use of recreation facilities by other public, private, and non-profit groups and organizations to city residents; 
C.  To consider, formulate and propose fiscally prudent programs, activities, resources, plans and development designed to provide for, regulate, and direct the future growth and development of the parks facilities and recreation programming for the people of the city; 
D.  To make investigations and reports for future acquisition of park sites; 
E.  To review opportunities for joint use of recreation/parks, and storm retention/detention; 
F.  To act on behalf of the city and function as the City of Morgan Hill Bicycle and Trails Advisory Committee; 
G.  To conduct such other hearings as are necessary and in accordance with its own rules and regulations for the transaction of its business, or rules for conduct; and 
H.  To report its decisions and recommendations relating to the above matters, in writing to the city council. 
(Ord. 1778 N.S. § 4 (part), 2006) 
(Ord. No. 1930 N.S., § 4, 4-22-2009)  
Chapter 2.36 - PLANNING COMMISSION* 
Sections: 
 
2.36.010 - Created—Statutory authority. 
The planning commission is established pursuant to the authority contained in Chapter 3 of Title VII of the California Government Code, entitled "Local Planning, " as existing or hereafter amended. Reference shall be made to said Chapter 3 for interpretation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 811 N.S. § 1 (II-3-1), 1987)  
2.36.020 - Membership—Terms of office—Vacancies. 
A.  The city planning commission shall consist of seven members. Members of the planning commission shall serve the following terms: 
1.  In the year 1998, three members shall be appointed to serve terms ending June 1, 2001; 
2.  The four members who were appointed in 1996 shall serve terms ending June 1, 1999; 
3.  Thereafter, all terms shall be for four years and shall expire on June 1st. 
(Ord. 1778 N.S. § 5, 2006: Ord. 1407 N.S. § 2, 1998; Ord. 1083 N.S. § 1, 1992; Ord. 811 N.S. § 1 (II-3-2), 1987)  
2.36.030 - Meetings. 
The commission shall hold regular meetings at least twice a month or as otherwise deemed necessary by the commission. All meetings of the commission shall be held in the city council chambers at City Hall or other location designated by minute order of the city council or at a location deemed necessary or appropriate by the planning commission. 
(Ord. 1197 N.S. § 1 (part), 1994: Ord. 811 N.S. § 1 (II-3-3), 1987)  
2.36.040 - Powers and duties. 
The planning commission shall have the powers and shall perform all the duties conferred and imposed upon city planning commissions by the applicable provisions of Chapter 3 of Title VII of the Government Code of the state and, in addition, the planning commission shall: 
A.  Perform all the functions assigned to the commission by the subdivision and zoning ordinances (Titles 17 and 18 of this code) of the city, and all general laws of the state of California; 
B.  Serve as an advisory body to the city council on matters related to city growth and development and on such other matters as may be requested by the council; 
C.  Promote public interest in and understanding of the subdivision and zoning ordinances of the city, and also of all master plans and other official plans and regulations pertaining to planning which have been approved officially by the city council; 
D.  Review and advise the city council on all proposed amendments to Title 17, Subdivisions, and Title 18, Planning and Land Use Regulations; 
E.  Approve or disapprove application for designation of cultural resources and historic districts pursuant to Chapter 18.75 of this code, or as amended; 
F.  Approve or disapprove permits sought to remove or demolish a cultural resource, cultural resource site or historic district pursuant to Chapter 18.75 of this code, or as amended. 
(Ord. 1111 N.S. §§ 2, 3, 1992; Ord. 899 N.S. § 18, 1989; Ord. 811 N.S. § 1 (II-3-4), 1987)  
Chapter 2.44 - CIVIL DISASTER AND EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Note— Prior ordinance history: Ord. 333 N.S. 
 
2.44.010 - Purposes. 
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the city in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of the city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected private persons. 
(Ord. 706 N.S. (IV-2-1.01), 1984)  
2.44.020 - Emergency defined. 
As used in this chapter, "emergency" means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot or earthquake, or other conditions including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of the city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. 
(Ord. 706 N.S. (IV-2-2.01), 1984)  
2.44.030 - Disaster council—Created—Membership. 
The disaster council is created and shall consist of the following: 
A.  The mayor, who shall be chairman; 
B.  The director of emergency services, who shall be vice-chairman; 
C.  The assistant director of emergency services; 
D.  The chief of police, the director of public works and the fire chief; 
E.  Such other persons as may be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Ord. 706 N.S. (IV-2-3.01), 1984)  
2.44.040 - Disaster council—Power and duties. 
It is the duty of the disaster council, and it is empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairman or, in his absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice-chairman. 
(Ord. 706 N.S. (IV-2-4.01), 1984)  
2.44.050 - Office of emergency services—Created—Responsibilities. 
A.  There is created the office of emergency services. 
B.  The responsibilities of the office of emergency services shall include: 
1.  The development of emergency plans with the assistance of the emergency service chiefs; 
2.  The day-to-day administration of the city's emergency preparedness program. 
(Ord. 706 N.S. (IV-2-5.01), 1984)  
2.44.060 - Director—Assistant director—Coordinator. 
A.  There is created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services. 
B.  There is created the office of assistant director of emergency services, who shall be appointed by the director. 
C.  There is created the position of emergency services coordinator, who shall be appointed by the director. 
(Ord. 706 N.S. (IV-2-6.01), 1984)  
2.44.070 - Director—Powers and duties. 
The director is empowered to: 
A.  Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a "local emergency" if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect; 
B.  Request the Governor to proclaim a "state of emergency" when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency; 
C.  Develop emergency plans with the assistance of emergency service chiefs for consideration by the disaster council, and manage the emergency programs of the city; 
D.  Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of the city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter; 
E.  Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of the city, and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them; 
F.  Represent the city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in this chapter; 
G.  In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as provided in this chapter, the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a "state of war emergency," the director is empowered to: 
1.  Make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council, 
2.  In addition to any appropriation made to support activities contemplated by this section, the director is empowered to make expenditures from any fund legally available in order to deal with actual or threatened conditions of a state of war emergency, state of emergency, or local emergency, 
3.  To make expenditures to obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property, and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use. Appropriations will be made to provide fair value compensation to the owner of any property commandeered during a state of emergency, 
4.  Require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a "state of war emergency," to command the aid of as many citizens of the community as he or she deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers. Appropriations will be made to support such activities to the extent funds are available for that purpose, 
5.  Requisition necessary personnel or material of any town department or agency, and 
6.  Execute all his or her ordinary powers as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him or her by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant to this chapter adopted by the city council, all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, by an agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority. 
(Ord. 1193 N.S. § 1, 1994: Ord. 706 N.S. (IV-2-7.01), 1984)  
2.44.080 - Assistant director—Coordinator—Powers and duties. 
A.  The assistant director will supervise the emergency services coordinator and perform other duties as assigned by the director. 
B.  The emergency services coordinator is responsible for the day-to-day administration of the office of emergency services. 
(Ord. 706 N.S. (IV-2-8.01), 1984)  
2.44.090 - Emergency organization. 
All officers and employees of the city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who may, by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of subsection (G)(3) of Section 2.44.070 of this chapter, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in the city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city. 
(Ord. 706 N.S. (IV-2-9.01), 1984)  
2.44.094 - Continuity of government in the event of a disaster. 
A.  At the second council meeting in January each year or as soon thereafter as may be practicable, the city council shall appoint five emergency standby council members. Emergency standby council members shall be selected from former members of the city council who agree to serve in that capacity during that year and to reside within the city of Morgan Hill during that year so long as they elect to participate as members of the emergency standby council. If insufficient numbers of former members of the city council are available or willing to serve, city council shall select emergency standby council members from current planning commissioners. 
B.  A member of the emergency standby council shall serve in that capacity from the date of appointment until the appointment of another emergency standby council the following year or until the member notifies the city clerk in writing that the member has elected to terminate participation in the emergency standby council. Each emergency standby council member shall take the oath of office required for the city council prior to assuming the position of emergency standby council member. 
C.  Each emergency standby council member appointed by the city council as described in section (a) shall have the duty during the term of that member's appointment to remain informed of the duties of city council members and the business and affairs of the city of Morgan Hill to the extent necessary to enable participation as a member of the city council upon appointment in the event of an emergency as provided hereafter. 
D.  In the event of the declaration of a state of war emergency, a state of emergency, or a local emergency as those terms are designated in Articles 12, 13, and 14 of Title 2 of the California Government Code and less than a quorum of the city council is available and a city council meeting is urgently required, the members of the emergency standby council shall be contacted for service. At that meeting, any city council members who are unavailable for duty at the time of that meeting as defined by section 8636 of the California Government Code (unavailable such as the member is either killed, missing; or so seriously injured as to be unable to attend meetings and otherwise perform the duties of office), shall be replaced by a member of the emergency standby council as necessary to reach five members. The order of selection of emergency standby council members shall be determined by council policy. The appointment of members of the emergency standby council to fill vacancies created by the unavailability of city council members at any time during a state of emergency shall be performed by city council, and additional emergency standby members shall be appointed during the state of emergency as required to maintain a total of five members on the city council. 
E.  Members of the emergency standby council who are appointed to serve as city council members shall serve in that position until replaced by a member of the city council who becomes no longer unavailable such that the addition of emergency standby council members is no longer necessary in order to constitute a quorum, until termination of the state of emergency, or until the election or appointment of a new regular city council member as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2296 N.S., § 1, 2-6-2019)  
2.44.100 - Structure—Duties—Function. 
The structure, duties and functions of the Morgan Hill emergency organization and the order of emergency succession to the position of director of emergency services shall be contained in the city emergency plan and adapted by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 706 N.S. (IV-2-10.01), 1984)  
2.44.110 - Mutual aid. 
It is the purpose of the city council in enacting this chapter to facilitate the rendering of mutual aid to and for the people of the city. Emergency plans adopted and approved by the city council shall provide for the interchange of mutual aid and for coordination with the emergency plans of the county operational area. 
(Ord. 706 N.S. (IV-2-11.01), 1984)  
2.44.120 - Expenditures. 
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. 
(Ord. 706 N.S. (IV-2-12.01), 1984)  
2.44.130 - Violations. 
It is unlawful for any person during an emergency to: 
A.  Willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter; 
B.  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter; or 
C.  Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 3, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 3, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 2.44.130 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 2.44.130 pertained to violations—penalties and derived from Ord. 706 N.S. (IV-2-13.01), adopted in 1984; and Ord. 1192 N.S., § 3, adopted in 1994.  
Chapter 2.66 - REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
Sections: 
 
2.66.010 - City council determination. 
The city council has determined that there is a community need for a redevelopment agency in the city and does so declare that there is a need for a redevelopment agency to function within the city pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 33000 et seq. 
(Ord. 840 N.S. § 1 (part), 1987)  
2.66.020 - Establishment. 
The city council has declared itself to be the redevelopment agency of the city pursuant to Section 33200 of the Health and Safety Code and finds that such action will serve the public interest and promote the public safety and welfare in an effective manner. The city council further has declared that all of the rights, powers, duties, privileges, and immunities of the Community Redevelopment Law are vested in the city council. 
(Ord. 840 N.S. § 1 (part), 1987)  
2.66.030 - Designation. 
The redevelopment agency created in this chapter is designated as "The Redevelopment Agency of the City of Morgan Hill." 
(Ord. 840 N.S. § 1 (part), 1987)  
2.66.040 - Member compensation. 
Inasmuch as the city is less than two hundred thousand in population, compensation of the members of the redevelopment agency is established pursuant to Section 33114.5 of the Health and Safety Code, as such section may be amended from time to time; provided, however, that no member shall receive compensation for attending more than four meetings of the agency during any calendar month. In addition, members shall receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the discharge of their duties. 
(Ord. 840 N.S. § 1 (part), 1987)  
Chapter 2.68 - LIBRARY, CULTURE AND ARTS COMMISSION 
Sections: 
 
2.68.010 - Created. 
There is established a new commission which is entitled the "library, culture and arts commission" to serve in an advisory capacity to the city council. 
(Ord. 1778 N.S. § 9 (part), 2006: Ord. 1374 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
2.68.020 - Membership—Terms of office. 
The commission shall consist of seven members. Members shall not be officials or employees of the city, county library employees nor paid members of any organization receiving financial support from the city for library and art services. 
(Ord. 1778 N.S. § 9 (part), 2006: Ord. 1559 N.S. § 1, 2002: Ord. 1407 N.S. § 5, 1998; Ord. 1382 N.S. § 1, 1998; Ord. 1374 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
2.68.030 - Powers and duties. 
The powers and functions of the commission shall be as follows: 
A.  To act in an advisory capacity to the city council in all matters pertaining to library, culture and arts in the community; 
B.  To serve as a liaison between the city and the Santa Clara County library; 
C.  To consult with private community groups supportive of library, culture and art programs and serve as a liaison between such groups and the city; 
D.  To provide advice and recommendations regarding the adequacy of existing library facilities and operations; 
E.  To look for opportunities for participation of artists and performers in city-sponsored activities, and ways to encourage community involvement in the arts; 
F.  To work cooperatively with city boards and commissions and other public and private organizations in creating and promoting art and cultural programs and activities within the city; 
G.  To coordinate and strengthen existing organizations in the arts and develop cooperation with regional organizations; 
H.  To make recommendations to the city council regarding the funding of community art projects, including the search for private and public grants, and regarding the disbursement of revenues consistent with the needs of the community; 
I.  To review and make recommendations to the city council upon all works of art to be acquired by the city, either by purchase, gift or otherwise, and exterior works of art installed in the city on public property; 
J.  To recommend to the city council the adoption of such ordinances or policies as it may deem necessary for the administration and preservation of the arts and cultural development of the city; 
K.  To perform such other tasks as may be expressly requested of it by the city council; 
L.  To conduct such other hearings as are necessary and in accordance with its own rules and regulations for the transaction of its business, or rules for conduct; and 
M.  To report its decisions and recommendations relating to the above matters, in writing to the city council. 
(Ord. 1778 N.S. § 9 (part), 2006: Ord. 1374 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 3.04 - PURCHASING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2285 N.S., § 1, adopted Oct. 17, 2018, amended Ch. 3.04 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 3.04, §§ 3.04.010—3.04.220, 3.04.240—3.04.250, 3.04.320—3.04.420, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2172 N.S., § 1, adopted Oct. 7, 2015. 
 
3.04.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to maximize the purchasing value of public funds in procurement and to provide safeguards for maintaining a procurement system of quality and integrity. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.020 - Application. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, this chapter applies to contracts for the procurement of supplies and services entered into by the city. When the procurement involves the expenditure of federal assistance or contract funds, the procurement shall be conducted in accordance with mandatory applicable federal law and regulations. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent city from complying with the terms and conditions of any grant, gift or bequest that is otherwise consistent with law. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.030 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Business" means any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture or any other private legal entity. 
B.  "City" means the city of Morgan Hill. 
C.  "Emergency" means a situation where immediate action is required to preserve the public peace, health and safety and/or to avoid severe degradation of a city facility. 
D.  "Local business" means a business that has its headquarters, distribution point or locally-owned franchise located in or having a street address within the city limit for at least six months immediately prior to the request for quotations and holds all required business licenses and other approvals by the city of Morgan Hill. 
E.  "Local offeror" means a consultant or service provider that has its headquarters, distribution point or locally-owned franchise located in or having a street address within the Morgan Hill Unified School District Boundary for at least six months immediately prior to the request for quotations and holds all required business licenses and other approvals by the city of Morgan Hill. 
F.  "Person" means any business, individual, union, committee, club, other organization or group of individuals. 
G.  "Post consumer" means a finished material that would have been disposed of as a solid waste, having completed its life cycle as a consumer item. This would include old newspapers, magazines, boxes, office waste paper, etc. 
H.  "Procurement" means the buying, purchasing, renting, leasing or other acquisition of any supplies or services. Procurement also includes all functions that pertain to the obtaining of any supplies or services, including specifications, description of requirements, selection and solicitation of sources, preparation and awards of contracts and contractual administration. 
I.  "Public project" means a project governed by Section 20161 of the California Public Contract Code. 
J.  "Recycled paper" means paper that contains, in accordance with Presidential Executive Order 12873, a minimum of thirty percent post-consumer materials. 
K.  "Services" means the performance of work by an independent contractor of the city; provided, however, services specifically exclude employee services and exclude the performance of work for "public projects." Services specifically includes all professional services, such as attorneys, physicians, consultants, teachers, trainers, architects, engineers, landscape architects, construction managers, environmental, land surveyors, appraisers, accountants and financial advisers, as well as other professional services such as insurance brokers and bankers; nonprofessional services such as cleaning and maintenance; and any "public works" not within the definition of "public projects." 
L.  "Specification" means any description of the physical or functional characteristics or of the nature of a supply, service or construction item. It may include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing or preparing a supply or service for delivery. 
M.  "Supplies" means all personal property (including, but not limited to, equipment and materials) except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
N.  "Surplus supplies" means supplies that are worn out, obsolete or unsuitable for city use. 
O.  "Total amount" means total price charged for a supply, including tax, shipping and handling and any other associated charges. 
P.  "Total taxable amount" means total price for a supply on which sales taxes are charged. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.040 - Purchasing officer—Office established. 
The city manager, or his/her designee, shall serve as the purchasing officer of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.050 - Purchasing officer—Duties. 
A.  In accordance with this chapter, the purchasing officer shall have the following duties and powers: 
1.  To procure or supervise the procurement of all supplies and services needed by the city, except as otherwise provided in this chapter; 
2.  To sell, trade or otherwise dispose of surplus supplies belonging to the city to the extent and in the manner allowed by law; and 
3.  To establish and maintain programs for specifications development, contract administration and inspection and acceptance, in cooperation with the city department(s) using the supplies and services; 
4.  To call for bids or give notice to any and all persons or publish in any case even if the same is not required by the terms of this chapter; and is empowered to invite bids by telephone, electronic mail, facsimile or by mail when deemed in the best interests of the city; and 
5.  To keep a record of all purchases made and the bids, if any, submitted thereon. Said records shall be open to public inspection at all times during regular business hours. 
B.  Direct supervision over the city's central stores. General supervision over all other inventories of supplies belonging to the city may be assigned by the purchasing officer to another city employee or other individual or business. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.060 - Operational procedures. 
Consistent with this chapter, the purchasing officer may adopt operational procedures relating to the execution of duties. At a minimum, the purchasing officer shall adopt procedures relating to the preparation of purchase orders, competitive pricing requirements for purchases of less than five thousand dollars, the determination that sufficient funds are available for the purchase, verification that the order received is correct and meets the city's quality standards and establish policies relating to environmental procurement and purchases relating to brand name products. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.070 - Delegation. 
The purchasing officer may delegate authority to purchase supplies or services and to dispose of surplus supplies to other city officials, if such delegation is deemed necessary for the effective procurement or disposal of those items and approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.080 - Consideration of bids and basis of awards. 
Purchases shall be awarded on the basis of the bid or bids most advantageous to the city. In determining whether a bid is most advantageous to the city, in addition to price, the purchasing officer, city manager or city council may consider the following: 
1.  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required; 
2.  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
3.  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder; 
4.  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services; 
5.  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with applicable laws and ordinances; 
6.  The sufficiency of the financial resources and the ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service; 
7.  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or contractual services to the particular use required; 
8.  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract; and 
9.  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.090 - Justification for acceptance of a high bid. 
In cases where the purchasing officer makes the purchase and, in the opinion of the purchasing officer, the most advantageous bid is not the lowest bid, the purchasing officer shall prepare and place on file with the department making the purchase, a written statement of his/her opinion and the reason therefor. Such statement shall be open to public inspection at all times during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.100 - Local business price preference. 
A local business shall be given a one percent preference (calculated on the total taxable amount of the purchase), over a bidder that is not a local business. In cases where considering this one percent preference, two or more bids are judged to be equal on the basis of price, quality and service, the local business bidder shall be preferred. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.101 - Local business quotation preference. 
If the lowest price submitted for a purchase is not from a local business, local businesses shall be given a preference in the procurement process if they are otherwise responsive and responsible and within five percent of the lowest price originally submitted by a non-local business. The local business's price will be tabulated as if it were up to five percent lower than the total figure actually set forth in the submitted bid, sufficient to establish the re-tabulated bid as the low bid. The local business would then be awarded the contract at the newly calculated price (deducting the five percent). Local businesses shall have the choice when submitting a bid whether or not they would be willing to reduce their price up to five percent in order to make them the low bidder. The city, when seeking bids or proposals, will notify bidders or proposers that the bids or proposals will be evaluated on the basis of a local preference of five percent of the bid or proposal price. The local business must affirmatively mark on the bid submittal that it would like to apply the local preference. The preference described in this section will be applied in addition to the one percent preference required by Section 3.04.100. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.110 - Purchases in the amount of five thousand dollars or more must be in writing. 
No award for supplies or services where the total amount or value is five thousand dollars or more shall be deemed to be an acceptance of any offer or bid unless and until the same is reduced to writing and signed by the purchasing officer and dispatched to the vendor or purchaser. For purchases under five thousand dollars, informal bidding procedures should be utilized whenever beneficial to the city; provided, however, that written documentation of the amount owed by city shall be obtained prior to any payment by city. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.120 - Informal purchases in an amount of up to ten thousand dollars. 
Where the total amount or value of a purchase is ten thousand dollars, or less, the city manager may delegate the authority to purchase to the department head for the department making the purchase, provided that the department head conducts and completes an informal price checking process through telephone or mail inquiry, comparison of prices on the Internet, or similar process and shall document the information received in writing. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the department head may elect to make any purchase in a total amount or value of up to ten thousand dollars (except as the laws of the state otherwise require) in the following cases: 
1.  By department head approval that said purchase may be made cooperatively, as provided in Section 3.04.180 of this chapter, upon a determination that informal price checking would not be likely to result in a lower price to the city from a responsible bidder or would cause unnecessary expense or delay under the circumstances; or 
2.  By department head approval upon a determination that there is only one source for the required supply or service based on a review of available sources by the purchasing officer and written recommendation therefor. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.130 - Informal purchases in an amount over ten thousand dollars and up to twenty-five thousand dollars. 
Where the total amount or value of a purchase is twenty-five thousand dollars, or less, the purchase may be made by the purchasing officer, provided that the purchasing officer shall conduct and complete an informal price checking process through telephone or mail inquiry, comparison of prices on the Internet, or similar process and shall document the information received in writing. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the purchasing officer may elect to make any purchase in a total amount or value of up to twenty-five thousand dollars (except as the laws of the state otherwise require) in the following cases: 
1.  By purchasing officer approval that said purchase may be made cooperatively, as provided in Section 3.04.180 of this chapter, upon a determination that informal price checking would not be likely to result in a lower price to the city from a responsible bidder or would cause unnecessary expense or delay under the circumstances; or 
2.  By purchasing officer approval upon a determination that there is only one source for the required supply or service based on a review of available sources by the purchasing officer and written recommendation therefor. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.140 - Competitive bid purchases over twenty-five thousand dollars and up to the amount authorized to be performed by the employees of a public agency for public projects per State of California's Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act. 
Where the total amount or value of a purchase is twenty-five thousand dollars or more, but not over the amount authorized to be performed by the employees of a public agency for public projects per State of California's Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act, the purchase shall be made by the city manager through competitive bid, upon notice as required by Section 3.04.190 of this chapter, provided however, the city manager may elect to make any purchase in any amount (except as the laws of the state otherwise require) in the following cases: 
1.  By city manager approval upon a determination that competitive bids upon notice would not be likely to result in a lower price to the city from a responsible bidder or would cause unnecessary expense or delay under the circumstances; 
2.  By city manager approval that said purchase may be made cooperatively, as provided in Section 3.04.180 of this chapter, upon a determination that competitive bids upon notice would not be likely to result in a lower price to the city from a responsible bidder or would cause unnecessary expense or delay under the circumstances; 
3.  By city manager approval upon a determination that the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety requires said purchase to be made without competitive bids upon notice; or 
4.  By city manager approval upon a determination that there is only one source for the required supply or service based on a review of available sources by the purchasing officer and written recommendation therefor. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.150 - Competitive bid purchases over the amount authorized to be performed by the employees of a public agency for public projects per State of California's Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act. 
Where the total amount or value involved is over the amount authorized to be performed by the employees of a public agency for public projects per State of California's Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act, the purchase shall be made by the city council through competitive bid, upon notice as required by Section 3.04.190 of this chapter, provided however, the city council may elect to make any purchase in any amount (except as the laws of the state otherwise require) in the following cases: 
1.  By affirmative vote of three city council members upon a determination that competitive bids upon notice would not be likely to result in a lower price to the city from a responsible bidder or would cause unnecessary expense or delay under the circumstances; 
2.  By majority vote of city council members present at a city council meeting that said purchase may be made cooperatively, as provided in Section 3.04.180 of this chapter, upon a determination that competitive bids upon notice would not be likely to result in a lower price to the city from a responsible bidder or would cause unnecessary expense or delay under the circumstances; 
3.  By majority vote of those present at a city council meeting upon a determination that the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety requires said purchase to be made without competitive bids upon notice; or 
4.  By majority vote of those present at a city council meeting upon a determination that there is only one source for the required supply or service based on a review of available sources by the purchasing officer and written recommendation therefor. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.160 - Emergency authority of purchasing officer. 
A.  In an emergency as defined in Section 3.04.030 where timely action by the city council is not possible, the purchasing officer may purchase supplies or services, even though the total amount thereof may exceed the amount authorized to be performed by the employees of a public agency for public projects per State of California's Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act, without competitive bids or notice. 
B.  At the next succeeding city council meeting, the purchasing officer shall submit to the city council a written report setting forth a statement of the circumstances of such emergency, a description of the supplies or services purchased and the prices thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.170 - Waiver of informalities—Rejection of bids. 
Where the purchasing officer, city manager or city council are required to make purchases upon competitive bids, said officer, manager or city council may waive any informalities or minor irregularities, or may reject any and all bids (anything contained in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding) if said officer, manager or city council, respectively, deems said rejection to be in the best interests of the city. Said rejection shall be at the sole discretion of the officer, manager or city council, as the case may be. Upon rejection of bids, the officer, manager or city council may: 
1.  Give subsequent notice for new competitive bids; 
2.  Postpone said purchase or disposal definitely or indefinitely; or 
3.  Elect to make the purchase without competitive bids, upon notice (and as if competitive bids, upon notice, had not been required in the first instance) in accordance with the authority granted by the various subsections of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.180 - Cooperative purchasing. 
The purchasing officer has the authority to join with other public jurisdictions in cooperative purchasing plans or programs, including, but not limited to California Communities Purchasing Program (CCPP), the California Department of General Services (CADGS), the California Multiple Award Schedule (CMAS), the National Association of Counties (NACo), or similar arrangements or plans, as determined by the purchasing officer to be in the city's best interests. 
The purchasing officer may either: (1) buy directly from a vendor at a price established by a competitive bid by another jurisdiction even if the city had not joined with the public agency in a cooperative purchase; or (2) compare bids among cooperative purchasing plans or programs and choose the bid that best matches the needs of the city. The purchasing officer shall not, however, shop the cooperative purchasing process bid to private vendors. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.190 - Competitive bids—Notice. 
Where notice is required, notice shall be given as follows: 
A.  The notice shall give such information as to the proposed purchase or disposal as the purchasing officer deems sufficient but shall include the following: 
1.  A distinct description of the supplies or services to be purchased or personal property to be disposed; 
2.  The location where bid forms, specifications, performance requirements, requests for proposals, or specific disposal requirements can be obtained for bidding; 
3.  Date, time and place of bid opening; 
4.  Whether bid deposits or bonds and faithful performance bonds will be required; and 
5.  A statement that the city has the authority to reject any and all bids and may waive any minor technicality or variance found in the bid document. 
B.  For purchases under Sections 3.04.140 or 3.04.150: 
1.  By publishing notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the city on at least one occasion at least ten days prior to the date set for the final receipt of bids, provided that publication may be made in any newspaper of general circulation in the county which the purchasing officer shall select if the publication schedule of all newspapers of general circulation in the city are such that notice by publication cannot be given in time; and 
2.  Posting on the city's website. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.200 - Competitive bids. 
Competitive bids shall be submitted in writing in a sealed envelope to the office of the city clerk no later than the final time and date for receipt of bids as set forth in the notice of publication and opened publicly. If authorized in the notice, bids also may be submitted by electronic mail or facsimile, provided however, that the entire document is received no later than the final time set for receipt of written bids. Any bid may be withdrawn by a written request signed by the bidder and received by the city clerk prior to the final time and date for the receipt of bids. 
1.  Opening. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. 
2.  Tabulation. A tabulation of all bids received shall be posted for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.210 - Bid deposits. 
When deemed necessary by the purchasing officer, city manager or city council, any bidder may be required to submit a bid security or bond in an amount determined by the purchasing officer, city manager or city council that represents the damage costs to the city should the bidder not be able to engage in a contract with the city as a result of the bidder's actions. A successful bidder (and surety, if a bond is furnished) shall be liable for all damages upon said bidder's failure to enter into a contract with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.220 - Faithful performance deposits. 
When deemed necessary by the purchasing officer, city manager or city council, any person entering into a contract with the city may be required to furnish a faithful performance and/or a time and materials deposit or bond in an amount determined by the purchasing officer, city manager or city council. Said person (and surety, if a bond is furnished) shall be liable for any damages upon said person's failure to faithfully perform the terms of his/her contract. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.230 - Reserved.  
3.04.240 - Consultant contracts. 
A.  The city council finds and declares that the competitive bid process is ill-suited for the selection of consultants. The request for proposal procedure set forth in Section 3.04.250 may be used if a determination is made by the officer or official responsible for the purchase — the purchasing officer, city manager or city council, respectively — that to do so would be in the best interest of the city in selecting the best qualified consultant. Consultants are required for professional or technical expertise and for matters requiring specialized abilities or a high degree of skill. Their numbers in relation to a particular skill or expertise required are comparatively limited. Where consultants are involved, the bidding process is not likely to result in a lower price to the city or eliminate unnecessary expense or delay. 
B.  The officer or official responsible for the purchase — the purchasing officer, city manager or city council, respectively — shall be empowered to engage a consultant (including, but not limited to, material testing service, construction inspection services, architectural, engineering, testing, land surveying, appraising, environmental, planning, financial, legal, development processing, governmental operations, special studies, construction project management, information technology and services graphic design and other services related thereto) without the necessity of an informal bid or competitive bid or notice thereof in the following circumstances and subject to the following criteria and conditions: 
1.  Subject to the delegation of the city manager, with department head approval if the consultant's total fee for services and supplies under the contract by which the consultant is engaged on a per project basis, including any amendments to the contract, does not exceed ten thousand dollars, so long as there exists a sufficient unencumbered appropriation in the fund against which the contract expense may be appropriately charged and provided further that any bifurcation of a purchase or contract into subunits or phases for the purpose of avoiding the maximum dollar amounts set forth in this section is prohibited; or 
2.  With city manager approval if the consultant's total fee for services and supplies under the contract by which the consultant is engaged on a per project basis, including any amendments to the contract, does not exceed the amount authorized to be performed by the employees of a public agency for public projects per State of California's Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act, so long as there exists a sufficient unencumbered appropriation in the fund against which the contract expense may be appropriately charged and provided further that any bifurcation of a purchase or contract into subunits or phases for the purpose of avoiding the maximum dollar amounts set forth in this section is prohibited; or 
3.  With city council approval if the consultant's total fee for services and supplies under the contract by which the consultant is engaged on a per project basis exceeds the amount authorized to be performed by the employees of a public agency for public projects per State of California's Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act. City council approval is not required for services in excess of the amount authorized to be performed by the employees of a public agency for public projects per State of California's Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act if the consultant's total fee for services and supplies is to provide environmental services for a project that will be paid for by a development processing project applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.245 - Non-consultant services contracts. 
A.  A services contract is a contract, with or without the furnishing of supplies or equipment, for work, labor or services including, but not limited to: 
1.  Maintenance of public buildings, streets, parks and playgrounds and other public improvements not governed by the provisions of the California Public Contract Code; 
2.  Repair, modification and maintenance of equipment; 
3.  Installation and maintenance of computer software; 
4.  Janitorial services, uniform cleaning, tree trimming, street sweeping, power washing and landscape maintenance; and 
5.  Leasing of personal property for use by the city. 
B.  Services contracts shall comply with the necessary informal bid, competitive bid process or request for proposal as set forth in Sections 3.04.080; 3.04.120; 3.04.130; 3.04.140; 3.04.150, and 3.04.250, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.250 - Request for proposals. 
A.  In lieu of competitive bidding, the officer or official responsible for the purchase — the purchasing officer, city manager or city council, respectively — may utilize the request for proposal method of purchasing supplies or services upon a determination that competitive bidding is not practical or advantageous to the city because of one or more of the following reasons: 
1.  Quality, capability, performance or qualification is overriding in relation to price; 
2.  Delivery, installation, service, maintenance, reliability or replacement is overriding in relation to price; 
3.  In the opinion of the purchasing officer, city manager or city council, respectively, the marketplace will respond better to a solicitation permitting a range of alternative proposals or evaluation and discussion of proposals before entering the contract; or 
4.  Any of the considerations set forth in Section 3.04.080 are overriding. 
B.  The identity of persons responding to the request for proposals and the content of proposals submitted to the city may be kept confidential during the process of negotiation and until a contract is awarded, if deemed necessary by the purchasing officer, city manager or city council to receive the best proposal. 
C.  The formats and procedures for requests for proposals shall be established by the purchasing officer. 
D.  The contract award shall be based upon the proposal determined by the purchasing officer, city manager or city council, respectively, to be most advantageous to the city, taking into consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals. 
E.  The purchasing officer, city manager or city council, respectively, may reject any and all proposals if such rejection is deemed to be in the best interests of the city and may thereupon direct that proposals be solicited or utilize any other purchasing method set forth in this section. 
F.  As provided in the request for proposals, discussions may be conducted with responsible offerors who submit proposals determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for award for the purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of, and conformance to, the solicitation requirements. Offerors shall be accorded equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals and such revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining the best and final offers. In conducting discussions, there shall be no disclosure of the identity of competing offerors, or of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.300 - Reserved.  
3.04.310 - Reserved.  
3.04.320 - Disposals of two thousand five hundred dollars or less. 
Except as otherwise provided by state law or city ordinance, the purchasing officer shall be empowered to dispose of personal property of the city which cannot be used by any department of the city, at public or private sale, or by renting, donating or destroying the same, (all with or without notice, competitive bid or necessity of posting bid bonds, at the purchasing officer's discretion, and upon such terms as said officer deems best) provided any single item of property involved does not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars in current market value. At the beginning of each fiscal year, the city council may adopt a list of acceptable non-profit organizations to which the city may donate. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.330 - Deposits for disposal of property. 
The purchasing officer may, in said officer's discretion, require that a deposit in the amount of the bid or any fraction thereof accompany each bid upon disposal of personal property. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.400 - Disposals of more than two thousand five hundred dollars. 
In the event any single item of property exceeds two thousand five hundred dollars in current market value, the city council may empower the purchasing officer to dispose of it (in accordance with the same terms and conditions, and subject to the same discretion and limitations as if it were under two thousand five hundred dollars in value). Alternatively, the city council may elect to sell, rent, donate or destroy the same in accordance with whatever provision and/or terms and conditions the city council may, in its discretion, elect. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
3.04.420 - Exclusions from chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply: 
1.  To public projects (governed by the provisions of the California Public Contract Code); 
2.  To franchises governed by the provisions of the California Public Utilities Code or other statutes of the state; 
3.  Where state or federal law requires a different procedure; 
4.  To franchises, rights and privileges granted for refuse disposal under Chapter 13.28, and the cable franchise under Chapter 5.20, of this code; 
5.  To the purchase of insurance; 
6.  To the leasing, purchase or sale of land or any interest therein; 
7.  To the hiring of, or contracting for, personnel (whether as temporary, seasonal or permanent employees); 
8.  To private construction contracts reviewed pursuant to Titles 17 or 18; and 
9.  To the purchase of utilities, including, but not limited to, telephone service, gas, electricity or water. 
(Ord. No. 2285 N.S., 10-17-2018)  
Chapter 3.08 - CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY* 
Sections: 
 
3.08.010 - Judicial review of administrative decisions. 
The provisions of Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the State of California or as amended shall be applicable in the city to decisions by the city, or by any officer, employee, board, commission or other agency of the city. As used in this section, "decision" means an adjudicatory administrative decision made, after hearing, suspending, demoting or dismissing an officer or employee, revoking or denying an application for a permit or a license, or denying an application for any retirement benefit or allowance. 
(Ord. 702 N.S. § 1 (III-6-1.01), 1984)  
3.08.020 - Presentation of claims—Prerequisite to suits or actions. 
A.  Claims against the city for money or damages which are exempted by Government Code Section 905 from Chapter 1 and Chapter 2 of Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the Government Code of the State of California, and which are not governed by any other statutes or regulations expressly related thereto, shall be governed by this section. A claim relating to such a cause of action shall be presented not later than one year after the accrual of the cause of action. Such claims shall be presented and processed as provided by Chapters 1 and 2 of Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the Government Code insofar as said provisions are not in conflict with this section. 
B.  No suit for money or damages may be brought against the city until a written claim therefor has been presented to the city council and has been acted upon or has been deemed to have been rejected by the city council, in accordance with this section. Pursuant to Chapter 5 of Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the Government Code, written agreements entered into by or in behalf of the city may provide all claims arising out of or related to the agreement must be presented not later than six months after the accrual of the cause of action, and such claims shall be governed by the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 964 N.S., 1990; Ord. 702 N.S. § 1 (III-6-1.02), 1984)  
Chapter 3.12 - TAX COLLECTION DUTIES TRANSFERRED 
Sections: 
 
3.12.010 - Transfer of tax collection duties to county—Statutory authority. 
The city council does, pursuant to the provisions of Section 51.500 et seq. of the Government Code of the state, transfers to the assessor, tax collector and treasurer of the county, the respective duties of the assessor, tax collector and treasurer of the city with respect to the functions of assessing for, levying and collecting municipal real and personal property taxes commencing with the fiscal year 1958-1959. Only those duties of the city treasurer necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter are transferred to the county treasurer, with all other duties of the city treasurer being reserved to him. 
(Ord. 76 N.S. § 1, 1957)  
3.12.020 - Transfer of tax collection duties to county—Duration. 
The particular officials of the county designated in Section 3.12.010 of this chapter, shall continue to perform the duties transferred to them until such time as the ordinance codified in this chapter may be repealed and a certified copy of the repealing ordinance shall be served upon the county auditor, tax collector and treasurer. In the event of such repeal, the duties transferred shall continue to be performed by the county officials designated until the taxes levied for the fiscal year in which the repealing ordinance may be enacted, have been fully collected and paid over to the treasurer of the city. 
(Ord. 76 N.S. § 2, 1957)  
3.12.030 - Compensation for city tax duties. 
The compensation to be paid to the county for the performance of the duties of assessing for, levying and collecting the municipal taxes of the city, as specified in this chapter, shall be fixed by agreement between the board of supervisors and the city council of the city, and shall not exceed the maximum amount set forth in Section 51.514 of the Government Code of the state. The agreement, subject to any amendments thereto, shall continue in effect from year to year until the ordinance codified in this chapter shall have been repealed. 
(Ord. 76 N.S. § 3, 1957)  
3.12.040 - County payments to city. 
The net amount of the taxes levied and collected by the county tax collector, after deducting the county's compensation for the services of its assessor, treasurer and tax collector, shall be paid to the city treasurer, who shall keep and disburse the same in accordance with the customs, practices and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. 76 N.S. § 4, 1957)  
3.12.050 - Limitations to city responsibility. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall serve to relieve the city assessor, tax collector or treasurer or their respective bondsmen, from any responsibility covered by their respective bonds for any act or omission occurring prior to such transfer or thereafter insofar as concerns duties to be performed by them subsequent to such transfer. Further, all of the city officials shall continue to perform their duties with respect to any and all municipal taxes heretofore levied but uncollected as the date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 76 N.S. § 5, 1957)  
3.12.060 - Certification date. 
On or before the first Monday of February 1958, the city shall serve a certified copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter on the county auditor, county tax collector and the county treasurer. 
(Ord. 76 N.S. § 6, 1957)  
Chapter 3.16 - DOCUMENTARY STAMP TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.16.010 - Short title—Statutory authority. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City." The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. 
(Ord. 223 N.S. § 1, 1967)  
3.16.020 - Administration in conformity with state statutes. 
The county recorder shall administer the provisions of this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. 223 N.S. § 9, 1967)  
3.16.030 - Tax imposed—Rate. 
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents for each five hundred dollars or fractional part thereof. 
(Ord. 777 N.S. § 1, 1986: Ord. 223 N.S. § 2, 1967)  
3.16.040 - Tax imposed—Applicability. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.16.030 of this chapter shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any deed, instrument or writing taken in lieu of foreclosure pursuant to Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11926 and meeting the requirements of Section 11926, and any deed, instrument or other writing which purports to transfer, divide or allocate community, quasi-community, or quasi-marital property assets between spouses for the purpose of effecting a division of community, quasi-community, or quasi-marital property which is required by a judgment decreeing a dissolution of the marriage or legal separation or any other judgment which meets the requirements of Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11927 shall be exempt and shall not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter with respect to any deed, instrument or writing to which they are a party. 
(Ord. 777 N.S. § 2, 1986: Ord. 223 N.S. § 3, 1967)  
3.16.050 - Tax imposed—Debt security excepted. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. 
(Ord. 223 N.S. § 4, 1967)  
3.16.060 - Exempt agencies. 
The United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia shall not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter with respect to any deed, instrument or writing to which it is a party. 
(Ord. 777 N.S. § 3, 1986: Ord. 223 N.S. § 5, 1967)  
3.16.070 - Exemption for plans of reorganization. 
A.  Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment: 
1.  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended; 
2.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; 
3.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or 
4.  Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected. 
B.  Subsections (a) through (d) of this section, inclusive, shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments or transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. 
(Ord. 223 N.S. § 6, 1967)  
3.16.080 - Exemption for Security and Exchange Commission orders. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if: 
A.  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935; 
B.  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; 
C.  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. 
(Ord. 223 N.S. § 7, 1967)  
3.16.090 - Exemption for transfer or termination of partnership. 
A.  In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if: 
1.  Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and 
2.  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
B.  If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
C.  Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of termination described in subsection B of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(Ord. 223 N.S. § 8, 1967)  
3.16.100 - Claims for refunds—State statutes adopted. 
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. 
(Ord. 223 N.S. § 10, 1967)  
3.16.110 - Effective date. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall become operative at 12:01 a.m., on January 1, 1968. 
(Ord. 223 N.S. § 11, 1967)  
3.16.120 - Copies to county recorder. 
Upon its adoption the city clerk shall file two certified copies of the ordinance codified in this chapter with the county recorder. 
(Ord. 223 N.S. § 12, 1967)  
Chapter 3.20 - SALES AND USE TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.20.010 - Short title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance." 
(Ord. 353 N.S. § B (part), 1973)  
3.20.020 - Purpose. 
The city council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions of this chapter be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
B.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
C.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes; 
D.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 353 N.S. § B (part), 1973)  
3.20.030 - Operative date. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1974. 
(Ord. 353 N.S. § B (part), 1973)  
3.20.040 - State statutes adopted. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 353 N.S. § B (part), 1973)  
3.20.050 - State statutes adopted—Limitations. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "state" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury or the Constitution of the state of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of the provisions of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the sale provisions of that code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. 353 N.S. § B (part), 1973)  
3.20.060 - Administration and operation—Contract with state. 
Prior to January 1, 1974, the operative date, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this chapter; provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 353 N.S. § B (part), 1973)  
3.20.070 - Rate. 
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be one percent. 
(Ord. 712 N.S. § 1, 1985: Ord. 353 N.S. § B (part), 1973)  
3.20.080 - Sales tax imposed. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.20.070 of this chapter of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the city on and after the operative date. 
(Ord. 353 N.S. § B (part), 1973)  
3.20.090 - Place of sale determined. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. 353 N.S. § B (part), 1973)  
3.20.100 - Additional permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 353 N.S. § B (part), 1973)  
3.20.110 - Use tax imposed. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.20.070 of this chapter of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. 353 N.S. § B (part), 1973)  
3.20.120 - Exclusions and exemptions—Generally. 
There shall be excluded from the measure of tax: 
A.  The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer; 
B.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county or city in the state; 
C.  The gross receipts from sales to, and the storage, use or other consumption of property purchased by, operators of common carriers and waterborne vessels to be used or consumed in the operation of such common carriers or waterborne vessels, principally outside the city; 
D.  The storage or use of tangible personal property in the transportation or transmission of persons, property or communications, or in the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity or in the manufacture, transmission or distribution of gas in intrastate, interstate or foreign commerce by public utilities which are regulated by the Public Utilities Commission of the state. 
(Ord. 353 N.S. § B (part), 1973)  
3.20.130 - Exclusions and exemptions—Operative January 1, 1984. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county or city in the state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws in the state, the United States or any foreign government. 
D.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of the state, the United States or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Ord. 652 N.S. § 1, 1983: Ord. 353 N.S. § B (part), 1973)  
3.20.140 - Exclusions and exemptions—Conditions of operability. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax. 
B.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county or city in the state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes. 
D.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax. 
E.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of the state, the United States or any foreign government. 
F.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of the state, the United States or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. 
(Ord. 652 N.S. § 2, 1983: Ord. 353 N.S. § B (part), 1973)  
3.20.150 - Operability date—Section 3.20.130. 
Section 3.20.130 of this chapter shall be operative January 1, 1984. 
(Ord. 652 N.S. § 3, 1983)  
3.20.160 - Operability date—Section 3.20.140. 
Section 3.20.140 of this chapter shall be operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the state which amends Section 6202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code or which repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202 as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983. 
(Ord. 652 N.S. § 4, 1983)  
3.20.170 - Exclusions and exemptions—Alternating operability. 
A.  Sections 3.20.130 and 3.20.140 of this chapter shall become effective on January 1st of the year following the year in which the State Board of Equalization adopts an assessment ratio for state-assessed property which is identical to the ratio which is required for local assessments by Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, at which time Section 3.20.120 of this chapter shall become operative. 
B.  In the event that Sections 3.20.130 and 3.20.140 of this chapter become operative and the State Board of Equalization subsequently adopts an assessment ratio for the state-assessed property which is higher than the ratio which is required for local assessments by Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, Section 3.20.120 of this chapter shall become operative on the first day of the month next following the month in which such higher ratio is adopted, at which time Sections 3.20.130 and 3.20.140 shall be inoperative until the first day of the month following the month in which the board again adopts an assessment ratio for state-assessed property which is identical to the ratio required for local assessments by Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, at which time Sections 3.20.130 and 3.20.140 shall against become operative and Section 3.20.120 shall become inoperative. 
(Ord. 353 N.S. § B (part), 1973)  
3.20.180 - Amendments to state statutes. 
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. 353 N.S. § B (part), 1973)  
3.20.190 - Enjoining collection prohibited. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. 353 N.S. § B (part), 1973)  
3.20.200 - Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 4, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 4, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 3.20.200 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 3.20.200 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 353 N.S., § B(part), adopted in 1973; and Ord. 712 N.S., § 2, adopted in 1985.  
Chapter 3.21 - USE TAX INCENTIVE PROGRAM 
 
3.21.010 - Eligibility for use tax rebate. 
Any person or entity doing business in the City of Morgan Hill is eligible for the use tax rebate described herein if all of the following conditions have been satisfied: 
A.  The person or business is enrolled in the city's use tax incentive program. 
B.  The person or entity has obtained a State of California Use Tax Direct Payment Permit pursuant to California Revenue and Taxation Code Section 7051.3, or a Sub Sellers Permit pursuant to State Board of Equalization Operations Memo No. 1023 ("permit"). 
C.  The City of Morgan Hill is properly identified in the permit as the jurisdiction in which the property acquired under the permit is first functionally used, stored or consumed, or sold from Morgan Hill in business to business transactions. 
(Ord. No. 2250 N.S., § 1, 6-28-2017)  
3.21.020 - Rebate claim procedure. 
A.  Within forty-five days after the close of the state's tax reporting quarter, an eligible person or entity doing business in Morgan Hill may file a rebate claim with the city's finance director, on a form provided by the finance director. 
B.  The claim must contain evidence of the amount of the use Tax paid to the state. The director may request from the claimant any other information necessary to substantiate the rebate claim. 
(Ord. No. 2250 N.S., § 1, 6-28-2017)  
3.21.030 - Calculation and issuance of use tax rebate. 
A.  The finance director shall issue the rebate within ninety days of verification that the city received the correct amount of funds from the state. The use tax rebate shall be based upon the following schedule: 
Net New Use Tax Received by the City of Morgan Hill (4 consecutive quarters) 	Rebate Percentage 
0—$100,000 	20% 
$100,001—$200,000 	25% 
$200,001 and greater 	30% 
 
B.  The rebate shall be paid by check directly to the claimant but shall be increased or decreased in accordance with any adjustment made by the state to a prior use tax payment by the claimant. 
C.  Upon enrollment in the use tax incentive program, the city will determine the baseline use tax received by the city from the taxpayer as follows: 
1.  For direct payment permittees, by averaging the amount of tax received by the city from that taxpayer over the twelve quarters prior to enrollment; 
2.  For sub sellers permittees, by averaging the amount of tax received from that construction site over the twelve quarters prior to enrollment. 
D.  "Net new use tax", for the purposes of this chapter, shall mean the difference between the amount of taxes actually received by the city resulting from the taxpayer's permit and the baseline amount as calculated for the taxpayer upon enrollment in the use tax incentive program. 
E.  The rebate will be paid quarterly based on twenty percent of the net new use tax received in each quarter. After four consecutive quarters, the city will adjust the percentage if warranted, based on the total net new use tax received over the prior four quarters. The rebate amount for the fourth consecutive quarter will reflect the amount attributed to the adjusted percentage, if applicable. 
F.  For the purposes of this calculation, the quarters are based on the taxpayer's tax reporting calendar, but the calculation is based on the four consecutive quarters immediately following enrollment in the use tax incentive program. 
G.  Once the rebate has been provided for the fourth consecutive quarter, the calculation of the rebate for the next four quarters will begin again. 
(Ord. No. 2250 N.S., § 1, 6-28-2017)  
3.21.040 - Amendment or discontinuance. 
The city reserves the right to amend or discontinue any provision of this use tax incentive program without voter approval. Any amendment shall be made by ordinance and shall be applicable to any transaction made subsequent to the effective date of any ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2250 N.S., § 1, 6-28-2017)  
Chapter 3.24 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2179 N.S., § 1, adopted Dec. 2, 2015, amended Chapter 3.24 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 3.24, §§ 3.24.010—3.24.180, pertained to transient occupancy tax. See Code Comparative Table for a detailed history of derivation. 
 
3.24.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  "Hotel" means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodginghouse, roominghouse, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location located outside a mobile home park and not occupied by employees, operator or owner of said mobile home park, or other similar structure or portion thereof. 
B.  "Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portions thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
C.  "Operator" means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
D.  "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
E.  "Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor, or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property, and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
F.  "Tax administrator" means the assistant city manager for administrative services, or designee, to be charged with administration of the tax. 
G.  "Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license, or other agreement for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty days has expired, unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be considered. 
(Ord. No. 2179 N.S., § 1, 12-2-2015)  
3.24.020 - Tax imposed—Amount. 
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of ten percent, effective April 20, 1991, of the rent charged by the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city, which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the city . 
(Ord. No. 2179 N.S., § 1, 12-2-2015)  
3.24.030 - Tax imposed—Exemptions. 
A.  No tax shall be imposed upon: 
1.  Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax provided in this chapter; 
2.  Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty. 
B.  No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2179 N.S., § 1, 12-2-2015)  
3.24.040 - Collection of tax—Operator's duties. 
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2179 N.S., § 1, 12-2-2015)  
3.24.050 - Registration—Required—Contents. 
Within thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or within thirty days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register such hotel with the tax administrator and obtain a transient occupancy registration certificate to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. The certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
A.  The name of the operator; 
B.  The address of the hotel; 
C.  The date upon which the certificate was issued; 
D.  The following statement: 
This transient occupancy registration certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the transient occupancy tax ordinance by registering with the tax administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the transient occupancy tax and remitting said tax to the tax administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including, but not limited to, those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department, or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2179 N.S., § 1, 12-2-2015)  
3.24.060 - Recordkeeping of collection and payment. 
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city. The tax administrator shall have the right to inspect said records at all reasonable times. 
The records maintained by the operator under this section shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(a)  Daily record of room occupancies. 
(b)  A written record of each occupancy charge for which an initial exemption is claimed, on a form to be provided by the city pursuant to Section 3.24.030 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2179 N.S., § 1, 12-2-2015)  
3.24.070 - Reporting and remittance requirements. 
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the month the tax was received, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by him or her, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if deemed necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and the tax administrator may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator and the use of taxes collected for any other purpose is a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2179 N.S., § 1, 12-2-2015)  
3.24.080 - Audit and recovery of costs. 
The city may audit those records kept by the operator as required by this chapter at any time upon reasonable notice to the operator. If the audit reveals an underpayment of taxes in excess of ten percent of the total amount owed to the city for any consecutive three-month period during the audit period, the operator shall pay the city actual costs to perform the audit as well as the full amounts, plus penalties and interest of tax, that the audit reveals should have been remitted to city pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2179 N.S., § 1, 12-2-2015)  
3.24.090 - Failure to collect and report tax—Determination by tax administrator. 
If any operator fails or refuses to collect such tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of such tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner deemed best to obtain facts and information on which to base the estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator procures such facts and information upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he or she shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at the last known place of address. Such operator may, within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice, make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest, and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days' written notice in the manner prescribed in this chapter to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in said notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest, and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest, and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing, the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in this chapter of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest, and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days, unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.24.150 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2179 N.S., § 1, 12-2-2015)  
3.24.100 - Delinquent payment—Penalty. 
Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 2179 N.S., § 1, 12-2-2015)  
3.24.110 - Continued delinquency—Penalty. 
Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed. 
(Ord. No. 2179 N.S., § 1, 12-2-2015)  
3.24.120 - Fraud—Penalty. 
If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in Sections 3.24.090 and 3.24.100 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2179 N.S., § 1, 12-2-2015)  
3.24.130 - Delinquent payment—Interest. 
In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
(Ord. No. 2179 N.S., § 1, 12-2-2015)  
3.24.140 - Penalties merged with tax. 
Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of Sections 3.24.090 through 3.24.130 of this chapter shall become a part of the tax required by this chapter to be paid. 
(Ord. No. 2179 N.S., § 1, 12-2-2015)  
3.24.150 - Tax deemed debt to city—Actions to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. 
(Ord. No. 2179 N.S., § 1, 12-2-2015)  
3.24.160 - Appeal procedure. 
A.  Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest, and penalties, if any, may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his or her last known place of address. 
B.  The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed in this chapter for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. 
(Ord. No. 2179 N.S., § 1, 12-2-2015)  
3.24.170 - Refund and claim procedure. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest, or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section, provided a claim in writing therefore, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years of the date of payment. 
B.  An operator may claim a refund of the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received, when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator, that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that a refund shall not be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
C.  A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the city, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
D.  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2179 N.S., § 1, 12-2-2015)  
3.24.180 - Judicial remedies—Conditions precedent. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against the city or an officer thereof to prevent or enjoin the collection of taxes sought to be collected pursuant to this chapter, and payment of all tax, interest, and penalties shall be required as a condition precedent to seeking judicial review of any tax liability. 
(Ord. No. 2179 N.S., § 1, 12-2-2015)  
3.24.190 - Unlawful acts. 
A.  It is unlawful for any operator or other person to do any of the following: 
1.  Fail or refuse to register as required in this chapter; 
2.  Fail to furnish any return required to be made; 
3.  Fail or refuse to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator; 
4.  Render a false or fraudulent return or claim; or 
5.  Fail to remit the full amount of tax collected. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person required to make, render, sign, or verify any report or claim as required by this chapter to make any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due. 
(Ord. No. 2179 N.S., § 1, 12-2-2015; Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 5, 5-2-2018)  
3.24.200 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed six months; or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2179 N.S., § 1, 12-2-2015)  
Chapter 3.32 - FEES 
Sections: 
 
3.32.010 - Annexations. 
The fee due upon annexing any parcel or parcels of land to the city as part of one proceeding shall be determined by resolution of the city council. The fee shall be due upon filing the application, but the fees due the state are not due until the annexation has been completed and certified by the Secretary of State. No part of these fees shall be returnable except as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 516 N.S. § A (part), 1980)  
3.32.020 - Appeals. 
Any discretionary decision by the planning commission, city engineer or community development director may be referred to the city council for resolution of grievances by any concerned citizen upon submission of a written application for appeal and the required appeal fee to be determined by resolution of the city council. The appeal fee shall be submitted to the city clerk within the time period prescribed by ordinance for each entitlement in question. 
(Ord. 516 N.S. § A (part), 1980)  
3.32.030 - Certificate of compliance. 
A written statement issued by the community development director verifying that real property in question complies with the provisions of the State Map Act and local ordinances enacted thereto. The certificate of compliance shall be filed with the county recorder. Fees necessary to cover the cost of issuance and recording of such certificate are established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 516 N.S. § A (part), 1980)  
3.32.040 - Encroachment permits. 
All persons required to obtain an encroachment permit from the city under any applicable ordinance shall pay the fee as determined by resolution of the city council as a condition to obtaining a permit. 
(Ord. 516 N.S. § A (part), 1980)  
3.32.050 - Environmental assessments. 
An "environmental assessment" means a preliminary environmental analysis by the lead agency to determine whether a negative declaration or environmental impact report must be prepared (14 California Administrative Code Section 15029.5). Processing of the environmental assessment is initiated by the applicant for a project by submitting a completed environmental assessment application form and the required fee as determined by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 516 N.S. § A (part), 1980)  
3.32.060 - Environmental impact reports (EIR's). 
The fee for filing an EIR required by state law or the city's designated officer shall be determined by resolution of the city council. No part of this fee shall be returnable except as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. 516 N.S. § A (part), 1980)  
3.32.070 - General plan amendments. 
All changes to the adopted general plan of the city and all elements therein shall be made by an amendment procedure involving submission of a general plan amendment application and the required fee as determined by resolution of the city council. The fee and application are to be submitted to the community development department and shall be processed by the department in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act and California State Government Code. 
(Ord. 516 N.S. § A (part), 1980)  
3.32.080 - Inspection of public works project. 
All applicants and developers who install improvements on public property such as streets, sidewalks, utilities, etc., which require inspection by the city engineer or department of public works prior to acceptance, shall pay a fee determined by resolution of the city council based on the city engineer's estimate of the project. 
(Ord. 516 N.S. § A (part), 1980)  
3.32.090 - Lot line adjustments. 
A lot line adjustment between two or more adjacent parcels where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created, provided the lot line adjustment is approved by the local agency or advisory agency. The fee shall be determined by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 516 N.S. § A (part), 1980)  
3.32.100 - Records of survey. 
A survey map prepared by a surveyor or engineer registered in the state meeting requirements for final maps pursuant to the State Subdivision Map Act to be recorded with the county recorder. Fees necessary to cover the cost of review and recordation of the record of survey shall be collected by the city engineer in the amount prescribed by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 516 N.S. § A (part), 1980)  
3.32.110 - Rezoning or prezoning. 
The filing fee for each application for a rezoning under Title 10 of this code or a prezoning pursuant to the California Government Code shall be determined by resolution of the city council for each acre or major fraction thereof. No part of the fee shall be returnable except as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. 516 N.S. § A (part), 1980)  
3.32.120 - Site reviews. 
The filing fee for each site review shall be determined by resolution of the city council. A "site review" means any application for a building permit which must be reviewed by the planning commission or city council under applicable laws. No part of such fee imposed by this section shall be returnable. 
(Ord. 516 N.S. § A (part), 1980)  
3.32.130 - Street and parking lot inspections. 
All applicants and developers shall pay to the city a fee determined by resolution of the city council for the inspection of a street or sidewalk or a parking lot where compaction tests are required and where this improvement is not a part of another project requiring fees to be paid under Section 3.32.080 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 516 N.S. § A (part), 1980)  
3.32.140 - Subdivision maps. 
The filing fee for subdivision maps (parcel map and tentative map) shall be determined by resolution of the city council. No part of the fees imposed by this section shall be returnable. 
(Ord. 516 N.S. § A (part), 1980)  
3.32.150 - Temporary use permits. 
Uses permitted subject to a temporary use permit are those temporary uses which are required for the proper functioning of the community or are temporarily required in the process of establishing a permitted use, or constructing a public facility. Such uses shall be so conducted that they will not be detrimental in any way to the surrounding properties or to the community. This temporary use permit is referred to as a special permit in Section 6.36.060 of this code. The fee shall be determined by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 516 N.S. § A (part), 1980)  
3.32.160 - Use permits. 
The filing fee for a use permit under Title 18 of this code shall be determined by resolution of the city council. No part of said fee shall be returnable except as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. 516 N.S. § A (part), 1980)  
3.32.165 - Entertainment permits. 
All applicants for an entertainment permit shall pay a permit fee. The fee shall apply to the dates of the specific occasion for which the application is made or if the application is for a continuous permit, to the first year or portion thereof during which the permit has been granted, and shall be renewed each year thereafter at the same time as the permittee's business license is renewed. Fees are established to cover part of the cost of the investigation and processing of applications and shall not be refundable. The annual permit fee under Title 5 of this code shall be determined by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 1379 N.S. § 2, 1998)  
3.32.170 - Variances. 
The filing fee for a variance under Title 18 of this code shall be determined by resolution of the city council. No part of such fee shall be returnable except as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. 516 N.S. § A (part), 1980)  
3.32.180 - Williamson Act applications (Land Conservation Act of 1964). 
The fee required for Williamson Act zoning shall be determined by resolution of the city council. All filings shall be submitted prior to December 15th of each year. No part of the fee imposed by this section shall be returnable. 
(Ord. 516 N.S. § A (part), 1980)  
3.32.190 - Refunds. 
Whenever an application is withdrawn prior to final approval, the payor shall be entitled to a partial refund of fees for any costs not yet incurred for processing the application. If the application is withdrawn after any formal action or administrative approval, then no part of the fee shall be refunded. 
(Ord. 1415 N.S. § 33, 1998: Ord. 516 N.S. § A (part), 1980)  
3.32.200 - Payment required. 
It shall be unlawful for any employee of the city or any of its officers to act upon any of the applications set forth in this article until all the fees provided for in this article have been paid in full. No such application shall be deemed to have been duly filed until the filing fee imposed by this article has been paid. 
(Ord. 516 N.S. § A (part), 1980)  
Chapter 3.40 - GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND 
Sections: 
 
3.40.010 - Created—Statutory authority. 
To comply with the provisions of Article 5 of Chapter 1 of Division 1, and Chapter 3, Division 3 of the Streets and Highways Code of the state, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the "special gas tax street improvement fund." 
(Ord. 768 N.S. § 1, 1986: Ord. 10 N.S. § 1, 1936)  
3.40.020 - Source of funds—Disposition. 
All moneys received by the city from the state under the provision of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein for, or the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways other than state highways shall be paid into the gas tax street improvement fund. 
(Ord. 768 N.S. § 2, 1986: Ord. 10 N.S. § 2, 1936)  
3.40.030 - Expenditure restrictions. 
All moneys in the gas tax street improvement fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to all of the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division 1, and Chapter 3, Division 3 of the Streets and Highways Code. 
(Ord. 768 N.S. § 3, 1986: Ord. 10 N.S. § 3, 1936)  
Chapter 3.48 - INVESTMENT OF CITY FUNDS 
Sections: 
 
3.48.010 - Statement of policy. 
The new policy on investment of city funds adopted by the city council on August 1, 1984, shall hereinafter be used for investment of city moneys. 
(Ord. 697 N.S. § A, 1984)  
Chapter 3.50 - FEE AND SERVICE CHARGE REVENUE/COST COMPARISON SYSTEM 
Sections: 
 
3.50.010 - Intent. 
Pursuant to Article XIIIB of the California Constitution, it is the intent of the city council to require the ascertainment and recovery of costs reasonably borne from fees and charges levied therefor in providing the regulation, products or services hereinafter enumerated in this chapter. 
(Ord. 880 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988)  
3.50.020 - Delegation of authority—Direction to city manager. 
A.  The city manager is delegated the authority and directed to adjust fees and charges to recover the percentage of costs reasonably borne in providing the regulation, products or services enumerated in this chapter in the percentage of costs reasonably borne and on the schedule of fee and service charge rate review and revision as hereinafter established in this chapter. 
B.  "Costs reasonably borne" shall be as defined in Section 3.50.030. In adjusting fees and charges, the city manager shall act in an administrative and ministerial capacity and shall consider only the standards and criteria established by this chapter. 
(Ord. 880 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988)  
3.50.030 - Costs reasonably borne defined. 
"Costs reasonably borne," as used and ordered to be applied in this chapter, are to consist of the following elements: 
A.  All applicable direct costs including, but not limited to salaries, wages, overtime, employee fringe benefits, services and supplies, maintenance and operation expenses, contracted services, special supplies and any other direct expenses. 
B.  All applicable indirect costs including, but not restricted to, building maintenance and operations, equipment maintenance and operations, communications expenses, computer costs, printing and reproduction, insurance premiums and self-insurance payments and like expenses when distributed on an accounted and documented rational proration system. 
C.  Fixed asset recovery expenses, consisting of depreciation of fixed assets and additional fixed asset expense recovery charges calculated on the current estimated cost of replacement, divided by the approximate life expectancy of the fixed asset. A further additional charge to make up the difference between book value depreciation not previously recovered and reserved in cash and the full cost of replacement, which also shall be calculated and considered a cost and reserved in cash so as to recover such unrecovered costs between book value and cost of replacement over the remaining life of the asset. 
D.  General overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the expenses of the city council, city manager, city clerk, city attorney, personnel, finance department, cable TV and telephone system and switchboard operation, insurance coverage and other unallocated miscellaneous expenses and all other staff and support service provided to the entire city organization as now organized and as it may be organized at any time in the future. 
Overhead shall be prorated between tax-financed services and fee-financed services on the basis of such percentage so that each of taxes and fees and charges shall proportionately defray such overhead costs. 
E.  Departmental overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the cost of each department head and his or her supporting expenses as enumerated in subsections A, B and C of this section. 
F.  Debt service costs, consisting of repayment of principal, payment of interest and trustee fees and administrative expenses for all applicable bond, certificate or securities issues or loans. Any required coverage factors of added reserves beyond basic debt service costs also shall be considered a cost if required by covenant within any securities ordinance, resolution, indenture or general law applicable to the city. 
(Ord. 880 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988)  
3.50.040 - Schedule of fees and service charges. 
A.  The city manager and each city department head, under the direction of the city manager, shall review the fees and service charges listed in Schedule 3.50.040, on the schedule of frequency listed in this section and set and adjust the fee or charge schedule so as to recover the listed percentage of costs reasonably borne necessary to provide the listed regulation, products or services and to take all actions necessary to accomplish and to carry out the policy of the city council established by this chapter. 
B.  A minimum fee of ten dollars shall be charged in all instances except in the cases of item numbers 59, 68, 118, 134 and 139 in Schedule 3.50.040. 
C.  The hereinabove services as listed in this section shall be as defined in that certain document entitled "Cost Recovery Study Findings, City of Morgan Hill, California," dated May 2002, by DMG Maximus, and as updated periodically by city staff. 
D.  All fees and charges set pursuant to this section shall take effect sixty days after the city manager signs an executive order stipulating that all provisions of this section have been complied with and no written appeal has been filed. 
E.  The schedule of frequency of rate adjustments may be varied by the city manager to adjust revenues sufficient to meet debt service coverage requirements of any bond, certificate or ordinance, resolution, indenture, contract or action under which securities have been issued by the city which contain any coverage factor requirement. 
F.  The schedule of frequency of rate adjustments may be varied by the city manager if, in his judgment and that of the requesting department head, a gross inequity would be perpetrated by the existing rate schedule on a new and unanticipated event. 
Schedule 3.50.040 
Regulation, Product or Service 	Percentage of Costs 
Reasonably Borne to 
Be Recovered 	Review Schedule 
I. DEVELOPMENT SERVICES 		
 1. Building Plan Checking 	100% 	Biennial 
 1A. Fire—Sprinkler Fees 	100% 	Biennial 
 2. Construction Inspection 	100% 	Biennial 
 2A. (Not Used) 		
 2B. Address Numbering 	None 	Biennial 
 2C. Address Renumbering 	None 	Biennial 
 2D. Street Name Change Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 3. Sign Permit Review and Inspection 	100% 	Biennial 
 3A. Sign Copy Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 4. Building Compliance Inspection 	100% 	Biennial 
 5. Post Fire Building Inspection 	100% 	Biennial 
 6. Building Record Check 	100% 	Biennial 
 6A. Preliminary Building Code Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 7. Tentative Parcel Map Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 8. Tentative Subdivision Map Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 9. Reversion to Acreage Permits 	100% 	Biennial 
 10. Lot Line Adjustment (CD) 	100% 	Biennial 
 11. Architectural and Site Review Plan 	100% 	Biennial 
 11A. Plan Detail Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 12. Site Plan Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 12A. Landscape District Plan Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 13. Conceptual Plan Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 14. Administrative Development Approval Amendment 	100% 	Biennial 
 15. Development Approval Amendment Review (Non Admin.) 	100% 	Biennial 
 15A. Development Approval Amendment Review (Admin.) 	100% 	Biennial 
 16. Uniform Sign Program Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 17. Time Extension Review—Non Admin.  	100% 	Biennial 
 17A. Time Extension Review—Admin.  	100% 	Biennial 
 18. Preliminary Plan Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 18A. Preliminary Development Fee Calc.  	None 	Biennial 
 19. Conditional Use Permit Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 20. Variance Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 20A. Variance Review—Minor Exceptions 	100% 	Biennial 
 21. Temporary Use Permit Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 22. (Not Used) 		
 23. Planned Development Overlay Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 24. Planned Development Overlay Amendment Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 25. General Plan Review and Revision 	100% 	Biennial 
 26. Annexation Processing 	100% 	Biennial 
 27. Zoning Amendment Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 28. Zoning Text Amendment Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 29. Urban Service Area Amendment Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 30. Initial Environmental Assessment Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 31. Expanded Initial Environmental Assessment 	100% 	Biennial 
 32. Environmental Impact Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 33—34. (Not Used) 		
 35. Preliminary Measure P Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 35A. Micro Measure P Administrative Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 35B. Micro Measure P Non-Admin. Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 36. Final Measure P Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 37. Cultural Resource Designation Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 38. Cultural Resource Alteration Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 39. Processing Appeal—Commission/Board Decision 	100% 	Biennial 
 40. Processing Appeal—Staff Decision 	30% 	Biennial 
 41. Development Agreement Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 42. Development Credit Transfer Administration 	100% 	Biennial 
 42A. Reimbursement Agreement 	100% 	Biennial 
 43. Williamson Act Cancellation Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 44. Zoning Confirmation Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 44A. Flood Zone Review 	None 	Biennial 
 45. Tree Removal Review 	24% 	Biennial 
 46. (Not Used) 		
 47. CC&R Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 48. Planning Consultation 	100% 	Biennial 
 48A. General Plan Maintenance 	None 	Biennial 
 49. Engineering Plan Check and Inspection 	100% 	Biennial 
 49A. Engineering Service/Consultation 	100% 	Biennial 
 49B. Deferred Improvement Agreement Review 	None 	Biennial 
 50. Street Vacation/ROW Easement Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 50A. Easement Abandonment 	None 	Biennial 
 50B. Congestion Management 	None 	Biennial 
 51. (Not Used) 		
 52. Certificate of Compliance 	100% 	Biennial 
 53. Encroachment Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 54. Utility Location Review 	100% 	Biennial 
 55. Utility Encroachment Review and Inspection 	100% 	Biennial 
 56. (Not Used) 		
 57. (Not Used) 		
 57A. (Not Used) 		
 57B. Annexation to L&L Maintenance Agreement 	100% 	Biennial 
 57C. Commercial Development Assistance 	None 	Biennial 
 57D. Residential Development Financial Assistance 	None 	Biennial 
 58. (Not Used) 		
 59. Bicycle Registration 	22% 	Biennial 
 60. Vehicle Code Enforcement 	100% 	Biennial 
 61. (Not Used) 		
 II. PUBLIC SAFETY SERVICES 		
 62. Building and Health Code Enforcement 	100% 	Annual 
 63. Zoning Code Enforcement 	100% 	Annual 
 64. Parking Enforcement 	100% 	Annual 
 65. Special Event Security 	100% 	Annual 
 65A. Police School Resource Service 	100% 	Annual 
 65B. Special Traffic Control 	None 	Annual 
 66. Police False Alarm Charge 	100% 	Annual 
 67. Wide and Overweight Load Review 	100% 	Annual 
 68. Fingerprinting 	100% 	Annual 
 69. Police Report 	100% 	Annual 
 70. DUI Investigations 	100% 	Annual 
 71. (Not Used) 		
 71A. Stored Vehicle Release Processing 	None 	Annual 
 71B. VIN Verification 	None 	Annual 
 72. Police Photograph Sale 	100% 	Annual 
 73. State Mandated Fire Inspection 	14% 	Annual 
 74. Fire Company Reinspection 	100% 	Annual 
 75. Fire Report Sale 	100% 	Annual 
 76. Fire False Alarm Response Recovery 	100% 	Annual 
 76A. Fire—Special Responses 	100% 	Annual 
 77. (Not Used) 		
 78. (Not Used) 		
 79. Water Flow Testing 	100% 	Annual 
 80. Hazardous Materials Removal Permit 	100% 	Annual 
 81. (Not Used) 		
 82. Hazardous Materials Leak/Spill Follow-up 	100% 	Annual 
 83. (Not Used) 		
 84. Hazardous Materials Inspection 	100% 	Annual 
 85. Vacant Lot Clearing Service 	100% 	Annual 
 86. Vacant Lot Noticing 	None 	Annual 
 87. (Not Used) 		
 88. (Not Used) 		
 88A. Special Events—Community Park 	None 	Annual 
 88B. Special Events—City Streets 	None 	Annual 
 89—99. (Not Used) 		
 100. Water Sales 	100% 	Annual 
 100A. Secondary Water Quality Testing 	100% 	Annual 
 101. Meter Installation and Service 	100% 	Annual 
 102. Utility Account Set-up 	100% 	Annual 
 103. Delinquent Water Turn Off/On 	100% 	Annual 
 103A. Utility Service Call 	100% 	Annual 
 104. Annual Backflow Inspection 	None 	Annual 
 104A. Construction Backflow Inspection 	100% 	Annual 
 104B. Backflow Testing 	100% 	Annual 
 104C. (Not Used) 		
 105. Sewer Service Fees 	100% 	Annual 
 106. General Utility Street Usage 	N/A 	Annual 
 106A. Franchise Agreement Admin.—CATV 	N/A 	Annual 
 107. Refuse Collection Street Usage 	N/A 	Annual 
 108. Refuse Franchise/Bill Adm. and Recycling 	None 	Annual 
 109. Street Light Maintenance 	None 	Annual 
 109A. Non-Standard Street Light Maintenance 	None 	Annual 
 110. Street Sweeping 	None 	Annual 
 110A. Special Street Sweeping 	100% 	Annual 
 111. (Not Used) 		
 112. Alley Maintenance 	0% 	Annual 
 113. Street Tree Maintenance 	0% 	Annual 
 114. Parkway and Median Maintenance 	0% 	Annual 
 115. Central Business District Maintenance 	0% 	Annual 
 115A. (Not Used) 		
 115B. Sign Posting—Single Pole 	100% 	Annual 
 115C. Sign Posting—Double Pole 	100% 	Annual 
 116. Returned Check Processing 	35% 	Annual 
 117. Records Research Service 	100% 	Annual 
 117A. Utility Bill-Delinquent Charges 	100% 	Annual 
 117B. Delinquent Bill Processing (Notice) 	100% 	Annual 
 118. Document Print and Copying 	100% 	Annual 
 119. Agenda Mailing Service—Annual 	100% 	Annual 
 120. Library Rental 	N/A 	Annual 
 121. (Not Used) 		
 122. (Not Used) 		
 123. Rent Stabilization Admin.  	100% 	Annual 
 124—131. (Not Used) 		
 132. Bond Letter Processing Charge 	100% 	Annual 
 133. Cemetery Contract 	100% 	Annual 
 134. Shopping Cart Retrieval 	100% 	Annual 
 135. Map Checking—Parcel Map 	100% 	Annual 
 136. (Not Used) 		
 137. Business License Application Review 	100% 	Annual 
 138. (Not Used) 		
 139. Business License Listing 	None 	Annual 
 
(Amended during 7/08 supplement; Ord. 1569 N.S. § 1, 2002; Ord. 1223 N.S. §§ 1 (Exh. A), 2, 1995; Ord. 1118 N.S. § 1, 1992; Ord. 1098 N.S. § 1, 1992; Ord. 1030 N.S. § 2, 1991; Ord. 1012 N.S. § 1, 1991; Ord. 965 N.S. § 1, 1990; Ord. 880 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988)  
3.50.050 - Statutory public meeting. 
Pursuant to California Government Code Sections 66016 and 66018, the city clerk shall cause notice to be provided as set out in Government Code Sections 66016, 66018 and 6062a and the city council periodically and at least annually shall receive at a public regularly scheduled meeting, oral and written presentation; and public meeting shall be provided by the city council prior to the city manager taking any action on any new or increased fees or charges. At least one such public hearing shall be held annually in conjunction with the city annual budget process and hearing. 
(Ord. 880 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988)  
3.50.060 - Provision of data. 
Pursuant to the California Government Code at least ten days prior to the required public hearing set out in this chapter, the city manager shall make available to the public appropriate data indicating the cost or estimated cost required to support the fees or charges imposed. The city manager also shall provide a summary of the present fee and charge schedules and those proposed at such annual public hearing. A general explanation of such charges also shall be published per the requirements of Government Code Section 6062a. 
(Ord. 880 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988)  
3.50.070 - Appeal to city council. 
A.  Any person who feels that any fee or charge determined and set is in excess of the percentage of costs reasonably borne to be recovered as set out in Section 3.50.040, or that such fee or charge has been reviewed prior to or has not been reviewed within the review schedule as set out in Section 3.50.040, may appeal in writing to the city council. 
B.  No fee or charge for which an appeal has been filed shall take effect until heard by the city council. Such appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the next ensuing council meeting after receipt of such appeal and heard at the next ensuing council meeting. Such appealed fee or charge shall take effect immediately upon hearing by the city council unless ordered otherwise by ordinance amending this chapter. 
(Ord. 880 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988)  
Chapter 3.54 - RECREATION FEES 
Sections: 
 
3.54.010 - Recreation fees. 
The following types of fees may be established, pursuant to resolution adopted by the council, for recreation services: (1) class fees; (2) facility rental fees; and (3) administrative processing fees. In regards to facility rental and administrative processing fees, the city manager or designate will conduct a fee analysis to be utilized in establishing such fees. The goal will be to enable the city to recover an increasingly greater share of total costs for adult activities and rental services. Emphasis in youth services will be on ensuring appropriate cost recovery while minimizing the impact on youth participation. A balance will be sought between appropriate cost recovery and providing affordable, quality recreational services in all three instances. 
(Ord. 1571 N.S. § 1, 2002: Ord. 1030 N.S. § 1 (part), 1991)  
3.54.020 - Establishment and revision of fees. 
A.  The following factors may be considered in establishing and revising fees: 
1.  Market analysis of public and private sector agencies, which are providing recreation opportunities; 
2.  Market survey of fees charged for recreation services by the agencies in the market survey; 
3.  Cost study of programs and services offered by the recreation division to ensure that fees are appropriately related to costs; 
4.  Projections of attendance levels for public and private recreation programs based on data collected by the city. 
B.  Class fees: The city manager is authorized to determine class fees, which fees should consider the above factors and be based on a reasonable cost recovery estimate. 
C.  Special exceptions: For special classes or programs not included in the published activity guide, a new fee may be charged as soon as approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. 1571 N.S. § 2, 2002: Ord. 1030 N.S. § 1 (part), 1991)  
Chapter 3.56 - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT MITIGATION FEES 
Sections: 
 
3.56.010 - Findings and purpose. 
The city council of the city of Morgan Hill finds and declares that all recitals set forth in the preamble of the ordinance codified in this chapter are true and such recitals are incorporated in this chapter and set forth as findings of the city council; and the council does further find and declare as follows: 
A.  The state of California, through the enactment of Government Code Sections 66001 through 66009 has determined the nexus that must be established in the enactment of development impact fees. 
B.  The imposition of development impact fees is one of the preferred methods of ensuring that development bear a proportionate share of the cost of public facilities and service improvements necessary to accommodate such development. This must be done in order to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
C.  This chapter recognizes that new development within the city will result in additional growth and that such growth will place additional burdens on various city facilities, infrastructure and services. This chapter further recognizes the types of land development that will generate impacts necessitating the acquisition of land and construction of public facilities and expansion of services and infrastructure in order to meet and accommodate them. 
D.  All land uses within the city should bear a proportionate financial burden in the construction and improvement of public facilities and services necessary to serve them. 
E.  The cost of providing public facilities and service improvements occasioned by development projects within the city exceeds the revenue generated by fees exacted from the development projects. 
F.  The city adopts the reports referenced in the preamble of the ordinance codified in this chapter as prepared by consultants MSI, ARI, DKS, DMG Maximus, and Hilton Farnkopf and Hobson, and as respectively titled and dated, which establish various costs for providing various public facilities and service improvements occasioned by development projects within the city. 
G.  The development impact fees established by this chapter are based upon the costs which are generated through the need for new facilities and other capital acquisition costs required, incrementally, by new development within the city. 
H.  The fees established by this chapter do not exceed the reasonable cost of providing public facilities occasioned by development projects within the city. 
I.  The fees established by this chapter relate rationally to the reasonable cost of providing public facilities occasioned by the development projects within the city, which public facilities are consistent with the general plan and the housing element of the general plan of the city. 
J.  The public facilities and anticipated future development referenced in this chapter are based upon an analysis of existing and projected land use and zoning. 
K.  The fees established by this chapter are consistent with the goals and objectives of the city's general plan and are designed to mitigate the impacts caused by new development throughout the city. Development impact fees are necessary in order to finance the required public facilities and service improvements and to pay for new development's fair share of their construction costs. 
L.  Imposition of fees to finance public facilities and service improvements required by new development is necessary in order to avoid adversely impacting existing facilities and services. 
M.  The city has pending before it subdivision maps and other applications for residential, commercial and industrial development approval which the city must act upon. Further, the city has heretofore approved various development projects in the form of tentative maps or other approvals, which have been expressly conditioned on payment of the fees established as a result of the development impact fee study undertaken by consultants MSI, ARI, DKS, DMG Maximus, and Hilton Farnkopf and Hobson, and the condition was assented to by the developers of these projects. It is necessary for the provisions of this chapter to apply to these developments in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare by the provision of adequate public facilities, to afford developers certainty with regard to their financial obligations, and to ensure that such development will not create a burden on the interrelated public facilities and services networks of the city. 
(Ord. 1570 N.S. § 1—3, 2002; Ord. 1122 N.S. (part), 1993)  
3.56.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section. 
A.  "Development project" means any project undertaken for the purpose of development. Development project shall include a project involving the issuance of a permit for construction or reconstruction, remodeling, or any work requiring any permit under the ordinances of the city, as the same presently exist or may be amended from time to time hereafter. 
The term development project shall also include permits for erection of manufactured housing or structures, and structures moved into the city. 
B.  "Fee" means a monetary exaction, other than a tax or special assessment, which is charged by the city to an applicant in connection with approval of a development project for the purpose of defraying all or a portion of the cost of public facilities related to the development project, but does not include fees specified in Section 66477 of the California Government Code, fees for processing applications for governmental regulatory actions or approvals, or fees collected under development agreements adopted pursuant to Article 2.5 (commencing with Section 65864 of Chapter 4, Division 1, Title 7 of the California Government Code). 
C.  "Public facilities" means and includes public improvements, public services and community amenities. 
(Ord. 1122 N.S. (part), 1993)  
3.56.030 - Development fees. 
A.  The following development impact fees are established and imposed on the issuance of all building permits for development within the city to finance the cost of the following categories of public facilities and improvements required by new development: 
1.  General Facilities and Equipment. A development impact fee is established for general facilities and equipment. 
2.  Wastewater Treatment Facilities. A development impact fee is established for wastewater treatment facilities, trunk line and collection system. 
3.  Public Safety Facilities, Equipment and Training. A development impact fee is established for law enforcement facilities, equipment and training. 
4.  Storm Drainage Facilities. A development impact fee is established for storm drainage facilities. 
5.  Park and Recreation Facilities. A development impact fee is established for park and recreation facilities. 
6.  Streets, Thoroughfares and Traffic. A development impact fee is established for streets and thoroughfares. 
7.  Water System Facilities. A development impact fee is established for the water system including land acquisition for wells and tanks. 
8.  Open Space Facilities. A development impact fee is established for open space facilities. 
9.  Library Facilities. A development impact fee is established for library facilities. 
10.  Community and Recreation Centers. A development impact fee is established for community and recreation centers. 
11.  Administrative Overhead. A development impact fee is established for administrative overhead to cover the cost of general administration of this chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant hereto, performance of accounting tasks associated herewith, supervision and handling of funds, preparation and/or updating of master facilities plans and/or capital financing plans, and the like. This fee shall be set as a percentage of the fees set forth in subsections (A)(1) through (A)(10) above, which are collected pursuant to this chapter. This fee does not relate to and is not designed to cover administrative costs incurred by the city in the case of any specific public facilities constructed with the fees referenced in subsections (A)(1) through (A)(10), since such project specific administrative costs are included in and shall be recovered from such fees. 
B.  The city council shall, by resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fees, describe the benefit and impact area on which the fees are imposed, list the specific public improvements to be financed and describe the estimated cost of these facilities. 
(Ord. 1624 § 1, 2003: Ord. 1122 N.S. (part), 1993)  
3.56.040 - Imposition of development impact fee. 
A.  Any person who, after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, seeks to develop land within the city by applying for a building permit, is required to pay the appropriate development impact fees established pursuant to Section 3.56.030 as the same may be applicable, in the manner, amount and for the purposes therein referenced. 
B.  No permits or extension of permits for the activities referenced in subsection A shall be granted unless and until the appropriate development impact fees required have been paid to the city. 
C.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in subsection A, above, or in any other provision of this chapter, the development impact fees as established pursuant to Section 3.56.030 shall apply to any development project which has heretofore received a tentative map approval or other approval from the city, where the approval of the same, assented to by the developer, has been conditioned upon payment of the fees established as a result of the analyses and studies pertaining to development impact fees undertaken by the city and/or its consultants/contractors as referenced in Section 3.56.010. 
(Ord. 1122 N.S. (part), 1993)  
3.56.050 - Automatic annual adjustment. 
Each fee, other than the police impact fee, imposed by this chapter shall be adjusted automatically on January 15th of each fiscal year, beginning on January 15, 2004, by a percentage equal to the Engineering Cost Index as published by Engineer News Record for the twelve month period ending the previous March. This automatic adjustment shall not apply to fees which are based on variable factors which result in automatic adjustments or those which specifically indicate otherwise. 
(Ord. 1624 § 2, 2003: Ord. 1581 N.S. § 1, 2002: Ord. 1570 N.S. § 4, 2002: Ord. 1122 N.S. (part), 1993)  
3.56.060 - Increase by resolution. 
The amount of each fee established pursuant to this chapter may be more specifically set and revised periodically by resolution of the city council, with this chapter being considered as enabling and directive in this regard. 
(Ord. 1122 N.S. (part), 1993)  
3.56.065 - Exemption from fee increases. 
For commercial and industrial projects, the fee amounts pursuant to this chapter or any resolution adopted pursuant thereto shall be locked-in on the date the building permit application for such project is deemed complete by the city, provided that the building permit is issued within six months of this date. The developer of such project shall not be subject to any fee increases pursuant to this chapter or any resolution adopted pursuant thereto during this lock-in period. 
(Ord. 1761 N.S. § 1, 2006)  
3.56.070 - Creation of special funds. 
Each fee collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in a special fund created to hold the revenue generated by each such fee. Monies within each such fund may be expended only by appropriation by the city council for specific projects which are of the same category as that for which the money was collected. In this regard, the following special funds are created and established for the purposes indicated: 
A.  A general facilities and equipment fund is established. The general facilities and equipment fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of constructing and improving the general municipal facilities, including any required acquisition of land. 
B.  A wastewater treatment facilities fund is established. The wastewater treatment facilities fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of constructing and improving the sewage treatment facilities, and related trunkline and collection system, including any required acquisition of land. 
C.  A public safety facilities, equipment and training fund is established. The public safety facilities, equipment and training fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of public safety, such as police and fire, facilities, equipment and training, including any required acquisition of land. 
D.  A storm drainage facilities fund is established. The storm drainage facilities fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of constructing and improving the storm drain facilities, including any required acquisition of land. 
E.  A park and recreation facilities fund is established. The park and recreation facilities fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of constructing and improving the park and recreation facilities, including any required acquisition of land, as well as grading, irrigation and turfing costs associated therewith. 
F.  A streets and thoroughfares fund is established. The streets and thoroughfares fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of the design, upgrading or improvement of the traffic network, including traffic signalization and any required acquisition of land. 
G.  A water system facilities fund is established. The water system facilities fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of replacement, quality improvement, and capital expansion of the water system, including land acquisition for wells and tanks. 
H.  An open space facilities fund is established. The open space facilities fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of the design, improvement and acquisition of facilities r land used for the purposes of improving open space considerations. 
I.  A library facilities fund is established. The library facilities fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of the design, upgrade or improvement of library facilities available for use by the general public. 
J.  A recreation and community centers facilities fund is established. The recreation and community centers facilities fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of constructing and improving the community and recreation center facilities, including any required acquisition of land. 
K.  An administrative overhead fund is established. The administrative overhead fund is a fund for payment of the actual or estimated costs of administering the provisions of this chapter any resolutions adopted pursuant thereto, all consistent with the provisions of Section 3.56.070. 
(Ord. 1624 § 3, 2003: Ord. 1122 N.S. (part), 1993) 
(Ord. No. 1945 N.S., § 1, 7-1-2009)  
3.56.080 - Zoning to be utilized to compute fee. 
The approved zoning for the property to be developed shall be used in the computation of the fees required to be paid with respect to any property. If a parcel contains more than one zone, then the applicable fees shall be prorated by acreage or units, as appropriate, attributable to each zone. Public properties shall be classified into the category of use as between residential, commercial or industrial as determined by the community development director of the city ("community development director") or duly authorized designee, and shall pay fees pursuant to that classification. All fees due under this chapter shall be determined and calculated by the city engineer of the city ("city engineer") or duly authorized designee. 
(Ord. 1122 N.S. (part), 1993)  
3.56.090 - Payment of fee. 
A.  The fees established pursuant to this chapter shall be paid for the property on which a development project is proposed at the time of the issuance of any required building permit, except as otherwise provided, in this chapter; provided, however, that fees imposed on residential development shall be collected in accordance with the provisions of California Government Code Section 66007, as the same presently exists or may hereafter be amended from time to time. 
B.  The term "building permit" as used in this chapter means and includes any permits required for construction, reconstruction, remodeling, moving structures into the city, and the like, such as electrical and plumbing permits, moving permits, and the like. 
C.  The fees created pursuant to this chapter shall be calculated on the basis of net acreage or number of units, as set forth in the resolution referenced in Section 3.56.030. For development projects containing a fraction of a net acre, the fee shall be calculated on the fraction of the acre involved in the development project. All fees collected shall be promptly transferred for deposit in the appropriate fund referenced in Section 3.56.070. 
D.  Notwithstanding the above, the fee for streets and thoroughfares in the case of commercial and industrial developments shall be calculated on the basis of gross square footage (i.e., all of the floor area confined by the outside surface of the exterior walls of a building, except for that floor area devoted solely to vehicle parking or circulation) times the rate per square foot; and the fee for wastewater treatment facilities in the case of commercial and industrial developments shall be calculated on the basis of gallons per day times the rate per gallon; and the fee for storm drainage facilities in the case of all developments shall be calculated on the basis of the number of square feet of impervious area times the rate per square foot of impervious area, all as established in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 3.56.030. 
(Ord. 1122 N.S. (part), 1993)  
3.56.095 - Deferral of payment of traffic and sewer fees. 
Payment of sewer and traffic impact fees shall be as stated in Section 3.56.090, except when a deferral is requested and certain conditions, as set forth by resolution of the city council, are met. 
(Ord. 1761 N.S. § 2, 2006)  
3.56.100 - Fee adjustments. 
A.  A developer of any project subject to the fees described in this chapter may apply to the city council for a reduction, adjustment or waiver of any one or more of the fees, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the impacts of that development and either the amount of the fee(s) charged or the type of facilities to be financed. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk not later than (1) ten days prior to the public hearing on the development permit application for the project, or (2) if no development permit is required, at the time of the filing of the request for a building permit. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction or adjustment. The city council shall consider the application at the public hearing on the permit application or at a separate public hearing held within sixty days after the filing of the fee adjustment application, whichever is later. The decision of the city council shall be final. If a reduction, adjustment or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment or reduction of the fee if such change in use would render the same inappropriate. The hearing shall be noticed and conducted in the same fashion and manner as prescribed by the laws of the city for hearing on development permits. 
B.  The city council may, from time to time, and as the need may arise, set forth, by council resolution, specific limitations which will apply to reductions, adjustments or waivers of development impact fees which may be made pursuant to this section. In this regard, this chapter shall be considered enabling and directory. 
(Ord. 1122 N.S. (part), 1993)  
3.56.110 - Use of funds. 
A.  Funds collected from the development impact fees shall be used for the purpose of paying (1) the actual or estimated costs of constructing and/or improving the public facilities to which the specific fee or fees relate, including any required acquisition of land or rights-of-way therefor; (2) reimbursing the city for the development's share of those public facilities already constructed by the city or to reimburse the city for costs advanced, including without limitation, administrative costs incurred with respect to a specific public facility project; or (3) to reimburse other developers who have constructed public facilities described in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 3 of Resolution 4657, where those facilities were beyond that needed to mitigate the impact of the developer's project or projects. 
B.  In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for advanced provision of public facilities for which development impact fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities provided are of the type to which the fees involved relate. 
C.  At least once each fiscal period, the city manager of the city ("city manager"), or duly authorized designee shall present to the city council a proposed five-year capital improvement program for the various public facilities referenced in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 3.56.030 assigning moneys (including any accrued interest) from the funds referenced in Section 3.56.070 to specific improvement projects and related expenses. Moneys, including any accrued interest, not assigned in any fiscal period shall be retained in the same fund until the next fiscal period except as provided by the refund provisions of Section 3.56.120. 
D.  Funds may be used to provide refunds as described in Section 3.56.120. 
E.  The city shall be entitled to retain funds collected representing administrative overhead as compensation for the expense of collecting the fees and administering this chapter (all consistent with provisions of Section 3 of Resolution 4657). 
(Ord. 1122 N.S. (part), 1993) 
(Ord. No. 1945 N.S., § 2, 7-1-2009)  
3.56.120 - Refund of fees paid. 
A.  If a building permit expires without commencement of construction, then the fee payer shall be entitled to a refund, without interest, of the impact fee paid as a condition for its issuance, except that the city shall retain one percent of the fee to offset a portion of the costs of collection and refund. The fee payer must submit an application for such a refund to the city engineer within thirty calendar days of the expiration of the permit. Failure to timely submit the required application for refund shall constitute a waiver of any right to the refund. All determinations with respect to said refund applications shall be made by the city engineer. 
B.  In the event any fee collected pursuant to this chapter remains unexpended or uncommitted in any fund established pursuant to Section 3.56.070 five or more years after deposit of the fee, the city shall make findings once each fiscal year to identify the purpose to which the fee is to be put and to demonstrate a reasonable relationship between the fee and the purpose for which it was charged. 
C.  The unexpended or uncommitted portion of the fee, and any interest accrued thereon, for which need cannot be demonstrated pursuant to subsection B, shall be refunded to the then current record owner or owners of lots or units of the development project or projects on a prorated basis. 
D.  The provisions of California Government Code Section 66001(d), (e) and (f) shall apply fully to any refund of fees remaining unexpended or uncommitted in any such city fund for five or more years after deposit, and the provisions of subsections B and C, above, shall be subordinate to the Government Code section and shall be applied consistent therewith. 
(Ord. 1122 N.S. (part), 1993)  
3.56.130 - Exemptions. 
A.  The following shall be exempted from payment of the development impact fees referenced in Section 3.56.030: 
1.  Alterations, renovations or expansion of an existing building or structure where no additional dwelling units are created and the use is not changed; provided, however, that the expansion of an existing commercial or industrial building or structure shall not be exempt from the fee for streets and thoroughfares or the fee for wastewater treatment facilities. Provided further, that the expansion of an existing building or structure shall not be automatically exempt from the fee for storm drainage facilities; 
2.  The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed or damaged building or structure with a new building or structure of the same size and use; 
3.  The conversion of existing residential units or buildings located on property with a central commercial residential district zoning designation or any such similar succeeding zoning designation under a downtown specific plan, to retail/commercial uses shall be exempted from application of the provisions of this chapter. This exemption shall expire five years from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
4.  The conversion, installation of tenant improvements, intensification of use, or expansion of any existing building or structure for the development of retail/commercial space on property located within the central commercial residential district or any such similar succeeding zoning designation under a downtown specific plan, which does not increase the total floor area of such building by more than one thousand and five hundred square feet within any ten-year period shall be exempted from application of the provisions of this chapter. This exemption shall expire five years from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
B.  All determinations regarding the exemptions provided above shall be made by the city engineer. 
C.  In order to ensure that the imposition of fees pursuant to this chapter will not be contrary to the public interest, or prevent the development of a public service project, the city council may waive all, or any portion of, the fees required by this chapter if the council finds that a commercial or residential development project will serve a public purpose or satisfy a public need and is located within a redevelopment project area, or other special district, or involves direct city participation in the development. 
(Ord. 1635 N.S. § 1, 2003; Ord. 1122 N.S. (part), 1993) 
(Ord. No. 1928 N.S., § 1, 4-22-2009)  
3.56.140 - Credits. 
A.  New development that, through demolition or conversion, will eliminate existing development is entitled to a fee credit if the existing development is a lawful use under the city's zoning ordinance, including a nonconforming use. 
B.  New development that will replace development that was partially or totally destroyed by fire, flood, earthquake, mudslide, or other casualty or act of God, is entitled to a free credit if the development that was partially or totally destroyed was a lawful use under the city's zoning ordinance, including a nonconforming use, at the time thereof. 
C.  Credit for such eliminated development or development that was partially or totally destroyed as above specified shall be calculated by the city engineer in accordance with the fee schedule set forth in the resolution to be adopted pursuant to Section 3.56.030 and shall be applied to new development on the same site. 
D.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, new development shall be given a credit against the fee due hereunder for park and recreation facilities to the extent of the amount of any fees paid and/or the value of any land dedicated by such new development, as well as the value of any credit due any such new development, for park and recreation facilities pursuant to the provisions of the city's subdivision ordinance, Chapter 17 of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code or any other ordinance of the city, as the same now exist or may hereafter be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. 1122 N.S. (part), 1993)  
3.56.150 - Developer construction of facilities. 
A.  In-Lieu Fee Credits for Construction of Improvements. 
1.  A developer required by the city to construct any facilities or improvements (or a portion thereof) described in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 3.56.030 as a condition of approval of a development permit may request an in-lieu credit of the specific development impact fee(s) included for the same development. Upon request, an in-lieu credit of fees shall be granted for facilities or improvements that mitigate all or a portion of the need therefor that is attributable to and reasonably related to the given development. 
2.  Only costs proportional to the amount of the improvement or facility that mitigates the need therefor attributable to and reasonably related to the given development shall be eligible for in-lieu credit, and then only against the specific relevant fee(s) involved to which the facility or improvement relates. 
3.  Fees required under this chapter shall be reduced by the actual construction costs of the facilities or improvements that relate to such fees, as demonstrated by the applicant and reviewed and approved by the city engineer, all consistent with the provisions of subsections (A)(1) and (A)(2) above. Subject to the applicable provisions of subsection B of this section, if the cost of the facilities or improvements is greater than required relevant fees, this chapter does not create an obligation on the city to pay the applicant the excess amount. 
4.  An amount of in-lieu credit that is greater than the specific fee(s) required under this chapter may be reserved and credited toward the fee of any subsequent phases of the same development, if determined appropriate by the city engineer. The city engineer may set a time limit for reservation of the credit. 
5.  Credits shall be calculated by the city engineer in accordance with the fee schedule set forth in resolution to be adopted pursuant to Section 3.56.030. 
B.  Development Construction of Facilities Exceeding Needs Related to Development Project. Whenever an applicant is required, as a condition of approval for a development permit, to construct any facility or improvement (or a portion thereof) described in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 3.56.030 which facility or improvement is determined by the city to exceed the need therefor attributable to and reasonably related to the given development project, a reimbursement agreement with the applicant and a credit against the specific relevant fee which would otherwise be charged pursuant to this chapter on the development project, shall be offered. The credit shall be applied with respect to that portion of the improvement or facility which is attributable to and reasonably related to the need therefor caused by the development, and shall be determined, administered and processed in accordance with and subject to the provision of this section. The amount to be reimbursed shall be that portion of the cost of the improvement or facility which exceeds the need therefor attributable to and reasonably related to the given development. The reimbursement agreement shall contain terms and conditions mutually agreeable to the developer and the city, and shall be approved by the city council. 
C.  Site-Related Improvements. Credit shall not be given for site-related improvements, including, but not limited to, traffic signals, right-of-way dedications, or providing paved access to the property, which are specifically required by the project in order to serve it and do not constitute facilities or improvements specified in the resolution referenced in Section 3.56.030. 
D.  Determination of Credit. The developer seeking credit and/or reimbursement for construction of improvements or facilities or dedication of land or rights-of-way, shall submit such documentation, including, without limitation, engineering drawings, specifications, and construction cost estimates, and utilize such methods as may be appropriate and acceptable to the city engineer to support the request for credit or reimbursement. The city engineer shall determine credit for construction of improvements or facilities based upon either these cost estimates or upon alternative engineering criteria and construction cost estimates if the city engineer determines that such estimates submitted by the developer are either unreliable or inaccurate. The city engineer shall determine whether facilities or improvements are eligible for credit or reimbursement. 
E.  Time for Making Claim for Credit. Any claim for credit must be made no later than the application for a building permit. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived. 
F.  Transferability of Credit—Council Approval. Credits shall not be transferable from one project or development to another without the approval of the city council. 
G.  Appeal of Determinations of City Engineer. Determinations made by the city engineer pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be appealed to the city council by filing a written appeal (setting forth in detail the factual basis therefor) with the city clerk, together with a fee established by resolution of the city council, within a fee established by resolution of the city council, within ten calendar days of the determination of the city engineer. The appeal shall be considered by the city council at a public hearing to be held, noticed and conducted in accordance with the provisions prescribed in Section 3.56.100 for public hearings with respect to fee adjustments. The decision of the city council on the appeal shall be final. 
(Ord. 1122 N.S. (part), 1993)  
3.56.160 - Review. 
A.  No later than six months following the end of each fiscal year, the city manager shall prepare a report for the city council identifying the balance of fees in the various funds established pursuant to Section 3.56.070, the facilities constructed, and the facilities to be constructed. In preparing the report, the city manager shall adjust the estimated costs of the public improvements in accordance with the Engineering Construction Cost Index as published by Engineer News Record for the elapsed time period from the previous July 1st or the date that the cost estimate was developed. The annual report shall also include a review of the administrative overhead charge. 
B.  At a noticed public hearing, the city council shall review the report and the development impact fees to determine whether the fee amounts continue to be reasonably related to the impact of development and whether the described public facilities are still needed. The council may revise the development impact fees to include additional projects not previously foreseen as being needed. 
C.  The report prepared by the city manager and its review by the city council, as well as any findings hereon, shall be subject to the provisions of California Government Code Section 66001(d), to the extent applicable (which shall be controlling in the event of any conflict). 
(Ord. 1570 N.S. § 5, 2002; Ord. 1122 N.S. (part), 1993)  
3.56.170 - Controlling state law. 
The provisions of this chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant hereto, shall at all times be subject and subordinate to the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 66000), Division 2, of Title 7 of the California Government Code, as the same presently exist or may hereafter be amended from time to time, to the extent the same are applicable. In the event of any conflict between the provision of this chapter and state law, the latter shall control. 
(Ord. 1122 N.S. (part), 1993)  
3.56.180 - Superseding provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant hereto, shall supersede any previous ordinance or resolution to the extent the same is in conflict herewith. 
(Ord. 1122 N.S. (part), 1993)  
Chapter 3.60 - PROCUREMENT PROCEDURES FOR CERTAIN PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS 
 
3.60.010 - Authority and purpose. 
This chapter has been adopted to implement the procedures for contracting for public works projects as authorized by the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act set forth in the California Public Contract Code. 
(Ord. No. 2150, § 1, 8-5-2015)  
3.60.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this chapter: 
"Contractors list" shall mean a list of qualified contractors, identified according to categories of work. The minimum criteria for the development and maintenance of the list shall be determined by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission. 
"Public project" is as defined in section 22002 of the Public Contract Code, and means any of the following, but does not include "maintenance work:" 
1.  Construction, reconstruction, erection, alteration, renovation, improvement, demolition, and repair work involving any publicly owned, leased, or operated facility; or 
2.  Painting or repainting of any publicly owned, leased, or operated facility. 
3.  "Maintenance work" includes all of the following: (a) routine, recurring, and usual work for the preservation or protection of any publicly owned or publicly operated facility, (b) minor repainting, (c) resurfacing of streets and highways at less than one inch, (d) landscape maintenance, including mowing, watering, trimming, pruning, planting, replacement of plants, and servicing of irrigation and sprinkler systems, or (e) work performed to keep, operate, and maintain publicly owned water, power, or waste disposal systems. 
(Ord. No. 2150, § 1, 8-5-2015)  
3.60.030 - Contracting procedures. 
A.  Unless otherwise indicated, the city manager, or his or her delegate, is authorized to and shall implement, oversee and administer the provisions of this chapter for the city. 
B.  The dollar amount thresholds provided in this section shall automatically adjust upon the effectiveness of any adjustment notification by the state controller in accordance with Public Contract Code section 22020, without the necessity of amending this section or any subdivision herein to reflect any such adjustment. 
1.  Public projects of forty-five thousand dollars or less may be performed by city employees by force account, by negotiated contract, or by purchase order. Provided the expenditure is within the budget limitation, the city manager is authorized to approve the use of city employees for public projects, and approve and sign any contract or purchase order for public projects, not exceeding forty-five thousand dollars. 
2.  Public projects of one hundred seventy-five thousand dollars or less may be let to contract by informal bidding procedures as follows: 
a.  Informal Bid Procedures. Public projects, in accordance with the limits listed in Section 22032 of the Public Contract Code, may be let to contract by informal procedures as set forth in Section 22032, et seq., of the Public Contract Code. 
b.  Contractors List. City shall develop and maintain a list of qualified contractors in accordance with the provisions of Section 22034 of the Public Contract Code and criteria promulgated from time to time by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission. 
c.  Notice Inviting Informal Bids. A notice inviting informal bids shall be prepared, which notice shall describe the project in general terms, describe how to obtain more detailed information about the project, and state the time and place for the submission of bids. The notice shall be mailed, not less than ten calendar days before bids are due, to either all contractors on the contractors list for the category of work to be bid, or to and to all construction trade journals as specified by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission in accordance with Section 22036 of the Public Contract Code. Additional contractors and/or construction trade journals may be notified at the discretion of the department soliciting bids, provided, however: 
i.  If there is no contractors list maintained by the city for the particular category of work to be performed, the notice shall be sent only to the construction trade journals specified by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission. 
ii.  If the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be obtained only from a certain contractor or contractors, the notice may be sent exclusively to such contractor or contractors. 
d.  Award of Contracts. Contracts for public projects in excess of forty-five thousand dollars shall be awarded by the City council. If all bids received are in excess of one hundred seventy-five thousand dollars, the city council may, by adoption of a resolution by four-fifths vote, award the contract, at one hundred eighty-seven thousand five hundred dollars or less, to the lowest responsible bidder, if it determines the project cost estimate was reasonable. 
3.  Public projects of more than one hundred seventy-five thousand dollars shall, except as otherwise provided in this Section, be let to contract by formal bidding procedure in accordance with applicable provisions of the Public Contract Code. 
(Ord. No. 2150, § 1, 8-5-2015)  
Title 5 - BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY 
Chapters:  
Chapter 5.04 - BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, adopted April 7, 2010, amended ch. 5.04 in its entirety to read as herein set out. The former ch. 5.04, §§ 5.04.010—5.04.590, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 152 N.S., 1963; Ord. No. 372 N.S., §§ D—F, 1974; Ord. No. 521 N.S., § A, 1980; Ord. No. 771 N.S., 1986; and Ord. No. 778 N.S., § 2, 1986. 
 
Article I. - General Provisions and Administration 
 
5.04.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  "Auctioneer" means a person who sells or offers for sale any real or personal property at auction (exclusive of court sales of items shown on the duly authenticated inventory thereof), or who carries on the business of auctioneer, whether at a fixed place of business in the city, or not. 
B.  "Business" means and includes all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in within the city including any commercial or industrial enterprise, trade, profession, occupation, vocation, calling, or livelihood, whether or not carried on for gain or profit, but shall not include the services rendered by an employee to his employer. 
C.  "City" means the city of Morgan Hill, California. 
D.  "City manager" means the city manager of Morgan Hill, California, or appointed designee. 
E.  "Conducting" means the commencing, conducting, operating, managing or carrying on of a business and the exercise of corporate or franchise powers, whether done as owner, or by means of an officer, agent, manager, employee, servant or otherwise, whether operating from a fixed location in the city or coming into the city from an outside location to engage in such activities. 
F.  "Contractor" means and includes any person who does any type of construction work for an agreed price, or who holds him or herself out to the public as in such business, or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs any building or structure for the purpose of selling or renting the same, and who does not employ therefore a regularly licensed person. 
G.  "Employee" means all persons engaged in the operation or conduct of any business, whether the owner, a member of the owner's family, partner, agent, manager, solicitor and any and all other persons employed or working in the business. 
H.  "Fee" means the fees established pursuant to Section 5.04.045. 
I.  "Fiscal year" means the period commencing July 1 and ending June 30, both inclusive. 
J.  "Fixed place of business" means a place of business regularly kept open, with someone in charge thereof for the transaction of the particular business engaged in during the hours customary to transact such business. 
K.  "License administrator" means the director of the finance department of Morgan Hill, California, or appointed designee. 
L.  "Permitting agency" means the director or head of a department issuing or enforcing each of the prerequisite approvals for or on behalf of the city or each issuing or enforcement agency of federal, state or local prerequisite approvals. 
M.  "Person" means any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
N.  "Prerequisite approvals" means any and all approvals, permits, licenses or entitlements required under federal, state, or local law or regulations, include those required under this code, to lawfully operate the business for which an application for business license has been submitted under this chapter. 
O.  "Tax" means the annual, semiannual, quarterly, or daily tax required for transacting business in the city as set forth in Article III and Article IV of this chapter. 
P.  "Vehicle" means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public street, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. A trailer shall be treated as a separate vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.020 - Application. 
A.  Every business required to have a license under the provisions of this chapter shall make application therefore on such forms as maybe prescribed by the license administrator. Every business license applicant shall submit information in its application describing each business license location and type of business activity conducted at each location that is operated by the applicant. 
B.  Every applicant must disclose on its application any and all prerequisite approvals. The applicant must supply evidence satisfactory to the permitting agencies of the city that the applicant possesses all such prerequisite approvals. 
C.  The permitting agencies of the city shall be notified of each application for business license and shall verify that the applicant possesses all prerequisite approvals issued or processed by each city department. 
D.  Any business that transacts or carries on any business activity, contracts, sells or delivers any goods, wares or merchandise in this city for which sales or use tax is payable and is required to report any payment of sales and use tax to the state shall obtain a California State Board of Equalization license and must furnish the sales tax number on the business license application. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.030 - Issuance or refusal to issue license. 
A.  All applications made pursuant to Section 5.04.020 for the issuance of a license are to be referred to the license administrator of the city, who shall have the power to determine the merits of such applications and to approve or reject the same. 
B.  An application may be denied if any permitting agency determines that the applicant for a license has applied for the license by misrepresentation, refused to complete all portions of the license application, or has failed to comply with one or more of the specific provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of this city. 
C.  Furthermore, a business license application may be denied if any permitting agency determines, based upon substantial evidence, that the applicant has not obtained or does not currently hold each and every one of the prerequisite approvals, or alternatively, that the application did not identify certain required prerequisite approvals which the applicant does not have. 
D.  Within ten days of the date of notice of the denial of an application, the applicant may request in writing a hearing with the license administrator. The applicant shall file a written request for a hearing which states the specific grounds on which the denial of the license is contested. Within ten days of the date of the notice of the license administrator's decision after the hearing, the applicant may appeal the decision of the license administrator to the city manager by filing with the city manager's office a notice of and grounds for appeal. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.040 - Revocation. 
A.  A business license may be revoked if the license administrator determines, based upon substantial evidence, that the holder of a license has obtained the license by misrepresentation or has failed to comply with one or more of the specific provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of this city. 
B.  Furthermore, a business license may be revoked if the license administrator determines, based upon substantial evidence, that the licensee has not obtained or does not currently hold each and every one of the prerequisite approvals, or alternatively, that the licensee did not identify, on the application, certain prerequisite approvals that the licensee does not have. 
C.  Within ten days of the notice of the revocation of a license, the license holder may request in writing a hearing with the license administrator. The applicant shall file a written request for a hearing which states the specific grounds on which the revocation of the license is contested. Within ten days of the date of the notice of the license administrator's decision after the hearing, the applicant may appeal the decision of the license administrator to the city manager by filing with the city manager's office a notice of and grounds for appeal. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.045 - Fee. 
The city council may establish by resolution fees to cover costs reasonably borne by the city to administer and enforce the regulations and programs established under this Article I, which fees shall be paid by the applicant with the filing of the application whether or not such applicant is exempt from paying the taxes under Article III. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
Article II. - Administration and Enforcement 
 
5.04.050 - Powers and duties. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the license administrator to administer the provisions of this chapter in accordance with the terms of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the administrator and he or she shall have the power to license all businesses and to cause the collection of fees therefore and the prosecution of all persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The chief of police, police officers and city code enforcement officers shall have and exercise the power and it shall be their duty: 
1.  First: To make arrests or issue citations for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; 
2.  Second: To enter free of charge at any reasonable time any place of business for which a license is required, and to demand the exhibition of such license for the current term from any person engaged or employed in the transaction of such business; and 
3.  Third: To require any person who claims to be exempt from the provisions of this chapter to properly identify himself or herself and to give sufficient information to show compliance with the provisions of one of the exemptions set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.060 - Hearings—Oaths and other official acts. 
A.  All hearings shall be before the license administrator and all appeals of any decision of the license administrator shall be before the city manager. The decision of the city manager upon appeal shall be final. 
B.  At the hearing, both the applicant and the license administrator shall have the right to appear and be represented by counsel, and to present evidence and arguments relevant to the grounds on which the decision of the license administrator is appealed. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to demonstrate why the action appealed from should be altered, reversed or modified. 
C.  Within ten working days of a hearing, a notice of the decision shall be sent to the applicant. 
D.  The license administrator and the city manager shall have the power to administer oaths, certify to all official acts and issue subpoenas for and to require the attendance of witnesses and the production of records and documents upon any hearing provided under this chapter. The license administrator shall have the power to administer oaths in the execution of any affidavit, statement or certificate required in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.070 - Notice service procedure. 
Any notice required under this chapter to be given shall be deemed to have been served when the same has been deposited in the United States mail enclosed in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such persons at their place of business as the address of the same appears in the records of the license administrator, and if no such address appears then to their last known address, and if there is no last address, then addressed to such persons at the city. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.080 - Nonwaiver—Chapter provisions not exclusive. 
A.  The payment of any license tax required by this chapter, its acceptance by the city and the issuance of a license shall not entitle the holder thereof to transact or to carry on any business called for by the license unless the licensee has complied with all requirements of this chapter and any other applicable federal, state, or local regulations pertaining to such business. 
B.  No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be construed as authorizing or the waiving by the city of the enforcement against the conduct or the continuance of any illegal or unlawful business or activity. 
C.  No affidavit, statement or certificate required under any provision of this chapter shall be conclusive upon the city or any department, bureau, officer or agent thereof, and whenever it appears to the satisfaction of the license administrator, and he or she has reason to believe that such affidavit, statement or certificate does not set forth the true facts required by this chapter, the license administrator may withhold the issuance of a license therefore until such time as the applicant shall furnish satisfactory evidence of the truth of such statement, affidavit or certificates. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.090 - Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 6, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 6, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 5.04.090 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 5.04.090 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, adopted April 7, 2010.  
Article III. - License Tax Requirements and Procedures 
 
5.04.100 - Revenue purposes. 
The provisions of this Article III and Article IV of this chapter are enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes, and are not intended for regulation. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.110 - License—Required. 
It is unlawful for any person either for himself or herself or for any other person, to commence or carry on any business in the city, without first having procured a license from the city so to do, or without complying with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.120 - License—Separate locations. 
A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on, and for each separate unrelated type of business at the same location, and each license shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license; provided, that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishment. Warehouses and distributing plants not used in connection with or incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed separate places of business or branch establishments. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.130 - License tax —Payment time. 
All license taxes required to be paid by this chapter, except where otherwise specifically provided in this chapter shall be due and payable as follows: 
A.  Annual licenses, July 1 of each year; 
B.  Semiannual licenses, January 1 and July 1 of each year; 
C.  Quarterly licenses, January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.140 - License tax—Proration. 
The tax for any license ordinarily issued for a period longer than six months may be prorated on a semiannual basis; provided, however, that the tax charged shall not be less than one-half the annual rate, whether or not six months remain in the fiscal year. This section shall not apply to provisions of this chapter, if any, pertaining to licenses ordinarily issued for one or more days at a daily rate. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.150 - Information for calculation of tax. 
Upon making an application for the license pursuant to Section 5.04.020, the applicant shall furnish upon a form provided by the license administrator such information as may be required and necessary to properly determine the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant. The tax shall be paid by the applicant with the filing of the application. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.160 - Refund of tax payment upon denial of license. 
If the license administrator determines to deny the application pursuant to Section 5.04.030, the tax, but not fees, will be returned to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.170 - License tax—Charitable/nonprofit organizations—Exempt. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a license tax to conduct, manage or carry on any business, occupation or activity from any institution or organization which is conducted, managed or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes or from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any individual; nor shall any license tax be required for the conducting of any entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture on scientific, historical, literary, religious or moral subjects within the city whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated to any church or school or to any religious or benevolent purpose; nor shall any license tax be required for the conducting of any entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture by any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, state, county or municipal organization or association whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated for the purpose and objects for which such organization or association was formed and for which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any individual. All applicants seeking exemption from the license tax under this section shall be responsible for complying with all other requirements of this chapter, obtaining a business license, providing proof of charitable/non-profit status and payment of fees. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.190 - License—Home occupations—Required. 
The provisions of this chapter shall require the payment of a license tax to conduct or carry on any customary incidental home occupation conducted within a dwelling in a residential zone . Any home occupation must comply with Section 18.48.055 of this code and shall not require internal or external alterations to the dwelling or involve construction features or use of equipment not customary in dwellings, and no activity or display directly pertaining to such occupation shall be visible from the street. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.200 - License Tax and Fees —Interstate commerce—Exempt. 
Every peddler, solicitor or other person claiming to be entitled to exemption from the payment of any license tax or fees provided for in this chapter upon the ground that such license casts a burden upon his or her right to engage in commerce with foreign nations or among the several states, or conflicts with the regulations of the United State Congress respecting interstate commerce, shall file an application pursuant to Section 5.04.020 and a verified statement with the license administrator, disclosing the interstate or other character of the business entitling such exemption. Such statement shall contain the name and location of the company or firm for which the orders are to be solicited or secured, the name of the nearest local or state manager, if any, and the address, the kind of goods, wares or merchandise to be delivered, the place from which the same are to be shipped or forwarded, the method of solicitation or taking orders, the location of any warehouse, factory or plant within the state, the method of delivery, the name and location of the residence of the applicant, and any other facts necessary to establish such claim of exemption. A copy of the order blank, contract form, or other papers used by such person in taking orders, shall be attached to the application for the information of the license administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.210 - License tax and fees—Veterans—Exempt. 
Every peddler, solicitor or other person claiming to be entitled to exemption from the payment of any license tax or fees provided for in this chapter upon the ground that he or she is a honorably discharged or released soldier, sailor or marine of the United States who meets the requirements of Section 16001, et seq. of the Business and Professions Code or other law of the state, shall file an application pursuant to Section 5.04.020 and file with the license administrator an affidavit setting forth the qualifications for the exemption. All applicants seeking exemption under this section shall be responsible for complying with all other requirements of this chapter, obtaining a business license, and upon verification of the statements of the affidavit, no license fees or tax shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.250 - License—Form and contents. 
A licenses issued shall contain: 
A.  The business licensed; 
B.  The place where such business is to be carried on; 
C.  The date of the expiration of such license; 
D.  Such other information as the license administrator determines. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.260 - Vehicle licenses. 
Every vehicle upon which a license tax is imposed under the provisions of this chapter, and every vehicle used in any business upon which a license tax is imposed under the provisions of this chapter shall bear a gummed sticker, properly marked and numbered, which shall be attached to the vehicle on the right side thereof in such a manner that it can be plainly seen and distinguished, whether the vehicle is in motion or not. The sticker or stickers shall be furnished by the license administrator without additional charge to the licensee and shall be removed from the vehicle by the licensee upon expiration of such license. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.270 - License or permit—Posting or display. 
A.  Every person having a license under the provisions of this chapter and carrying on a business at a fixed place of business, shall keep such license posted and exhibited while in force, in some conspicuous part of such place of business. 
B.  Every person having such a license and not having a fixed place of business, shall carry such license or permit with him or her at all times while conducting the business for which the license or permit was issued. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.280 - License or permit—Transfer prohibited. 
No license or permit issued under any provision of this chapter shall be in any manner transferred or assigned, or authorize any person, other than the person named in the license, to carry on the business therein named, or to transact such business in any place other than the place or location therein named. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.300 - Lost licenses. 
The license administrator shall make a charge of five dollars for each duplicate license issued to replace any license issued under the provisions of this chapter, which has been lost or destroyed. The applicant shall make satisfactory proof of such loss. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.310 - License tax payment—Not exempt when. 
The conviction and punishment of any person for transacting any business without a license shall not excuse or exempt such person from the payment of any license tax due or unpaid at the time of such conviction, and nothing in this chapter shall prevent a criminal prosecution of any violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.320 - License tax payment—Debt to city. 
The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed by this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city, and any person carrying on any business without first having procured a license from the city to do so shall be liable to an action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction, for the amount of license tax and penalties imposed on such business, and an attachment shall issue on a verified complaint without any bond or affidavit being given on behalf of the plaintiff. If the city recovers judgment in such action, it shall be entitled to a reasonable attorney's fee fixed by the court. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.330 - License tax payment—Evidence of liability. 
In any action brought under or arising out of any of the provisions of this chapter, the fact that a party thereto represented himself or herself as engaged in any business or calling for which a license is required or that such party exhibiting a sign indicating such business or calling, shall be conclusive evidence of the liability of such party to pay for a license for such business. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.340 - License tax nonpayment—Annual license. 
Every annual license which is not paid within a period of thirty days from the time the same becomes due and payable is declared to be delinquent, and the license administrator shall thereupon add to the license and collect a penalty of ten percent of the license so delinquent, and if such license is not paid within sixty days from the time such license becomes due and payable, an additional sum of fifteen percent of the license tax due shall be added and collected as a penalty. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.350 - License tax nonpayment—Semiannual license. 
Every semiannual license which is not paid within a period of ten days from the time the same becomes due and payable is declared to be delinquent, and the license administrator shall thereupon add to such license and collect a penalty of ten percent of the license so delinquent, and if such license is not paid within twenty days from the time such license becomes due and payable, an additional sum of fifteen percent of the license tax due shall be added and collected as a penalty. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.360 - License tax nonpayment—Daily license. 
Every daily license which is not paid at the close of business on the day when the same was due and payable is declared to be delinquent, and the license administrator shall thereupon add to such license and collect a penalty of ten percent of the license as delinquent, and if such license is not paid within three days from the time such license became due and payable, an additional sum of fifteen percent of the license tax due shall be added and collected as a penalty. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
Article IV. - Taxes for Specific Business 
 
5.04.370 - Fixed place of business. 
A.  Every person conducting a business other than those specifically enumerated in this chapter from a fixed place of business within the city shall pay an annual license tax of twenty dollars minimum, plus six dollars per employee for each full-time employee in excess of two, and three dollars for each part-time employee in excess of two. In the event that such business is conducted by more than two employees, an additional tax shall be paid as follows: 
1.  For each employee in excess of two, regularly working in the conduct of such business thirty hours per week or more, five dollars per annum; 
2.  For each employee in excess of two, regularly working in the conduct of such business fifteen hours per week or more, but less than thirty hours per week, two dollars fifty cents per annum. 
B.  The number of employees under this chapter shall be determined by taking the average number of employees (counting all shifts) for the six months preceding the first day of the license year for which the license is issued. The number of employees for new businesses shall be determined as of the day such business commences. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.380 - No fixed place of business—Amount. 
Every person conducting business within the city, but not from a fixed place of business within the city, shall pay an annual license tax of forty-five dollars, provided that in the event such business is otherwise taxable under this article, this section shall not apply. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.390 - No fixed place of business—Vehicles. 
Every person not having a fixed place of business within the city who conducts the business of delivering goods, wares or merchandise of any kind by vehicle, or providing any service by the use of a vehicle in the city shall pay an annual tax of forty-five dollars per vehicle so used; provided, that in the event such business is otherwise taxable under this article, this section shall not apply. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.400 - Animal rides. 
Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of providing live animal rides shall pay a daily license tax of six dollars with a maximum of two hundred dollars in any one fiscal year. The provisions of this section shall apply to transient-type operations and not those with a fixed place of business in the city that would be subject to some other provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.410 - Auctioneers. 
Every person conducting the business of auctioneer shall pay a semiannual license tax of sixty dollars. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.420 - Auto trailer courts. 
Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of conducting an auto trailer court or camp shall pay the sum of fifteen dollars per year plus an additional three dollars per space available for rental purposes per year. For the purposes of this section, "auto trailer court" includes any place, area or tract of land offered to the public for the accommodation of any automobile, trailer or mobile home. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.430 - Bowling alley. 
Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of conducting a bowling alley shall pay an annual license tax of thirty dollars plus an additional ten dollars per lane. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.440 - Circuses, carnivals and other shows. 
A.  Every person, firm or corporation engaging in the business of conducting a circus, menagerie, carnival, wild west show or any other similar exhibition, shall pay the sum of two hundred seventy-five dollars per day in advance; provided further, that should any business or exhibition subject to licensing under this section is advertised, scheduled or expected to last for more than one day in any given period of ten days, then no license shall be issued unless and until a cash deposit is made to the city in a sum equal to one hundred fifty dollars multiplied by the number of days such exhibit is to be so conducted. The unused portion, if any, of such deposit shall be returned to the depositor. 
B.  Provided further, that none of the provisions of Subsection A. of this section applied to a fair which is limited to the display of agricultural products or farm animals only, nor to a bazaar or similar activity conducted entirely for the benefit of a religious, charitable, educational or other organization exempt from paying income taxes under the laws of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.450 - Contractors, subcontractors. 
Every person conducting the business of contracting or subcontracting to construct, grade, pave or lay streets, sidewalks, drains or sewers; or for the business of contracting for or subcontracting for plumbing, painting, roofing, tiling, plastering, carpentering, papering, house moving, installing electrical work or performing any other work in the construction, alteration, repair or addition to any building, structure or other type of contracting or subcontracting not specifically mentioned in this section, shall pay an annual license tax of sixty dollars whether or not such person has a fixed place of business in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.460 - Hotels, inns. 
Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of conducting, managing or carrying on or keeping a public hotel or inn, shall pay the sum of fifteen dollars per year, plus an additional three dollars per year for each room available for rental purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.480 - Motels, apartments, group residences. 
Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of conducting an apartment house, motel, motor court or other group residence, shall pay the sum of fifteen dollars per year; plus an additional three dollars per year for each apartment or room available for rental purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.490 - Occult sciences. 
Every person or firm engaged in the business of an occult science shall pay an annual license tax of sixty dollars. "Occult science" means and includes astrology, palmistry any kind of fortunetelling, or a similar occupation dealing with secret or supernatural agencies. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.500 - Peddlers, street vendors. 
A.  Every person carrying on the business of a peddler of cement, auto polish, flags, banners, balloons, canes, horns, trumpets, musical or noisemaking instruments of any kind, toys, badges, buttons, shoestrings, hairpins, lead pencils, combs, souvenirs or other items of personal property, shall pay a license tax of sixty dollars semiannually in advance. 
B.  For the purposes of this section, "peddler" means and includes every person not having a regularly established place of business in the city, who travels from place to place, or has a stand upon any public street, alley or other public place, doorway of any building, unenclosed or vacant lot, or parcel of land, who sells or offers for sale any goods, wares or merchandise in his or her possession. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.510 - Professions. 
A.  For the business of practicing any profession, including but not limited to adjuster, architect, attorney at law, auditor or accountant, bacteriologist, bond bail broker, chemist or chemical laboratory, chiropodist, chiropractor, civil engineer, dental laboratory, dentist, doctor, electrical engineer, herbalist, insurance adjuster, masseur, oculist, optician, optometrist, osteopath, physician, photographer, real estate broker, structural engineer, sign painter, surgeon, surveyor, veterinarian, the sum of sixty dollars per year for each and every individual engaged in such business and/or practicing of such profession. 
B.  In the event that such professional person employs more than two employees who are not professional people as defined herein, an additional tax shall be paid as follows: 
1.  For each employee in excess of two, regularly working in the conduct of such business thirty hours per week or more, five dollars per annum; 
2.  For each employee in excess of two, regularly working in the conduct of such business fifteen hours per week or more, but less than thirty hours per week, two dollars fifty cents per annum. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.520 - Signboards. 
Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business or occupation of billposting and outdoor advertising or maintaining billboards for such business in the city, the sum of ten dollars per signboard per year. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.530 - Skating rink. 
Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of conducting a skating rink shall pay an annual license tax of one hundred dollars. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.540 - Theaters. 
Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of operating a movie theater or other theater for stage or dramatic productions shall pay the general license tax provided in Section 5.04.370 of this article if such theater provides seats for less than five hundred persons at any one performance, and a tax of two hundred dollars per year if such theater provides seats for more than five hundred persons at any one performance. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.550 - Vending machines—Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and terms shall be deemed to mean and be construed as follows: 
A.  "Operator" means any person who shall, as owner, lessee, employee, agent or otherwise, operate, install, keep, maintain, permit or allow to be operated, installed or maintained, any mechanical amusement device or vending machine in or upon any premises owned, leased, managed, operated or controlled by such person within the city. 
B.  "Vending machine" means any mechanical device from which goods or services are dispensed, or offered for sale to the public, other than mechanical amusement devices. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.560 - Amusement devices. 
Every operator of any device used for amusement, pastime, or entertainment, which is operated or used by any coin, currency, card, plate, disc, slug, key, or other device shall pay an annual license tax of forty dollars for each and every device so operated. Payment of this tax shall in no way license nor permit the operation of a machine or game which is unlawful under the laws of the state or local ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.570 - Jukeboxes, music machines. 
Every operator of any jukebox or music machine, shall pay an annual license tax of thirty dollars for each and every jukebox or machine so operated. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.580 - Pinball machines. 
Every operator of a pinball machine shall pay an annual license tax of sixty dollars for each and every pinball machine used by such operator. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
5.04.590 - Vending machines—Annual tax. 
Every operator of a vending machine shall pay an annual license tax of ten dollars for each and every such machine operated by such person. 
(Ord. No. 1971 N.S., § 1, 4-7-2010)  
Chapter 5.08 - AMBULANCES 
 
5.08.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  "Ambulance" means any privately owned vehicle equipped or used for transporting the wounded, injured or sick and includes, but is not restricted to, emergency vehicles used for such purposes. 
B.  "Ambulance operator" means any natural person, firm, partnership, association, company, corporation or organization engaged in the business of carrying or transporting wounded, injured or sick persons for hire along or over public streets. 
C.  "Person" means any natural person, firm, partnership, association, company, corporation or organization of any kind. 
(Ord. 282 N.S. § A (part), 1970)  
5.08.020 - Operator license—Required. 
No person shall engage in the business of operating an ambulance upon the streets of the city, other than a governmental agency, without first having obtained a certificate of public convenience and necessity from the city council and paying an annual business license fee in the sum of fifty dollars for the first vehicle so owned and operated by him and twenty-five dollars for each additional ambulance owned and operated by him. 
(Ord. 282 N.S. § A (part), 1970)  
5.08.030 - Operator license—Application. 
An applicant for an ambulance operator's license shall file his application with the city council, which application shall be signed and verified by the applicant, and accompanied by the fee required and shall set forth the following: 
A.  Name, business and residence address of the applicant; 
B.  The fictitious name, if any, under which such applicant does business or proposes to do business; 
C.  The number and type, age, condition and patient capacity of each ambulance proposed to be operated by the applicant, stating the make, year of manufacture and special equipment installed or proposed to be installed in each such ambulance and whether such ambulances are or will be operated as authorized emergency vehicles; 
D.  The color scheme, insignia, name, monogram or other distinguishing characteristics to be used to designate the private ambulance or private ambulances of the applicant; 
E.  The schedule of rates proposed to be charged for ambulance service; 
F.  The experience of the applicant in the transportation and care of wounded, injured or sick persons; 
G.  The financial status of the applicant, including the amounts of unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature of the transaction or acts giving rise to such judgments; 
H.  Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that public convenience and necessity require the granting of a license and such other information as the city council may require. 
(Ord. 282 N.S. § A (part), 1970)  
5.08.040 - Operator license—Public hearing—Council action. 
Upon the filing of a fully completed application for the license to engage in the business of operating an ambulance, the city administrator shall fix a time for a public hearing thereon before the city council for the purpose of determining whether the public convenience and necessity require the proposed service. No license shall be granted until the council shall, after investigation and hearing, declare by resolution that the public convenience and necessity require the proposed service and that the same will promote the convenience, safety and welfare of the general public. 
(Ord. 282 N.S. § A (part), 1970)  
5.08.050 - Operator license—Notice of hearing—Procedures. 
Notice of such hearing shall be given to all persons to whom licenses for operation of ambulances have been heretofore issued. Due notice of the time and place of the public hearing before the city council shall also be given to the general public by causing a notice of such hearing to be published twice in a newspaper of general circulation of the city, the first publication to be made at least ten days before the hearing, the second publication to be made at least five days before the hearing. 
(Ord. 282 N.S. § A (part), 1970)  
5.08.060 - Operator license—Issuance conditions. 
Upon completing its investigation and hearing, the city council shall grant the applicant a license if it finds: 
A.  That the vehicles described in the application and proposed to be used are adequate and safe for the purpose of carrying or transporting wounded, injured or sick persons; 
B.  That the color scheme, insignia, name, monogram or other distinguishing characteristics proposed to be used upon such ambulance or ambulances are not in conflict with and do not imitate any color scheme, insignia, name, monogram or other distinguishing characteristics used by any other person, in such manner as to mislead or tend to mislead, deceive or defraud the public. 
C.  That further ambulance service in the city is required by the public convenience and necessity and that the applicant is fit, willing and able to perform ambulance service and to conform to the provisions of this section, and such rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the city council. In making such finding, the city council shall take into consideration the number of ambulances already in operation, whether existing ambulance service is adequate to meet the public need, the probable effect of increased ambulance service on local traffic conditions, and the character, experience and responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. 282 N.S. § A (part), 1970)  
5.08.070 - Operator license—Fees—Term. 
A.  The fee which shall be submitted with the application for an ambulance operator's license shall be the sum of fifty dollars to cover administrative and other costs incident to such application. If the license is granted this fee shall be applied on the license fee required by Section 5.08.020 of this chapter. In the event the license applied for is refused, the application fee shall not be returned. 
B.  Ambulance licenses issued under this chapter shall continue to be valid from the date of issuance, unless the same has been changed, suspended or revoked for any of the causes set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 282 N.S. § A (part), 1970)  
5.08.080 - Operator license—Form. 
If the city council, by resolution, finds and declares that public convenience and necessity require the proposed ambulance service or will admit additional ambulance service, a license to that effect shall be issued to the person or persons entitled thereto by having complied with the requirements of this chapter, and all of the requirements of this chapter having been met; and the city council in its discretion shall determine the total number of ambulances which may be operated under such license. The license when issued shall state the name. 
(Ord. 282 N.S. § A (part), 1970)  
5.08.090 - Operator license—Transferability. 
If the ambulance operator to whom an ambulance operator's license has been issued desires to sell or transfer his business, the interested buyer or transferee shall make application for an ambulance operator's license as required by this chapter, accompanied by an affidavit of seller of intention to surrender and cancel the license held by such ambulance operator conditioned upon and concurrently with consummation of such sale and issuance of a license in the name of the buyer. If a buyer-applicant or transferee-applicant for a license meets all the various standards set forth in this chapter for issuance of an ambulance operator's license, the city council shall issue a new license to the buyer-applicant and concurrently therewith cancel the seller's license. The public hearing set forth in Sections 5.08.040, 5.08.050 and 5.08.060 of this chapter need not be held. 
(Ord. 282 N.S. § A (part), 1970)  
5.08.100 - Operator license—Amendment procedures. 
Any person holding a license to operate one or more ambulances as provided in this chapter, who desires to change or amend such license to substitute a different vehicle for a vehicle operated under the license, shall do so only upon obtaining from the city administrator permission therefor, which shall be granted only upon written application setting forth the particulars of such proposed substitution, and upon otherwise complying with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 282 N.S. § A (part), 1970)  
5.08.110 - Operator license—Suspension and revocation. 
A.  The city council may at any time revoke, suspend or change, after proper notice to and an opportunity of hearing given to the holder thereof, a license granted if the ambulance operator and/or driver or attendant fails to operate an ambulance authorized under this chapter in accordance with the provisions of this chapter as now constituted or as the same may be hereafter amended. 
B.  All licenses which shall have been suspended or revoked by the city council shall be surrendered to the city clerk and the operation of all ambulances covered by such licenses shall cease and the continued operation thereof shall thereafter constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 282 N.S. § A (part), 1970)  
5.08.120 - Public liability insurance required. 
No owner or operator shall drive or operate an ambulance or cause the same to be driven or operated in the city and no license for the operation thereof shall be granted unless and until there is on file with the city clerk and in full force and effect at all times while such ambulance is being operated, a policy of insurance approved by the city attorney and by the city administrator, insuring the owner and operator of such ambulance (such ambulance being designated by number and state license number) and the city as coinsured to the extent of any insurable interest, obligation or risk of the city, against loss by reason of injury or damage that may result to persons or property from the faulty or negligent operation or defective construction or condition of such vehicle or from any other cause or causes whatsoever. The policy shall be limited to not less than fifty thousand dollars for the injury or death of one person, and one hundred thousand dollars for injury or death of two or more persons in the same accident and ten thousand dollars for injury or destruction of property. Each policy shall contain a stipulation that any cancellation or revocation of such policy shall be without effect unless and until the city is notified thereof in writing thirty days prior to the cancellation thereof. At any time, if such policy or insurance is cancelled by the company issuing the same, or the authority of the company to do business in the state shall cease, the owner shall replace such policy with another policy satisfactory to the city attorney and to the city administrator and in default thereof the owner's license to operate shall be revoked. Failure of any owner to notify the city clerk of any such cancellation or cessation shall constitute a violation of this chapter and subject such owner to the penalty provided in this chapter for violation. 
(Ord. 282 N.S. § A (part), 1970)  
5.08.130 - Service rate schedule—Review and approval. 
No operator, driver or attendant of any ambulance having a license issued by the city shall fix, charge or collect for ambulance service, a rate or tariff more than the rate or tariff fixed in the following manner, and all operators of ambulances shall take such action as necessary to cause rates or tariffs for the ambulances owned or operated by them to be fixed in the following manner: 
A.  Flat Rate, Zone or Special Service Rate Schedule. All owners or operators of ambulances shall operate on a flat rate or zone basis, or time, mileage or special service basis, or a combination thereof and shall file with the city clerk reasonable and uniform rates or schedule of charges. The rates, or schedule of charges shall be reviewed and approved by the city council before becoming effective. 
B.  Rate Schedule to Council Review. All rates or schedule of charges established in the forgoing manner shall remain effective and shall not be amended or varied from except with the consent of or by the order of the city council, and the city council may from time to time review such rates or schedule of charges, and may in its discretion require the operator to substantiate by factual evidence and auditable records the reasonableness and uniformity of such rates or schedule of charges, and may, based upon their findings on the question of reasonableness and uniformity order changes which shall be complied with. 
C.  Posting and Filing Schedule. All owners and operators shall keep posted in a conspicuous place in the interior of each ambulance operated by him, the rates or schedule of charges approved as to form by the city administrator and chargeable for the use of such ambulance. 
(Ord. 282 N.S. § A (part), 1970)  
5.08.140 - Drivers and attendants permit—Required. 
No person shall drive or serve as an attendant of an ambulance operated under an ambulance operator's license issued pursuant to this chapter unless such person is the holder of a valid ambulance driver's or attendant's permit issued to him in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 282 N.S. § A (part), 1970)  
5.08.150 - Drivers and attendants permit—Application. 
An applicant for an ambulance driver's or ambulance attendant's permit shall file his application with the chief of police, which application shall be signed and verified by the applicant, and accompanied by the fee required and shall contain: 
A.  A statement giving the applicant's full name, present address and any other residence address during the past five years; 
B.  Age, sex, marital status, weight, height, color of eyes and hair, whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, giving particulars of each such conviction; 
C.  Whether the applicant has previously been licensed as a driver or attendant, and if so, when and where, and whether his license has ever been revoked or suspended and for what cause; and 
D.  Such other information as the chief of police may require. 
(Ord. 282 N.S. § A (part), 1970)  
5.08.160 - Drivers and attendants permit—Investigation and issuance. 
The chief of police shall conduct an investigation of each applicant for an ambulance driver's or ambulance attendant's permit and may refuse to issue such permit and may suspend or revoke a permit theretofore granted, subject to the applicant's right to request a personal appearance before the council to offer evidence why his application should not be refused, suspended or revoked, for any of the following reasons: 
A.  If the applicant for a driver's permit is under twenty-one years of age; 
B.  If the applicant for an attendant's permit is under eighteen years of age; 
C.  If the applicant for a driver's permit does not have in force a current operator's license issued by the state; 
D.  If the applicant is not of good moral character; 
E.  If the applicant is unable to speak, read and write the English language; 
F.  If the applicant for a driver's permit has been convicted three or more times of a violation of any law or ordinance regulating the operation of motor vehicles, excepting violations pertaining to stopping, starting or parking, within three years of the date of application; 
G.  If the applicant is convicted or has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, use or possession of narcotics, or for operating a vehicle under the influence of intoxicating liquors, drugs or reckless driving; 
H.  If the applicant does not possess an advanced American Red Cross First Aid Certificate or in the case of a trainee, has not complied with the applicable provisions of the county's ordinance pertaining to trainee ambulance drivers or attendants; 
I.  If the applicant is unable to produce at any time, and not less frequently than once a year, a certificate of a duly licensed physician stating that the applicant is in the opinion of such physician free of communicable disease, and physical disability. 
(Ord. 282 N.S. § A (part), 1970)  
5.08.170 - Drivers and attendants permit—Form. 
The permit shall be in the form of a card which shall bear the signature, photograph and fingerprints of the applicant. The card shall be issued in duplicate, and one copy with the fingerprints, photograph and signature of the applicant shall be placed on file with the chief of police. The other card shall be carried on the person of the permittee at all times while driving or serving as an attendant of an ambulance. 
(Ord. 282 N.S. § A (part), 1970)  
5.08.180 - Drivers and attendants permit—Fee—Term. 
The applicant for driver's and attendant's permits shall pay to the city clerk a fee of four dollars for each application. A copy of the receipt for fees paid shall be filed with the chief of police. Driver's and attendant's permits shall continue to be valid from the date of issuance, until the same has been suspended or revoked pursuant to this chapter on any one or more of the grounds set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 282 N.S. § A (part), 1970)  
5.08.190 - Duties and compliance procedures. 
The city administrator is authorized to issue rules and regulations prescribing and defining the duties and procedures to be observed and complied with by an ambulance operator and by drivers and attendants, which rules and regulations and any amendments thereof shall be subject to approval by the city council. Such rules and regulations and amendments thereto, when approved by the city council by resolution and filed with the city clerk, shall constitute enforceable provisions of this chapter and violations thereof shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this chapter. Copies of such rules and regulations and any amendments thereof shall be delivered to each ambulance operator and each driver and attendant at the time the permit is issued. 
(Ord. 282 N.S. § A (part), 1970)  
5.08.200 - Ambulance operation—Required equipment. 
It is unlawful to operate an ambulance in violation of any of the following rules or regulations: 
A.  Every permanently operated ambulance shall be equipped with a two-way radio; 
B.  Every ambulance shall contain such equipment as is required by the county and/or the California Highway Patrol; 
C.  No operator, driver or attendant shall operate or permit to be operated any ambulance in the city while some or any equipment used thereon shall be defective, unsafe or in an unsanitary condition. Every ambulance shall be at all times subject to the inspection of the city administrator or his duly appointed agent. 
(Ord. 282 N.S. § A (part), 1970)  
5.08.210 - Chapter provisions supplemental. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed as supplemental to the provisions of any other pertinent laws or ordinances of the city, except that the fees provided for in this chapter shall be paid in lieu of those provided for in the general business licensing ordinance. 
(Ord. 282 N.S. § A (part), 1970)  
5.08.220 - Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. The provisions of this chapter providing for suspension, revocation, amendment, or change of permits, as the case may be, of any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter are not exclusive remedies and the city reserves all other remedies available. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 7, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 7, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 5.08.220 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 5.08.220 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 282 N.S., § A(part), adopted in 1970; Ord. 1192 N.S., § 4, adopted in 1994; and Ord. 1320 N.S., § 3, adopted in 1997.  
Chapter 5.12 - BINGO GAMES 
 
5.12.010 - Statutory authority. 
Pursuant to the authority provided in Section 19(c) of Article IV of the California State Constitution and Section 326.5 of the Penal Code, the city establishes the following requirements for the conduct of bingo games by nonprofit charitable organizations in the city. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
5.12.020 - Bingo defined. 
As used in this chapter "bingo" means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conforms to numbers or symbols selected at random. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
5.12.030 - Organizations permitted to conduct—Disposition of proceeds. 
No person, organization or other legal entity shall be permitted to conduct bingo games in the city unless such person, organization or legal entity possesses a valid certificate or letter from the Franchise Tax Board evidencing that it is exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Sections 23701-a, 23701-b, 23701-d, 23701-f, 23701-g and 23701-l of the Revenue and Taxation Code or is a mobilehome park association or senior citizens organization; and provided that the receipts of such games are used only for charitable purposes; and provided that the organization possesses a valid permit and license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 772 N.S., 1986: Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
Article I. - Permits and Licenses 
 
5.12.040 - Permit—Required. 
No person or organization shall conduct a bingo game without first obtaining a permit from the chief of police to do so. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
5.12.050 - Permit—Application. 
Written application for a permit required by this article shall be made by affidavit under penalty of perjury and filed with the chief of police. Such application shall contain: 
A.  Name of organization; names, signatures and addresses of all the officers of the organization; 
B.  Days and hours of operation of bingo games; 
C.  Attached copies of certificates or letters evidencing exempt status under the appropriate sections set forth in Section 5.12.030 of this chapter, of the California Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, received from the Franchise Tax Board; 
D.  Address of premises where bingo games will be conducted; 
E.  Statement of ownership or lease of premises; 
F.  Purpose(s) for which such premises are used by the organization; 
G.  Statement of ownership of bingo equipment used in the operation of bingo games; 
H.  Statement of consent for chief of police to investigate any bank accounts containing profits derived from bingo games; 
I.  Name of each individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity which has a financial interest in the conduct of the bingo games; 
J.  Name and birthdate of each staff member or person operating or assisting in the operation of the bingo games; and 
K.  Such further information as may be required by the chief of police. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
5.12.060 - Permit—Investigation and recommendation—Chief of police—Authority. 
The chief of police shall have the authority to obtain criminal history information for each person operating or assisting in the operation of a bingo game for purposes of his investigation. If he finds that such operators or persons assisting in the operation of a bingo game have been convicted within the past five years of crimes involving lotteries, gambling, larceny, perjury, bribery, extortion, fraud or similar crimes involving moral turpitude, he may refuse issuance of the permit in question. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
5.12.070 - Permit—Investigation and recommendation—Additional city departments. 
The chief of police shall submit each application to the following city departments for investigation and recommendation: 
A.  Fire chief as to any fire hazard on the premises in question; 
B.  Health officer as to the health and sanitary conditions of the premises in question; 
C.  Building department as to compliance with city and state buildings laws and codes; 
D.  Planning officer as to compliance with city zoning ordinances. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
5.12.080 - Permit—Denial. 
The chief of police may refuse to issue a permit if, after consideration of the application and any other papers, records and files he or she deems relevant, it is determined that the operation of a bingo game would be injurious to the health, safety and morals of the people of the city, or that the permit application or proposed mode of operation of the bingo games is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
5.12.090 - Changes in operating staff—Additional investigation. 
A.  Any changes as to the staff operating or assisting in the operation of a bingo game or any other changes in the information furnished under Section 5.12.050 of this article made subsequent to the issuance of a bingo permit and license shall be reported to the chief of police for any further investigation which he deems necessary and appropriate. 
B.  If, after such investigation, the chief of police finds that the changes require suspension or revocation of the bingo permit and license, he or she shall take the appropriate action. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
5.12.100 - License—Required. 
In addition to obtaining a permit as required by this article, each organization conducting a bingo game shall obtain a license from the license collector. No license shall be issued until the applicant therefor has a valid permit covering the organization and the premises. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
5.12.110 - License—Fee. 
The fee for a general license shall be fifty dollars, payable at the time of issuance and renewal thereof, if the total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game exceeds five dollars in cash or kind or both for each separate game which is held. If the value of such prizes is less than five dollars, then the annual license fee shall be five dollars only. If any application for a license is denied, one-half of any license fee paid shall be refunded to the organization. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
5.12.120 - License—Renewal. 
Licenses are granted for one-year terms. Each term is renewable annually. Written application for renewal of a license shall be made to the chief of police at least one month prior to its expiration. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
5.12.130 - Annual report—Submission and contents. 
At the end of each fiscal year during the term of the permit and license, each nonprofit charitable organization which has been issued a permit and license shall file a report made under penalty of perjury with the chief of police containing the following information: 
A.  Any changes in or additions to the information required under Section 5.12.050 of this article; 
B.  The total amount of money received from the operation of the bingo games in the previous fiscal year; 
C.  The total amount paid out in prizes; and 
D.  Detailed costs to the organization for the operation of the bingo games. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
5.12.140 - Permits and licenses nontransferable. 
Permits and licenses granted under this chapter shall not be transferable, either as to the license or the location. Any attempt to transfer shall render the permit and license in question invalid. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
5.12.150 - Suspension and revocation procedures. 
A.  Whenever it appears to the chief of police that a permittee is conducting a bingo game in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the chief of police has the authority to summarily suspend the permit and to order the permittee to cease and desist immediately conducting bingo games. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to continue to conduct a bingo game after notification of a summary suspension of a permit under the provisions of subsection A of this section. 
C.  The order issued under subsection A of this section shall also inform the permittee that he or she has five days from the date of knowledge of the order to request, in writing, a hearing to determine whether the permit will be revoked. Failure to deliver a written request for such hearing to the chief of police within the five-day period shall result in revocation of the permit. 
D.  Within ten days of receipt of a proper request for a hearing by a permittee whose license has been suspended, the chief of police shall conduct a hearing of the issue of whether the permit should be revoked. The suspended permittee may appear before the chief of police for the purpose of presenting evidence why the license should not be revoked. No permit shall be revoked under this section unless notice of the time and place of the hearing is given at least five days before the hearing by depositing, in the United States mail, a notice directed to such suspended licensee at the address given in the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the ground advanced as the basis for the suspension and revocation. At the hearing, proof of facts in support of suspension and revocation action shall be made before the permittee is required to respond. 
E.  It is unlawful for any permittee whose permit is revoked to conduct any bingo game unless and until the city council, on appeal, determines to overrule the decision of the chief of police. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977; Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 8, 5-2-2018)  
5.12.160 - Revocation of license—Alternative procedure. 
A.  Whenever it appears to the chief of police that a permittee is conducting bingo games in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or that the permit was obtained by any false representation, the permit may be revoked. No summary suspension is necessary, but notification that revocation is under consideration, and of the right to a hearing, and when requested, an opportunity to appeal, are required in the same manner as in situations where there is an order of suspension. 
B.  Any organization whose license is revoked under this chapter shall not conduct any bingo game in the city unless and until such time as the city council, on appeal, determines to overrule the decision of the chief of police. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
5.12.170 - Revocation of license—Appeal to city council. 
A.  A permittee whose permit is revoked has the right, within ten days after receiving notice in writing of the revocation, to file a written notice of appeal to the city council. The notice shall set forth the specific ground or grounds on which it is based. The city council shall hold a hearing on the appeal within thirty days after proper filing of the notice, or at a time thereafter agreed upon by the city and the appellant, and shall give the appellant at least ten days' written notice of the hearing. At the hearing the appellant or its authorized representative shall have the right to present evidence and a written or oral argument, or both, in support of its appeal. The determination of the city council shall be final. 
B.  The permittee whose permit is finally revoked may not again apply for a license to conduct bingo games in the city for a period of one year from the date of revocation, except if the sole ground for revocation is cancellation of the exemption granted under Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state or loss of charitable status under Section 170(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, the former permittee may apply for a new permit upon reinstatement of its exemption and resumption of its charitable status. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
Article II. - Operation 
 
5.12.180 - Location restrictions. 
An organization authorized to conduct bingo games shall conduct such games only on property owned or leased by it, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by the organization be used or leased exclusively by such organization. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
5.12.190 - Equipment ownership. 
All equipment used in the operation of bingo games shall be owned by the organization authorized by permit and license to conduct such bingo games. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
5.12.200 - Public accessibility. 
All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the nonprofit charitable organization. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
5.12.210 - Staffing and operation. 
A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the authorized organization which organized it. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game. Only an organization authorized to conduct a bingo game by permit and license issued pursuant to this chapter shall operate such game, or engage in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
5.12.220 - Hours. 
No permittee shall conduct any bingo game more than six hours out of any twenty-four-hour period. No bingo game shall be conducted before ten a.m. nor after twelve midnight. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
5.12.230 - Physical presence required. 
No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless such person is physically present at the time and place at which the bingo game is being conducted. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
5.12.240 - Prize limitations. 
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games shall not exceed the limits established within the California State Penal Code Section 326.5. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977) 
(Ord. No. 2224, § 1, 11-16-2016)  
5.12.250 - Financial interest limited to authorized organization. 
No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity except the organization authorized by the permit and license to conduct a bingo game shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
5.12.260 - Disposition of profits. 
All profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
5.12.270 - Recordkeeping. 
Each organization conducting a bingo game shall maintain detailed records of all profits, expenditures, prizes and other expenses associated with the operation of bingo games. The records shall be retained for such period of time as required by state and federal law and for a period of three years for the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
5.12.280 - Inspection of premises and records—Authority. 
A.  The chief of police shall have the authority to inspect the premises in order to insure that the operation of bingo games at the premises does not constitute a violation of any state or federal law or provision of this chapter. 
B.  The chief of police may inspect the records and special bank accounts containing profits derived from bingo games of any organization conducting bingo games whenever deemed reasonable and appropriate to insure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
5.12.290 - Participation by minors. 
No minors shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
5.12.300 - Compensation limited to prizes. 
No person or agent of such person shall receive a profit, wage, salary or other income from any bingo game authorized by this chapter, except as a bona fide prize(s) received as a participant in such bingo game. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
5.12.310 - Chapter provisions supplement state statutes. 
The provisions of this chapter are not intended to conflict with, but shall supplement all laws of the state relating to lotteries, gaming or gambling. 
(Ord. 453 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
5.12.320 - Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 8, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 8, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 5.12.320 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 5.12.320 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 453 N.S., § A(part), adopted in 1977; and Ord. 1192 N.S., § 5, adopted in 1994.  
Chapter 5.16 - GAMING AND BETTING 
 
5.16.010 - Illegal card and dice games. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or association, for profit, for anything of value, or for commercial purpose of any nature, to keep, operate, conduct or maintain, either directly or indirectly, within the city, any house, room, apartment, dwelling place, building, premises, or other place where any game, gambling, or gaming not mentioned or included in Section 330 or 330a of the Penal Code of the state is played, conducted, dealt, or carried on, whether with cards, dice, or any other device of whatsoever nature for money, checks, credit, merchandise, or other representative of value. 
B.  Every person, firm, corporation or association, either as owner, lessor, lessee, principal, agent, employee, participant, or otherwise, who maintains, keeps, operates, or conducts, directly or indirectly, in whole or in part, or who directly or indirectly is in possession in whole or in part of any house, room, apartment, dwelling place, building, premises, or other place upon or in which any gambling, games, or gaming prohibited in this chapter are played, conducted, dealt, or carried on, and who imposes or collects a fee or anything of value for the privilege of participating, in any way whatsoever, in any such games, gambling, or gaming, or who directly or indirectly gains or receives anything of value or any financial profit from playing, conducting, or dealing of any such games, gambling, or gaming shall, for the purposes of this chapter, be deemed to be keeping, conducting, operating and maintaining the same for profit or commercial purposes. 
(Ord. 767 N.S. § 2 (part), 1986; Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 9, 5-2-2018)  
5.16.020 - Illegal games of chance. 
It is unlawful within the city for any person, firm, corporation or association, either as owner, lessee, manager, employee, agent or servant, to conduct, manage, carry on, maintain, operate, open, deal or deal in, or to cause or permit to be conducted, managed, carried on, maintained, operated, opened, dealt or dealt in, any game, operation or transaction wherein any prize, gift, rebate, compensation, reward, award, payment or gratuity, consisting of any money, checks, token, credit, goods, wares, merchandise, property or thing of value, is or is to be given, awarded or delivered, either directly or indirectly, and wherein chance is a determining factor or is any determining factor of the result of such game, operation or transaction, which game, operation or transaction is conducted, carried on, maintained, operated or played by the throwing, tossing, dropping, depositing or placing of any ball, marker, object, thing or substance into any perforation, hole or indentation, in or upon any surface, receptacle, container, object or thing having marked, designated or identified thereon by or with any figure, number, character, symbol, letter, design or mark of any kind, or by the selecting, designating, turning, indicating, choosing or projecting of any such figure, number, character, symbol, letter, design or mark by means of any device, apparatus or equipment, or by any means or in any manner or by the drawing, selecting, choosing or removing from any receptacle or container of any ball, disk, object, substance or material marked, designated or identified by or with any figure, number, character, symbol, letter, design or mark, any such figure, number, character, symbol, letter, design or mark hereinabove referred to corresponding to, duplicating, referring to or relating to, in whole or in part, directly or indirectly, any figure, number, character, symbol, letter, design or mark upon any card, paper, board, fabric, surface, object, substance or thing held, used, operated or maintained by any player or participant therein or by any person, where, by any predetermined or prearranged, or by any rule, methods, scheme, design or procedure, any person is found, declared or determined to be, or is or is to be, the winner, donee, recipient or taker of such prize, gift, rebate, compensation, reward, award, payment or gratuity, in the event that any such player or participant pays, deposits, expends, gives or pledges, either directly or indirectly, or agrees, promises or intends to pay, deposit, expend, give or pledge, either directly or indirectly, any money, check, credit, property or thing of value, or makes or agrees to make any purchase for the privilege of playing or participating therein or of gaining admission to the place or premises where such game, operation or transaction is or is to be played, conducted, carried on, maintained or operated, or to any other place or premises; provided, however, that no provision of this chapter shall be deemed or construed as prohibiting any act made unlawful by the provisions of Section 320, or of Section 320a or of Section 330 of the Penal Code, or of any other code section or general law of the state, it being the intent of the city council to prohibit by this chapter all games, operations or transactions described in this section, not prohibited by the provisions of any general law of this state, including all games, operations or transactions for profit, commonly known as keno, tango, movie tango, beano, skill ball, fortune, quintan, fascination or inspiration and all games, operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be designated. 
(Ord. 767 N.S. § 2 (part), 1986)  
5.16.030 - Participation in illegal games. 
It is unlawful within the city for any person to participate in, play, play in or engage in, either directly or indirectly, any game, operation or transaction prohibited by the provisions of Sections 5.16.010 or 5.16.020 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 767 N.S. § 2 (part), 1986)  
5.16.040 - Betting on illegal games. 
It is unlawful for a person to gamble by placing or betting at or against any of the games defined in Sections 5.16.010 or 5.16.020 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 767 N.S. § 2 (part), 1986; Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 9, 5-2-2018)  
5.16.050 - Permitting illegal games. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association owning, leasing, managing, controlling or having any interest in any property or premises lying within the city to cause or permit the maintenance or operation in or on such property or premises, having knowledge, or after reasonable notice of the existence thereof, of any game, operation or transaction declared by the provisions of Sections 5.16.010 or 5.16.020 to be unlawful. 
(Ord. 767 N.S. § 2 (part), 1986)  
5.16.060 - Exception for authorized bingo games. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the participation in, play, conduct, carrying on or operation of any bingo game authorized pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 5.12, Bingo, adopted by Ordinance 453 and as amended. 
(Ord. 767 N.S. § 2 (part), 1986)  
5.16.070 - Gambling devices declared nuisance. 
Any machine, contrivance, appliance, device, game, ticket, chance, share, interest, instrument or article operated, used, kept, possessed, placed or maintained in violation of the provisions of: 
A.  Section 330a of the Penal Code of the state; or 
B.  Any section enumerated in Part 1, Title 9, Chapter 9 of the Penal Code of the state; or 
C.  The provisions of this chapter, is declared to be a nuisance and shall be subject to abatement as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 767 N.S. § 2 (part), 1986)  
5.16.080 - Destruction of gambling devices. 
A.  Any article declared by Section 5.16.070 of this chapter to be a nuisance as a result of the operation, use, keeping, possession, playing or maintaining of which any person has been convicted of, or has pleaded guilty to, any violation of any law of this state, or any of the provisions of this code, or any ordinance of the city, shall be destroyed by the chief of police after such plea or after judgment of conviction becomes final. Such article and the contents thereof shall be destroyed; provided, however, that any money so declared to be a nuisance shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
B.  If any article subject to destruction, as provided in this section, is in the custody of any court within the city, the chief of police shall cause an application to be made to such court for an order releasing such article to him for the purpose of complying with this section. 
(Ord. 767 N.S. § 2 (part), 1986)  
5.16.090 - Draw poker—Receiving payment for playing or operating game. 
It is unlawful for any person to receive, directly or indirectly, anything of value from the playing or operating of a game of draw poker or any variation thereof, other than the actual winnings to which a person playing such game in good faith for himself alone may be entitled as a result of such game. 
(Ord. 767 N.S. § 2 (part), 1986)  
5.16.100 - Draw poker—Paying for privilege of participating in game. 
It is unlawful for any person to give anything of value for being permitted to participate in a game of draw poker or any variation thereof, other than to pay the actual losses sustained by such person playing such game in good faith for himself alone. 
(Ord. 767 N.S. § 2 (part), 1986)  
5.16.110 - Draw poker—Betting property belonging to another. 
It is unlawful for any person to bet or wager anything of value belonging to another person in a game of draw poker or any variation thereof. 
(Ord. 767 N.S. § 2 (part), 1986)  
5.16.120 - Draw poker—Permitting premises to be used for violations. 
It is unlawful for any person, either as owner, lessee, agent, employee, mortgagor or otherwise, to knowingly permit any room, building or premises, or any furniture, fixtures, equipment or other article, or anything of value, to be used for or in any game of draw poker or any variation thereof, in connection with which a violation of Sections 5.16.090, 5.16.100 or 5.16.110 occurs. 
(Ord. 767 N.S. § 2 (part), 1986)  
5.16.130 - Illegal gambling—Seizure of furniture and equipment. 
In addition to any other remedy provided by law, any furniture, fixtures, equipment or article, or anything of value, used in violation of any provision of this chapter may be seized by any of the officers designed by Sections 335 and 335a of the Penal Code of the state and, in such cases, shall be disposed of in the same manner as provided in said Section 335a of the Penal Code; provided, however, that the phrase "machine or device" as used in said Section 335a of the Penal Code shall mean any furniture, fixtures, equipment or article, or anything of value, except money, coin or currency. Any or all money, coin or currency used in violation of any provision of this chapter and seized pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. 767 N.S. § 2 (part), 1986)  
5.16.140 - Illegal gambling—Frequenting premises. 
No person shall visit, frequent, or be present at or within any house, room, apartment, office or place used in whole or in part as a place where any game or device is played, operated, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice, billiard balls, pool balls or other devices for money, checks, chips, credit or any other representative of value or for any merchandise or any other thing of value, prohibited by Section 330 or 330a of the Penal Code of the state. 
(Ord. 767 N.S. § 2 (part), 1986)  
5.16.150 - Bookmaking—Use of telephone or telegraph facilities. 
No person shall let or lease any telegraph or telephone line or wire knowing that it is to be used for the purpose of conducting or carrying on a betting pool, or for the purpose of conducting the business of making book or selling pool on races or other contests, or of betting or laying wagers upon the result of any race or contest. No person shall transmit any message over any telephone or telegraph line or wire knowing that such message is to be used in connection with conducting or carrying on a betting pool or making book or selling pools on races or other contests or of betting or laying of wagers upon the result of any race or contest. 
(Ord. 767 N.S. § 2 (part), 1986)  
5.16.160 - Tip sheets. 
No person engaged in conducting or carrying on a betting pool or in conducting the business of making book or selling pools on races, or the betting or laying of wagers upon the results of any race or contest, shall have in his possession any written or printed form, chart, table, list sheet, circular or publication of any kind giving or purporting to give any list of entries for any horse race or other contest thereafter anywhere to take place, if there be written or printed or published as part thereof any tip, information, prediction or selection of, or advice as to, or any key, cipher or cryptogram indicating, containing or giving any tip, information, publication or selection of, or advice as to the winner or probable winner, or a loser or probable loser, or the result or probable result of any such race or other contest, or the standing or probable standing of any horse or contestant therein, or any statement as to, or comment upon, or reference to, the form, condition or standing of any horse or other contestant, or the actual, probable or possible result of any race or contest, or the actual, probable or possible state, past, present or future, of the betting, wagering or odds upon or against any horse or other contestant named in such list, or probable or possible list, or entries unless the names of such horses or other contestants shall be arranged in such list, or probable or possible list, in alphabetical order, and shall all be printed in type of the same size and face and of identical appearance, and shall all be printed flush with the left side of the column in which the same are printed, or all an equal distance therefrom. 
(Ord. 767 N.S. § 2 (part), 1986)  
5.16.170 - Possession of book or device for recording bets and wagers. 
No person shall have in his possession any book, paper, apparatus, device or paraphernalia for the purpose of recording or registering any bet or any purported bet or wager, or any purported wager, upon the result, or purported result, of any trial, or purported trial, or contest or purported contest, of skill, speed, power or endurance of man or beast, or between men, beasts or mechanical apparatus, or upon the result or purported result of any lot, chance, casualty or contingent event whatsoever. 
(Ord. 767 N.S. § 2 (part), 1986)  
5.16.180 - Gambling at dice or pool. 
It is unlawful for any person to deal, play or carry on, open or cause to be opened, or conduct, either as owner or employee, whether for hire or not, any game of dice having six faces or less, or any game played with small round balls usually having one flat face and commonly referred to as "pool peas," or any games using pool balls for the purpose of engaging in billiards, snooker, pool, or a similar game, when the aforementioned games are played for money, checks, credit, or other representative of value. It is unlawful for any person to bet at or against any of the aforementioned and prohibited games. 
(Ord. 767 N.S. § 2 (part), 1986; Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 9, 5-2-2018)  
Chapter 5.20 - FRANCHISES FOR CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS 
 
5.20.010 - Intent. 
A.  Authority. In accordance with applicable federal and state law, the city is authorized to grant one or more nonexclusive franchises to construct, reconstruct, operate, and maintain cable television systems within the city limits. 
B.  Findings. The city council finds that the development of cable television and telecommunications systems may provide significant benefits for, and substantial impacts upon, the residents of the city. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the city council further finds that the public convenience, safety, and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers to be vested in the city. It is the intent of this chapter to specify the means for providing the best possible cable television and telecommunications services to the public, and the issuance of all franchises under this chapter are intended to achieve this primary objective. It is the further intent of this chapter to establish regulatory provisions that permit the city to regulate cable television and telecommunications franchises to the extent authorized by federal and state law, including but not limited to the federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the federal Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, and applicable California law. 
(Ord. 1371 N.S. § 1 (part), 1997)  
5.20.020 - Short title. 
This chapter may be cited as the "cable television and telecommunications regulatory ordinance" of the city of Morgan Hill. 
(Ord. 1371 N.S. § 1 (part), 1997)  
5.20.030 - Defined terms and phrases. 
Various terms and phrases used in this chapter are defined below in Section 5.20.170. 
(Ord. 1371 N.S. § 1 (part), 1997)  
5.20.040 - Franchise terms and conditions. 
A.  Franchise Purposes. A franchise granted by the city under the provisions of this chapter may authorize the grantee to do the following: 
1.  To engage in the business of providing cable television services, and such other telecommunications services as may be authorized by law that the grantee chooses to provide to subscribers within the designated franchise service area. 
2.  To erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild, reconstruct, replace, maintain, and retain, cable lines, related electronic equipment, supporting structures, appurtenances, and other property in connection with the operation of the cable system in, on, over, under, upon, along and across streets or other public places within the designated franchise service area. 
3.  To maintain and operate the franchise properties for the origination, reception, transmission, amplification, and distribution of television and radio signals, and for the delivery of cable services and such other services as may be permitted by law. 
B.  Franchise Required. It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate a cable television system in the city within any street or public way without first obtaining a franchise under the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Term of the Franchise. 
1.  A franchise granted under this chapter will be for the term specified in the franchise agreement, commencing upon the effective date of the ordinance or resolution adopted by the city that authorizes the franchise. 
2.  A franchise granted under this chapter may be renewed upon application by the grantee in accordance with the applicable provisions of state and federal law and of this chapter. 
D.  Franchise Territory. A franchise is effective within the territorial limits of the city, and within any area added to the city during the term of the franchise, unless otherwise specified in the ordinance or resolution granting the franchise or in the franchise agreement. 
E.  Federal or State Jurisdiction. This chapter will be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws, and is applicable to all franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of this chapter, to the extent authorized by applicable law. 
F.  Franchise Nontransferable. 
1.  The grantee may not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet, or dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, contract, consolidation, or otherwise, the franchise or any of the rights or privileges therein granted, without the prior consent of the city council and then only upon such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the city council, which consent may not be unreasonably denied or delayed. Any attempt to sell, transfer, lease, assign or otherwise dispose of the franchise without the consent of the city council is null and void. The granting of a security interest in any assets of the grantee, or any mortgage or other hypothecation, will not be deemed a transfer for the purposes of this subsection. 
2.  The requirements of subsection (F)(1) of this section apply to any change in control of the grantee. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to major stockholder or partnership interests, but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. If the grantee is a corporation, prior authorization of the council is required where ownership or control of more than ten percent of the voting stock of the grantee is acquired by a person or a group of persons acting in concert, none of whom, singularly or collectively, own or control the voting stock of the grantee as of the effective date of the franchise. 
3.  The grantee must notify the city in writing of any foreclosure or judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the grantee's franchise property, or upon the termination of any lease or other interest covering all or a substantial part of that franchise property. Such notification will be considered by the city as notice that a change in control of ownership of the franchise has taken place, and the provisions of this subsection that require the prior consent of the city to that change in control of ownership shall apply. 
4.  For the purpose of determining whether it will consent to an acquisition, transfer, or change in control, the city may inquire as to the qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party, and the grantee must assist the city in that inquiry. In seeking the city's consent to any change of ownership or control, the grantee or the proposed transferee, or both, must complete Federal Communications Commission Form 394 or its equivalent. This application must be submitted to the city not less than one hundred twenty days prior to the proposed date of transfer. The transferee must establish that it possesses the legal, financial, and technical capability to operate and maintain the cable system and to comply with all franchise requirements for the remaining term of the franchise. If the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of the applicant are satisfactory, the city shall consent to the transfer of the franchise. The consent of the city to that transfer shall not be unreasonably denied or delayed. 
5.  Any financial institution holding a pledge of the grantee's assets to secure the advance of money for the construction or operation of the franchise property has the right to notify the city that it, or a designee satisfactory to the city, will take control of and operate the cable television system upon the grantee's default in its financial obligations. Further, that financial institution also must submit a plan for such operation within ninety days after assuming control. The plan must insure continued service and compliance with all franchise requirements during the period that the financial institution will exercise control over the system. The financial institution may not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding one year unless authorized by the city, in its sole discretion, and during that period of time it will have the right to petition the city to transfer the franchise to another grantee. 
6.  The grantee shall reimburse the city for the city's reasonable review and processing expenses incurred in connection with any transfer or change in control of the franchise. These expenses include, without limitation, costs of administrative review, financial, legal, and technical evaluation of the proposed transferee, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by these experts), notice and publication costs, and document preparation expenses. No reimbursement may be offset against any franchise fee payable to the city during the term of the franchise. 
G.  Geographical Coverage. 
1.  The grantee shall design, construct, and maintain the cable television system so as to have the capability to pass every dwelling unit in the city, subject to any service-area line extension requirements of the franchise agreement. 
2.  After service has been established by activating trunk or distribution cables for any service area, the grantee shall provide service to any requesting subscriber in that service area within thirty days from the date of request, provided that the grantee is able to secure on reasonable terms and conditions all rights-of-way necessary to extend service to that subscriber within that thirty day period. 
H.  Nonexclusive Franchise. Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter is nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable television system, or any component thereof, as it deems appropriate, subject to applicable state and federal law. However, if an additional franchise is granted on terms more favorable to the second grantee (whether involving the grant of greater benefits or the imposition of lesser obligations), then the initial grantee shall have the right to modify its franchise to incorporate the more favorable terms, or to reduce its obligations, to achieve competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory treatment. 
I.  Multiple Franchises. 
1.  The city may grant any number of franchises, subject to applicable state and federal law. The city may limit the number of franchises granted, based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of applicable law and specific local considerations, such as: 
a.  The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate multiple cables in addition to the cables, conduits, and pipes of the existing utility systems, such as electrical power, telephone, gas, and sewerage. 
b.  The benefits that may accrue to cable subscribers as a result of cable system competition, such as lower rates and improved service. 
c.  The disadvantages that may result from multiple cable systems, such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents' property, and the disruption arising from numerous excavations of the public rights-of-way. 
2.  Developers of new residential housing with underground utilities shall provide conduit to accommodate cables for at least two cable television systems and must dedicate the use of that conduit to the city. 
3.  The city may require that any new grantee be responsible for its own underground trenching and the associated costs if, in the city's opinion, the rights-of-way in any particular area cannot reasonably accommodate additional cables. 
J.  Limitation on Expense Reimbursement. Any obligation imposed on the grantee to reimburse the city in reviewing any new franchise application or the transfer or renewal of any existing franchise or in otherwise regulating a franchise under this chapter shall be subject to any limitations on the amount of such reimbursement provided for in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 1416 N.S. §§ 1, 2, 1998; Ord. 1371 N.S. § 1 (part), 1997)  
5.20.050 - Franchise applications and renewal. 
A.  Filing of Applications. Any person desiring an initial franchise for a cable television system shall file an application with the city. A reasonable nonrefundable application fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council must accompany the application. That application fee will cover all costs associated with reviewing and processing the application, including without limitation costs of administrative review, financial, legal, and technical evaluation of the applicant, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by those experts), notice and publication requirements, and document preparation expenses. If those actual costs exceed the application fee, the applicant shall pay the difference to the city within thirty days following receipt of an itemized statement of those costs. 
B.  Applications—Contents. An application for an initial franchise for a cable television system shall contain, where applicable: 
1.  A statement as to the proposed franchise service area. 
2.  A resume of the applicant's prior history, including the experience and expertise of applicant in the cable television field. 
3.  A list of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a partnership, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by each stockholder, if a corporation. 
4.  A list of officers, directors, and managing employees of applicant, together with a description of the background of each such person. 
5.  The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, or any other business entity owning or controlling the applicant in whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant. 
6.  A current financial statement of the applicant verified by an independent certified public accountant or otherwise certified to be true, complete, and correct to the reasonable satisfaction of the city. 
7.  The proposed construction and service schedule. 
8.  Any additional information that the city deems reasonably necessary. 
C.  Consideration of Initial Applications. 
1.  Upon receipt of any application for an initial franchise, the city manager or the city manager's designee shall prepare a report and make recommendations to the city council concerning that application. 
2.  A public hearing shall be set prior to any initial franchise grant, at a time and date approved by the city council. Within thirty days after the close of the hearing, the city council shall make a decision based upon the evidence received at the hearing as to whether the franchise should be granted, and, if granted, subject to what conditions. The city council may grant one or more franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise. 
D.  Franchise Renewal. Franchise renewals shall be made in accordance with applicable law. The city and the grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise. 
(Ord. 1371 N.S. § 1 (part), 1997)  
5.20.060 - Minimum consumer protection and service standards. 
A.  Operational Standards. 
1.  Except as otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, the grantee shall maintain the necessary facilities, equipment, and personnel to comply with the following consumer protection and service standards under normal operating conditions: 
a.  Sufficient toll-free telephone line capacity during normal business hours to assure that telephone calls are answered before the fourth ring. Telephone answer time by a customer service representative, including wait time, may not exceed thirty seconds. Callers needing to be transferred may not be required to wait more than thirty seconds before being connected to a service representative. 
b.  Under normal operating conditions, a caller shall receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time. 
c.  Emergency toll-free telephone line capacity on a twenty-four hour basis, including weekends and holidays. After normal business hours, the telephone calls may be answered by an answering service in accordance with the telephone answering standards set forth in subsections (A)(1)(a) and (b) of this section. Calls received after normal business hours shall be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day. 
d.  A conveniently located local business and service or payment office open during normal business hours at least eight hours per day on weekdays, and at least four hours weekly on evenings or weekends, and adequately staffed with trained customer service representatives to accept subscriber payments and to respond to service requests, inquiries and complaints. 
e.  An emergency system maintenance and repair staff, capable of responding to and repairing major system malfunctions on a twenty-four hour per day basis. 
f.  A trained installation staff will install service to any subscriber requiring a standard installation within five days after receipt of a request, in all areas where trunk and feeder cable have been activated. "Standard installations" are those that are located up to one hundred twenty-five feet from the existing distribution system, unless otherwise defined in any franchise agreement. 
g.  The grantee shall schedule, within a specified four hour time period Monday through Saturday (legal holidays excluded), all appointments with subscribers for installation of service, service calls, and other activities at the subscriber location. The grantee may schedule installation and service calls outside of normal business hours for the convenience of the subscriber. The grantee may not cancel an appointment with a subscriber after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. If a grantee representative is running late for an appointment with a subscriber and will not be able to keep the scheduled appointment, the subscriber must be contacted prior to the time of the scheduled appointment and the appointment shall be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time that is convenient for the subscriber. The grantee shall attempt to contact every customer within two weeks after an installation or repair work is completed to assure that the customer is satisfied with the work. 
h.  Subscribers who have experienced one missed appointment due to the fault of the grantee shall receive an installation free of charge if the appointment was for an installation. If an installation was to have been provided free of charge, and for all other appointments, the subscriber shall receive one month of the most widely subscribed to service tier, free of charge. Subscribers also shall be entitled to receive a free installation or one month free service as provided above in the event that the grantee fails to complete a standard installation within five days of receiving an installation request due to its fault, fails to schedule an appointment within a specified four hour time period, or fails to contact the subscriber if the grantee's representative will be late for an appointment. Subscribers who have experienced two missed appointments due to the fault of the grantee shall receive two months of the most widely subscribed to service tier, free of charge in addition to the free installation or free month of service provided for the first missed appointment. 
i.  Upon subscriber request, the grantee shall arrange for pickup and/or replacement of convertors or other equipment provided by the grantee at the subscriber's address within fourteen days after the request is made if the subscriber is mobility-limited. 
2.  The standards of subsections (A)(1)(a) and (c) of this section shall be met not less than ninety percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis. 
B.  Service Standards. 
1.  The grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Except in emergency situations, scheduled interruptions shall occur during a period of minimum use of the cable system, preferably between midnight and 6:00 a.m. Unless the scheduled interruption lasts for no more than two hours and occurs between midnight and 6:00 a.m. (in which event twenty-four hours prior notice shall be given to the city), forty-eight hours prior notice shall be given to subscribers. 
2.  The grantee shall maintain a repair force of technicians who shall respond to subscriber requests for service within the following time frames: 
a.  For a System Outage. Within two hours, including weekends, of receiving subscriber calls or requests for service that by number identify a system outage of sound or picture of three or more channels, affecting five or more subscribers of the system. 
b.  For an Isolated Outage. Within twenty-four hours, including weekends, of receiving requests for service identifying an isolated outage of sound or picture for one or more channels. 
c.  For Inferior Signal Quality. No later than the following business day, excluding Sundays and holidays, of receiving a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality. 
3.  The grantee will be deemed to have responded to a request for service under the provisions of this subsection when a technician arrives at the service location and begins work on the problem. If a subscriber is not home when the technician arrives, the technician must leave written notification of arrival. 
4.  The grantee may not charge for the repair or replacement of defective or malfunctioning equipment provided by the grantee to subscribers, unless the defect was caused by the subscriber. 
5.  The grantee shall determine the nature of the problem within twenty-four hours of commencing work and resolve all cable system related problems within three business days, unless technically infeasible. 
C.  Billing and Information Standards. 
1.  Subscriber bills shall be clear, concise, and understandable. Bills shall be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills also must clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates, and credits. 
2.  The first billing to a subscriber after a new installation or service change shall be prorated based upon when the new or changed service commenced. Subscribers shall not be charged a late fee or otherwise penalized for any failure by the grantee, including the failure to timely or correctly bill the subscriber. 
3.  In case of a billing dispute, the grantee shall respond in writing to a written complaint from a subscriber within thirty days. 
4.  The grantee shall provide credits or refunds to subscribers, upon their request, whose service has been interrupted for four or more hours. For each day that service has been interrupted for four hours or more, the credit shall equal a pro-rata share of the monthly billing for one full day. All credits for service must be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. For subscribers terminating service, refunds shall be issued promptly, but no later than thirty days after the return of any grantee-supplied equipment. 
5.  The grantee shall provide written information approved by the city on each of the following areas at the time of the installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request: 
a.  Products and services offered. 
b.  Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services. 
c.  Installation and service maintenance policies. 
d.  Instructions on the use of the cable service. 
e.  Channel positions of programming carried on the system. 
f.  Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the city's office designated for dealing with cable-related issues. 
g.  Consumer protection and service standards and penalties for noncompliance. 
6.  Subscribers shall be notified of any changes in rates, programming services, or channel positions as soon as possible through announcements on the cable system and in writing. Notice shall be given to subscribers a minimum of thirty days in advance of those changes if the change is within the control of the grantee. In addition, the grantee shall notify subscribers through announcements on the cable system and in writing thirty days in advance of any significant changes in the information required in subsection (C)(5) of this section. 
7.  The grantee shall maintain a public file containing all notices provided to subscribers under these consumer protection and service standards and all promotional offers made to subscribers. 
D.  Verification of Compliance with Standards. 
1.  Upon fifteen days notice, the city may require the grantee to provide a written report demonstrating its compliance with the customer service standards specified by the city. The city shall require the preparation of such reports no more frequently than on a quarterly basis. 
2.  A repeated and verifiable pattern of noncompliance with the consumer protection and service standards of this section, after the grantee's receipt of due notice and an opportunity to cure, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement. 
E.  Subscriber Complaints and Disputes. 
1.  The grantee shall establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon, and resolving subscriber complaints without intervention by the city. The written procedures must prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint, either orally or in writing, specifying the subscriber's grounds for dissatisfaction. The grantee shall file a copy of these procedures with the city. These procedures shall include a requirement that the grantee respond in writing to any written complaint from a subscriber within thirty days of receipt. 
2.  The city has the right to review the grantee's response to subscriber complaints in order to determine the grantee's compliance with the franchise requirements. 
3.  All subscribers have the right to continue receiving service so long as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. If the grantee elects to rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or if the city gives notice of intent to terminate or not to renew the franchise, the grantee must act so as to ensure that all subscribers receive service while the franchise remains in force. 
4.  Upon a change of control of the grantee, or if a new operator acquires the cable system, the original the grantee must cooperate with the city, the new grantee, or the new operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During that transition period, the grantee is entitled to the revenues derived from its operation of the system. 
F.  Disconnection/Downgrades. 
1.  A subscriber may terminate or downgrade service at any time, and the grantee shall promptly comply with the subscriber's request without charge within five days. No period of notice prior to voluntary termination or downgrade of service may be required of subscribers. 
2.  The grantee may disconnect a subscribers service if the subscriber fails to pay a monthly fee or charge, but such disconnection shall not occur prior to forty-five days after the fee or charge is due plus ten days prior written notice to the subscriber of the grantee's intent to disconnect service. In the event that the subscriber pays all past due amounts, including late charges, before the scheduled disconnection date, the grantee shall not disconnect service. In the event that service is disconnected for nonpayment of past due fees or charges, the grantee shall promptly reinstate service upon payment by the subscriber in full of all such fees and charges, including late charges. 
3.  Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection (F)(2) of this section, the grantee may immediately disconnect service to a subscriber if the subscriber is damaging or destroying the grantee's cable system or equipment. In the event of disconnection on such grounds, the grantee shall resume service to the subscriber upon receiving adequate assurances that the subscriber has ceased the practices or conduct that resulted in disconnection and has paid all proper fees and charges, including any amounts reasonably owed the grantee for the damage caused by the subscriber. 
4.  The grantee also may disconnect service to a subscriber that is causing signal leakage exceeding federal limits. Such disconnection may occur after five days written notice to the subscriber if the subscriber fails to correct the problem. In the event that service is disconnected, the grantee shall immediately resume service without charge upon the satisfactory correction of the signal leakage problem by the subscriber. 
5.  Upon termination of service to a subscriber, the grantee shall remove its equipment from the subscriber's premises within fourteen days. The equipment shall be deemed abandoned if it is not removed within thirty days after termination of service unless the grantee has been denied access to the subscriber's premises. 
G.  Changes in Service. Except as otherwise provided by federal law, subscribers shall not be required to pay any additional fee or charge, other than the regular service fee, in order to receive the services selected (such as upgrade or downgrade charges). No charge may be imposed for any service or product that the subscriber has not affirmatively selected. Payment of the regular monthly bill shall not by itself constitute an affirmative selection. 
H.  Deposits. The grantee may require a reasonable, nondiscriminatory deposit on equipment provided to subscribers. Such deposits shall be placed in an interest bearing account. The deposit shall be returned, with interest earned to the date of repayment, within thirty days after the equipment is returned to the grantee. 
I.  Parental Control Option. The grantee shall provide parental control devices to all subscribers who want to be able to block the video or audio portion of any programming that the subscriber finds objectionable. Such devices shall be provided at no charge to the subscriber, unless a converter box is required to be installed or unless otherwise required by federal law. 
J.  Additional Requirements. 
1.  If the grantee fails to operate the system for seven consecutive days without the city's prior approval or subsequent ratification, the city may, at its sole option, operate the system or designate an operator until the grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the city, or until a permanent operator is selected. If the city satisfies this obligation on behalf of the grantee, then during that period the city is entitled to collect all revenues derived from the system, and the grantee shall indemnify the city against any damages that the city may suffer as a result of the grantee's failure to operate the system. 
2.  All officers, agents, or employees of the grantee, or its contractors or subcontractors, who, in the normal course of work come into contact with members of the public, or who require entry onto subscribers' premises, must carry a photo-identification card in a form approved by the city. The grantee must account for all identification cards at all times. All vehicles of the grantee or its subcontractors shall be clearly identified as vehicles engaged in providing services for the grantee. 
3.  Additional standards relating to service, customer protection, and response by the grantee to subscriber complaints not otherwise provided for in this chapter may be established in the franchise agreement or by separate ordinance, before or after a franchise is granted. A verified and continuing pattern of noncompliance may be deemed a material breach of the franchise, provided that the grantee is entitled to receive written notification and an opportunity to cure, before any sanction is imposed. 
K.  Penalties for Noncompliance. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to impose penalties for the violation of the customer service standards established by this chapter as authorized by the Video Customer Service Act (Government Code Section 53088 et seq.) These penalties are in addition to the remedies provided by Section 5.20.130. The imposition of such penalties shall not prevent the city from exercising any other remedy provided by law. 
2.  Administration and Appeals. 
a.  The city manager or his designee is authorized to administer this subsection. Decisions by the city manager to assess penalties against the grantee shall be in writing and shall contain findings supporting the decisions. Decisions by the city manager shall be final, unless appealed to the city council. 
b.  In the event that the grantee, any interested person, or the city is aggrieved by a decision of the city manager, the aggrieved party may, within ten days of the written decision, appeal that decision in writing to the city council. The appeal letter must be accompanied by the fee established by the city council for processing the appeal. The city council may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the city manager. 
c.  Schedule of Penalties. The following schedule of monetary penalties may be assessed against the grantee for material breach of the provisions of the customer service standards set forth in Section 5.20.060 of this chapter, provided the breach is not out of the reasonable control of the grantee. 
i.  The maximum penalty shall be two hundred dollars for each day of material breach, but shall not exceed six hundred dollars for each occurrence of the material breach. 
ii.  For a second material breach of the same nature within a twelve-month period for which the city has provided notice and a penalty has been assessed, the maximum penalty shall be four hundred dollars for each day of the material breach, but shall not exceed one thousand two hundred dollars for each occurrence of the material breach. 
iii.  For a third material breach of the same nature within a twelve-month period for which the city has provided notice and a penalty has been assessed, the maximum penalty shall be one thousand dollars for each day of the material breach, but shall not exceed three thousand dollars for each occurrence of the material breach. 
d.  Judicial Remedy. Nothing in this schedule shall preclude a party affected by this subsection from utilizing any judicial remedy available to that party. 
e.  Notification of Breach. The city shall give the grantee written notice of any alleged breaches of the consumer service standards and allow the grantee at least thirty days from receipt of the notice to remedy the specified breach. For the purpose of assessing penalties, a material breach shall be deemed to have occurred for each day, following the expiration of the period specified herein, that any breach has not been remedied by the grantee, irrespective of the number of subscribers affected. 
L.  Free Service for Noncompliance. Notwithstanding any other penalties or remedies provided by this chapter or any other law, the grantee shall provide the following months of the most widely subscribed to service tier to subscribers affected by the grantee's failure to comply with the specified consumer protection and service standard: 
1.  One Month Free Service. The grantee shall provide one month of free service to each subscriber affected by the failure of the grantee to timely and satisfactorily comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Pick-up and/or replacement of converters or other equipment within fourteen days after subscriber request (Section 5.20.060(A)(1)(i)). 
b.  Forty-eight hour notice of service interruption (Section 5.20.060(B)(1)). 
c.  Response time for system outages and inferior signal quality (Section 5.20.060(B)(2)). 
d.  Resolution of cable system related problems within three business days (Section 5.20.060(B)(5)). One additional month of free service shall be provided for each seven-day period that the problem remains unresolved. 
e.  Written response to billing complaints. (Section 5.20.060(C)(3)). 
f.  Credits and refunds (Section 5.20.060(C)(4)). 
g.  Provision of all required information to subscribers (Section 5.20.060(C)(5)). 
h.  Completion of termination or downgrade of service (Section 5.20.060(F)(1)). 
2.  Three Months Free Service. The grantee shall provide three months of free service to each subscriber affected by the failure of the grantee to timely and satisfactorily comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Disconnection of subscriber service without just cause and such service is not reconnected within two hours after notice to the grantee during normal business hours (Section 5.20.060(F)(2)). 
b.  Refusal to provide parental control devices (Section 5.20.060(I)). 
A subscriber shall not be entitled to free service under this subsection unless the subscriber provides notice to the grantee of the applicable violation within ten days after the violation occurs. If a dispute exists between the grantee and the subscriber as to whether a violation has occurred, the city shall make the final determination as to whether free service must be provided. 
(Ord. 1416 N.S. §§ 3—12, 1998; Ord. 1371 N.S. § 1 (part), 1997)  
5.20.070 - Franchise fee and financial requirements. 
A.  Franchise Fee. 
1.  Following the issuance and acceptance of the franchise, the grantee shall pay to the city a franchise fee on cable service revenues in the amount and at the times set forth in the franchise agreement. For revenues from other telecommunications services, the grantee shall pay to the city an in-lieu franchise fee in the maximum amount permitted by applicable law. 
2.  On an annual basis, the grantee shall submit to the city a statement within one hundred and twenty days of the close of the calendar year setting forth the computation of gross revenues used to calculate the franchise fee for the preceding year and a detailed explanation of the method of calculation. The statement shall include a detailed analysis of gross revenues received during the preceding year, including without limitation, (i) total gross revenues by category (e.g., basic, pay, pay-per-view, advertising, installation, equipment, late charges, and other recurring sources of revenue); (ii) the types and amounts of revenues, if any, excluded from the calculation of gross revenues; (iii) the value of any non-cash compensation received; (iv) any deductions made from gross revenues such as bad debts, and the amount of such deductions; and (v) if an outside agency was used to collect revenue, how much revenue was received by such agency. The statement shall be certified by the chief financial officer of the grantee and if requested by the city an independent certified public accountant. 
3.  Upon thirty days prior written notice, the city has the right to conduct an independent audit of the grantee's records in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. If that audit indicates a franchise fee or in-lieu fee underpayment of two percent or more, the grantee shall assume and pay all reasonable costs of that audit. 
4.  Except as otherwise provided by law, no acceptance of any payment by the city will be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for additional sums payable as a franchise fee or in-lieu fee under this chapter, or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee. 
5.  If any franchise or in-lieu fee payment or recomputed amount is not made on or before the dates specified in the franchise agreement, the grantee shall pay as additional compensation: 
a.  An interest charge, computed from the specified due date until the date that payment is made, at an annual rate equal to the prime lending rate of any national bank selected by the city, plus one percent; and 
b.  If the payment is late by forty-five days or more, a sum of money equal to five percent of the amount due in order to defray additional expenses and costs incurred by the city by reason of the delinquent payment. 
6.  Franchise fee or in-lieu fee payments shall be made in accordance with the schedule specified in the franchise agreement. 
B.  Security Fund. 
1.  The city may require the grantee to provide a security fund, in an amount and in the form specified in the franchise agreement. The amount of the security fund will be established based on the nature and extent of the grantee's obligations under the terms of the franchise agreement. 
2.  The security fund shall be available to the city to satisfy all claims, liens, and taxes due the city from the grantee that arise by reason of the construction, operation, or maintenance of the system, and to satisfy any actual or liquidated damages or penalties arising out of a breach of the franchise, subject to the procedures and conditions set forth in the franchise agreement. 
3.  If the security fund is drawn upon by the city in accordance with the procedures established in this chapter and the franchise agreement, the grantee shall cause the security fund to be replenished to its original amount no later than thirty days after any withdrawal by the city. Failure to replenish the security fund will be deemed a material breach of the franchise. 
(Ord. 1416 N.S. § 13, 1998; Ord. 1371 N.S. § 1 (part), 1997)  
5.20.080 - Construction requirements. 
A.  System Construction. 
1.  The grantee may not construct any cable system facilities until the grantee has secured the necessary permits from the city, or from other public agencies having jurisdiction over that construction. 
2.  In those areas of the city where transmission lines or distribution facilities of the public utilities providing telephone and electric power service are underground, the grantee must likewise construct, operate, and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground. 
3.  In those areas of the city where the grantee's cables are located on the above-ground transmission or distribution facilities of any public utility providing telephone or electric power service, and if the facilities of both those city's public utilities are subsequently placed underground, then the grantee must likewise reconstruct, operate, and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground, at the grantee's sole cost. The grantee's equipment, which normally is placed above ground, such as pedestals, amplifiers, and power supplies, may continue to remain in above-ground enclosures, unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement. 
4.  Any changes in or extensions of any poles, anchors, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, or other fixtures and equipment ("structures"), or the construction of any additional structures in, upon, along, across, under, or over the streets, alleys, and public ways, shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. If the proposed change, extension, or construction conforms to the provisions of this chapter and this code, the city engineer will issue written permits for that work. The height of all aerial wires above public thoroughfares must conform to the requirements of the California regulatory agency having jurisdiction over this matter. 
a.  All transmission and distribution structures, lines, and equipment erected by the grantee must be located so as not to interfere with the proper use of streets, alleys, and other public ways and places, and so as to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of those streets, alleys, or other public ways and places. These facilities must not interfere with existing public utility installations. 
b.  If any property or improvements of the city in the public rights-of-way are disturbed or damaged by the grantee, or by any of its contractors, agents, or employees, in connection with the performance of any work authorized by this chapter or by the franchise agreement, the grantee shall promptly, at the grantee's sole cost and expense, restore as nearly as practicable to its former condition the property or those improvements that were disturbed or damaged. If any such property or improvements at any later time become uneven, unsettled, or otherwise require restoration, repair, or replacement because of such disturbance or damage by the grantee, then the grantee, as soon as reasonably possible, shall, upon receipt of notice from the city and at the grantee's sole cost and expense, restore as nearly as practicable to their former condition the property or improvements that were disturbed or damaged. Any such restoration by the grantee must be made in accordance with those specifications that may, from time to time, be adopted by the city. 
c.  Before commencing any work in the public rights-of-way, the grantee shall obtain all permits lawfully required for that work by this code. However, if emergency work is required, the grantee shall obtain all permits within three working days after commencing that emergency work. 
d.  The grantee may not unreasonably or unnecessarily obstruct the public rights-of-way in performing any of the work authorized by this chapter. The grantee shall maintain such barriers, signs, and warning signals during the performance of work on or adjacent to the public rights-of-way as may be necessary to reasonably avoid injury or damage to life and property. 
e.  If at any time during the term of the franchise the city lawfully elects to alter or change the grade or location of any street, alley, or other public rights-of-way, the grantee shall, upon at least ninety days written notice by the city, remove and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other fixtures at its own expense, and in each instance comply with the requirements of the city. The requirement for ninety days prior written notice shall not apply in the event of an emergency threatening the public health or safety. 
f.  The grantee may not place poles, conduits, or other fixtures above or below ground where they will interfere with any gas, electric, or telephone fixtures, water hydrants, or other utilities. All such poles, conduits, or other fixtures placed in any street shall be placed so as to comply with all laws or regulations of the city. 
g.  The grantee may be required by the city to permit joint use by other utilities of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys, or other public rights-of-way, insofar as that joint use is reasonably practicable and payment of reasonable rental is required; provided, however, that in the absence of agreement regarding such joint use, the city will provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of that joint use, including the compensation to be paid for it, and the arbitration award will be final. 
h.  The grantee shall, on request of any person holding a moving permit issued by the city, temporarily move its wires or fixtures to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of that temporary removal will be paid by the person requesting it, and the grantee must be given not less than forty-eight hours advance notice to arrange for that temporary removal. 
i.  The grantee has the authority, except when in conflict with any existing law, to trim trees that are upon or overhanging the streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public places so as to prevent the branches of those trees from coming in contact with the grantee's wires and cables. However, at the option of the city, such trimming may be done by the city, or under its supervision and direction, at the expense of the grantee. 
B.  Multiple Franchises. 
1.  If more than one franchise is awarded, the city reserves the right to limit the number of drop cables per residence, or to require that the drop cable or cables be used only by the cable operator selected by the resident to provide service. 
2.  The city reserves the right to grant an encroachment permit to an applicant for a cable franchise to install conduit or cable in anticipation of the granting of that franchise. Such installations are at the applicant's sole risk, with no recourse against the city if the pending franchise application is not granted. The city may require an applicant to provide a separate trench for its conduit or cable, at the applicant's sole cost. 
(Ord. 1416 N.S. § 14, 1998; Ord. 1371 N.S. § 1 (part), 1997)  
5.20.090 - Technical standards. 
A.  Applicable Technical Standards. The grantee shall construct, install, operate, and maintain its system in a manner consistent with all applicable laws, ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements, FCC technical standards, and any additional standards that may be set forth in the franchise agreement. In addition, the grantee must provide to the city, upon request, a written report of the results of the grantee's periodic proof of performance tests that are conducted in accordance with FCC standards and guidelines. 
B.  Noncompliance with Standards. The repeated and verified failure of the grantee to maintain specified technical standards will constitute a material breach of the franchise. 
(Ord. 1371 N.S. § 1 (part), 1997)  
5.20.100 - Indemnification and insurance requirements. 
A.  Hold Harmless. The grantee will indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, and employees, from any liability, claims, damages, costs, or expenses, to the extent provided in the franchise agreement. 
B.  Insurance. 
1.  On or before the commencement of franchise operations, the grantee shall obtain policies of liability, workers' compensation, and property insurance from qualified insurance companies that are admitted surety insurers in the state of California. 
2.  The policies of liability insurance shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Be issued to the grantee and name the city, its officers, agents, and employees, as additional insureds. 
b.  Indemnify for all liability for personal and bodily injury, death, and damage to property arising from activities conducted and premises used under the authority of this chapter by providing coverage that includes, without limitation, the following: 
i.  Negligent acts or omissions of the grantee, and its agents, servants and employees, that are committed in the conduct of franchise operations; and 
ii.  Use of motor vehicles. 
c.  Provide a combined single limit for comprehensive general liability and comprehensive automobile liability insurance in the amount provided for in the franchise agreement. The liability insurance policy is subject to review and approval by the city risk manager. 
d.  Be subject to cancellation only upon thirty days prior written notice directed to the city. 
3.  The policy of workers' compensation insurance shall comply with the laws of the state of California. 
4.  The policy of property insurance shall provide fire insurance with extended coverage on the franchise property used by the grantee in the conduct of its franchise operations in an amount adequate to enable the grantee to resume franchise operations following the occurrence of any risk covered by this insurance. 
5.  Prior to commencement of its franchise operations, the grantee shall file with the city a certificate of insurance for each of the required policies. The certificate of insurance must be executed by the company issuing the policy, or by a broker authorized to issue that certificate, and must certify that the policy is in force and must provide the following information with respect to the insurance policy: 
a.  The policy number; 
b.  The date upon which the policy will become effective and the date upon which it will expire; 
c.  The names of the named insureds and any additional insureds required by the franchise agreement; 
d.  The subject of the insurance; 
e.  The type of coverage provided by the insurance; and 
f.  The amount or limit of coverage provided by the insurance policy. 
The grantee shall provide copies of all relevant insurance policies required by this chapter to the city upon request. 
6.  Franchise operations may not commence until the grantee has complied with the provisions of this subsection. 
7.  If the grantee fails to maintain any of the above-described policies in full force and effect, the city, upon forty-eight hours notice to the grantee, has the right to procure the required insurance and to recover its cost from the grantee. The city also has the right to suspend the franchise during any period that the grantee fails to maintain the insurance policies in full force and effect. In order to account for increases in consumer prices, the city has the right, no more than once during any five year period, to order the grantee to increase the amounts of the insurance coverage specified in the franchise agreement. Increases in insurance coverage will be based upon current prudent business practices of like enterprises involving the same or similar risks. 
(Ord. 1371 N.S. § 1 (part), 1997)  
5.20.110 - Records and reports. 
A.  Records Required. 
1.  The grantee shall maintain at all times: 
a.  A record of all service calls and interruptions or degradations of service experienced for the preceding two years, provided that those complaints result in or require a service call. 
b.  A complete set of plans, records, and "as-built" maps showing the locations of the cable television system installed or in use in the city, exclusive of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in subscribers' homes. 
c.  If requested by the city, a summary of service calls, identifying the number, general nature, and disposition of those calls on a monthly basis. A summary of those service calls shall be submitted to the city within thirty days following any city request and in a form reasonably acceptable to the city. 
2.  The city may submit requests for additional information, records, and documents from time to time, provided that they reasonably relate to the scope of the city's rights under this chapter or the franchise agreement. 
3.  Upon reasonable notice, and during normal business hours, the grantee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the city of all franchise property and facilities, together with any appurtenant property and facilities of the grantee situated within or outside the city, and all records relating to the franchise, provided they are necessary to enable the city to carry out its regulatory responsibilities under this chapter or the franchise agreement. The grantee has the right to be present at any such examination. 
B.  Annual Reports. 
1.  Within ninety days after the end of each calendar year, the grantee shall submit to the city, if requested, an annual report with respect to the preceding calendar year. This annual report must be in a form approved by the city, and may include, without limitation, the following information: 
a.  A summary of the previous year's activities relating to development of the cable system, including services commenced or discontinued during the reporting year. 
b.  A list of the grantee's officers, members of its board of directors, and other principals. 
c.  A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding five percent or more of the voting interest in the grantee. 
d.  Information as to the number of homes passed, subscribers, additional television outlets, and the number of basic and pay-per-view subscribers. 
e.  Any other information relevant to franchise regulation that the city may reasonably request. 
2.  Upon request, the grantee must submit to the city copies of all pleading, applications, reports, decisions, correspondence, and actions submitted to or received from any federal, state, or local court, regulatory agency, or other governmental body, which documents are non-routine in nature and which may materially affect the grantee's cable television operations within the franchise service area. Information submitted to the city that by law is protected from disclosure, and is so designated by the grantee, will be retained in confidence by the city and its authorized agents to the extent permitted by law, and will not be made available for public inspection. However, the grantee has no obligation to provide to the city copies of documents that contain the grantees's trade secrets or are otherwise of a confidential or proprietary nature unless it receives satisfactory assurances that such information will be held in strict confidence by the city. To the extent possible, the grantee will provide the city with summaries or copies of any required documents from which trade secrets and proprietary matters have been deleted. The burden of proof will be on the grantee to establish the confidential nature of any information submitted, to the reasonable satisfaction of the city. 
3.  If the grantee is publicly held, a copy of the grantee's annual and other periodic reports submitted to its shareholders shall be delivered to the city within forty-five days after their issuance. 
4.  Upon the city's request, but no more frequently than annually, the grantee shall submit to the city a privacy report indicating its compliance with the provisions contained in Section 5.20.160(C) and all measures taken to ensure that the privacy rights of individuals are being protected. 
5.  All reports required under this chapter, except those required by law to be kept confidential, will be available for public inspection in the city's offices during normal business hours. 
6.  All reports and records required under this chapter will be furnished at the sole expense of the grantee, unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement. 
7.  The willful refusal, failure, or neglect of the grantee to file when due any of the reports required under this chapter may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement if those reports are not provided to the city within thirty days after written request. Any such material breach may subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, that are available to the city under this chapter or the franchise agreement. 
8.  Any materially false or misleading statement or representation that is knowingly and willfully made by the grantee in any report required under this chapter or the franchise agreement may be deemed a material breach of the franchise and may subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, that are available to the city. 
(Ord. 1416 N.S. §§ 15, 16, 1998; Ord. 1371 N.S. § 1 (part), 1997)  
5.20.120 - Review of system performance. 
A.  Annual Review. 
1.  Each year during the term of the franchise, if requested by the city, the grantee and the city will meet publicly to review system performance and quality of service. The various reports required by this chapter, results of technical performance tests, the record of subscriber complaints and the grantee's response to those complaints, and the information obtained from any subscriber surveys will be used as the basis for review. In addition, any subscriber may submit comments or complaints during the review meetings, either orally or in writing, and these comments or complaints also will be considered. Within thirty days after the conclusion of a system performance review meeting, the city may issue findings with respect to the grantee's compliance with the franchise and quality of service. 
2.  If the city determines that the grantee is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter or the franchise agreement, the city may direct the grantee to correct the areas of noncompliance within a reasonable period of time. Failure of the grantee, after due notice, to correct the areas of noncompliance within the period specified, or to commence compliance within that period and diligently achieve compliance thereafter, will be deemed a material breach of the franchise, and the city may exercise any remedy provided by this chapter or the franchise agreement. 
B.  Special Review. 
1.  When complaints are made, or where other evidence exists that, in the city's judgment, casts reasonable doubt on the reliability or quality of cable service and indicates that the grantee is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter or its franchise, the city has the right to compel the grantee to test, analyze, and report on the performance of the system in order to protect the public against substandard cable service. 
2.  The city may not compel the grantee to provide such tests or reports unless the city has provided the grantee with at least thirty days notice of its intention to exercise its rights under this subsection and has provided the grantee with an opportunity to be heard prior to the exercise of these rights. 
3.  The test or tests shall be made and the report delivered to the city, at the grantee's sole cost, no later than thirty days after the city notifies the grantee that it is exercising its rights. The report must include the following information: the nature of the complaints that precipitated the special tests; the system components that were tested; the equipment and procedures used in the testing; the results of the tests; and the method by which the complaints were resolved. Any other information pertinent to the special tests must be reported. 
C.  Special Evaluation Sessions. The city may hold special evaluation sessions at any time during the term of the franchise, provided that these sessions are held not more frequently than once every three years. The grantee shall be notified of the time, place, and date of the sessions and the topics to be discussed. These sessions will be open to the public and advertised in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten days before each session. The sessions may include an evaluation of any items considered relevant to the cable system, the subscribers, and the city. Either the city or the grantee may propose items for discussion or evaluation. 
(Ord. 1371 N.S. § 1 (part), 1997)  
5.20.130 - Franchise violations. 
A.  Remedies for Franchise Violations. If the grantee fails to perform in a timely manner any obligation set forth in this chapter or in a franchise granted hereunder, following notice from the city and an opportunity to cure that nonperformance in accordance with the provisions of this section or the franchise agreement, the city may, in its sole discretion: 
1.  Cure the violation and recover the actual cost of cure from the security fund if the violation is not cured within thirty days after written notice to the grantee of the city's intention to cure and to draw upon the security fund. 
2.  Assess liquidated damages against the grantee in the amount set forth in the franchise agreement if the violation is not cured, or if the grantee has not commenced to cure, on a schedule acceptable to the city, within thirty days after written notice to the grantee of the city's intention to assess liquidated damages. This assessment may be withdrawn from the security fund, and will not constitute a waiver by the city of any other right or remedy it may have under the franchise or applicable law, including without limitation, its right to recover from the grantee any additional damages, losses, costs, and expenses, including actual attorney's fees, that may have been suffered or incurred by the city by reason of or arising out of that breach of the franchise. 
B.  Procedure for Remedying Franchise Violations. Prior to imposing any remedy or other sanction specified in this section, the city must give the grantee notice and the opportunity to be heard on the matter, in accordance with the following procedures: 
1.  The city must first notify the grantee of the violation in writing, by personal delivery or by certified mail, return-receipt requested, and demand correction within a reasonable time. That time period may not be less than fifteen days in the case of the failure of the grantee to pay any amount due the city under this chapter or the franchise agreement, and thirty days in all other cases. If the grantee fails to correct the violation within the time prescribed, or if the grantee fails to commence correction of the violation within the time prescribed and diligently remedy the violation, the city shall then give not less than thirty days written notice of a public hearing to be held by the city council. The notice must specify the violations alleged to have occurred. 
2.  At the public hearing, the city council shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, and then render its findings and decision. 
3.  If the city council finds that the grantee has corrected the violation, or has commenced correction of the violation after notice from the city and is diligently proceeding to remedy the violation, or that no violation has occurred, then the proceedings will terminate and no penalty or other sanction will be imposed. 
4.  If the city council finds that violations exist and that the grantee has not corrected them in a satisfactory manner, or has not commenced correction of the violation after notice from the city and is not diligently proceeding to remedy the violation to the satisfaction of the city, then the city council may, in its discretion, impose one or more of the remedies provided in this chapter or in the franchise agreement, as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
C.  City's Power to Revoke. The city reserves the right to revoke any franchise granted under this chapter and to rescind all rights and privileges associated with it in any of the following circumstances, each of which constitutes a default by the grantee under the franchise: 
1.  The grantee's default in the performance of its obligations under this chapter or the franchise agreement and the continuance of that default after receipt of due notice and a reasonable opportunity to cure. 
2.  The grantee's failure to provide, or to maintain in full force and effect, the insurance coverage or security fund in the amounts specified in the franchise agreement. 
3.  The grantee's violation of any order or ruling of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to the franchise, unless that order or ruling is being contested in good faith by the grantee in judicial or administrative proceedings. 
4.  The grantee's acts or omissions that involve any fraud or deceit as to the city. 
5.  The grantee's insolvency, inability to pay its debts, or adjudication as a bankrupt. 
The revocation and termination of the grantee's franchise does not affect any right of the city to pursue any other remedy under the franchise or applicable law. 
(Ord. 1416 N.S. § 17, 1998; Ord. 1371 N.S. § 1 (part), 1997)  
5.20.140 - Force majeure—Grantee's inability to perform. 
If the grantee's performance of any of the terms, conditions, or obligations required by this chapter or by a franchise granted hereunder is prevented by a cause or event not within the grantee's control, that inability to perform will be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions will be imposed; provided, however, that such inability to perform will not relieve the grantee from any obligations imposed by Section 5.20.060(C)(4) pertaining to refunds and credits for interruptions in service. For the purpose of this section, causes or events not within the control of the grantee include, without limitation, acts of God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court, explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters, such as floods, earthquakes, landslides, and fires. Such causes or events do not include the financial inability of the grantee to perform, the failure of the grantee to obtain any necessary permits or licenses from other governmental agencies, the failure to obtain the right to use the facilities of any public utility where that failure is due solely to the acts or omissions of the grantee, or the failure of the grantee to obtain supplies, services, or equipment necessary for the installation, operation, maintenance, or repair of the cable television system where the grantee has failed to exercise reasonable diligence to secure those supplies, services, or equipment. 
(Ord. 1371 N.S. § 1 (part), 1997)  
5.20.150 - Abandonment or removal of franchise property. 
A.  Abandonment or Removal. 
1.  If the use of any property of the grantee within the public rights-of-way is discontinued for a consecutive twelve-month period, the grantee will be deemed to have abandoned that franchise property. Any part of the cable system that is parallel or redundant to other parts of the system, and is intended for use only when needed as a backup for all or a portion of the system, will not be deemed to have been abandoned because of its lack of use. 
2.  Upon such terms as the city may impose, the city may authorize the grantee to abandon, and not remove, any underground facility or equipment that is laid, constructed, operated, or maintained under the franchise. Unless that authorization is granted, or unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, the grantee shall remove all underground facilities and equipment upon receipt of written notice from the city and restore any affected street to the state existing at the time such facilities and equipment were installed, so as not to impair its usefulness. In removing its plant, structures, and equipment, the grantee must refill, at its sole expense, any excavation made by it and must leave all public ways and places in as good condition as that prevailing prior to such removal and without materially interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires, poles, or attachments. The city has the right to inspect and approve the condition of the public ways, public places, cables, wires, attachments, and poles prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity, and insurance provisions of this chapter, and the security fund provided by the grantee will continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by the grantee with the terms and conditions of this subsection. 
3.  Upon abandonment in place of any franchise property, the grantee, if required by the city, shall submit to the city an instrument, satisfactory in form to the city, transferring to the city the ownership of the abandoned franchise property. 
4.  Upon expiration of the term of the franchise, or upon its earlier revocation or termination, the city has the right to require the grantee to remove, at its sole expense, all above-ground portions of the cable television system from all streets and public ways within the city within a reasonable period of time, which will be not less than one hundred eighty days. 
B.  Restoration by the City—Reimbursement of Costs. If the grantee fails to complete any work required by this chapter, the franchise agreement, or any other law, or if that work is not completed within thirty days after receipt of written notice from the city, or, if more than thirty days are reasonably required for that work, the grantee does not commence the work within that thirty day period and diligently complete the work, then the city may cause that work to be done. The grantee shall reimburse the city the costs of completing that work within thirty days after receipt of an itemized list of those costs, or the city may recover those costs from the security fund provided by the grantee. 
C.  Extended Operation and Continuity of Services. Upon either the expiration or revocation of the franchise, the city may authorize the grantee to continue to operate the cable television system for an extended period of time. In such event, the grantee must continue to operate the system under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise and to provide the regular subscriber services and any other services that may then be provided. All subscribers will have the right to continue to receive all available services, provided their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. The grantee shall use all reasonable efforts to provide continuous, uninterrupted service to its subscribers, including operation of the system during any transition period following franchise expiration or termination. 
D.  Receivership and Foreclosure. 
1.  A franchise granted in accordance with this chapter will, at the option of the city, terminate one hundred twenty days after the appointment of a receiver or a trustee to take over and conduct the business of the grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy, or similar action or proceeding, unless that receivership or trusteeship is vacated prior to the expiration of that one hundred twenty day period, or unless: 
a.  The receiver or trustee, within one hundred twenty days after election or appointment, fully complies with all terms and provisions of this chapter and the franchise agreement, and remedies all defaults under the franchise or provides a plan to remedy those defaults that is satisfactory to the city; and 
b.  The receiver or trustee, within that one hundred twenty day period, executes an agreement, duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the matter, whereby the receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by every provision of the franchise agreement. 
2.  Upon a foreclosure or judicial sale of the franchise property, or any material part of that property, the city may serve notice of termination upon the grantee and the successful bidder at that sale, in which event the franchise and all rights and privileges of the grantee under that franchise will terminate thirty days after service of that notice, unless: 
a.  The city has approved the transfer of the franchise in the manner provided by this chapter; and 
b.  The successful bidder covenants and agrees with the city to assume and to be bound by all provisions of the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 1371 N.S. § 1 (part), 1997)  
5.20.160 - Rights of the city and subscribers. 
A.  City's Reservation of Rights. In addition to the rights specifically reserved to the city by this chapter, the city reserves to itself every right and power that may be reserved by the provisions of any law or the franchise agreement. 
B.  Waiver. The city has the right to waive any provisions of the franchise agreement, except those required by federal or state laws or regulations, if the city determines that it is in the public interest to do so, and that the enforcement of those provisions will impose an undue hardship on the grantee or the subscribers. To be effective, a waiver must be in writing and signed by an authorized representative of the city. The waiver of any provision in one instance will not be deemed a waiver of that provision in any other instance, nor will it be deemed a waiver of any other provision of the franchise unless that fact is so stated. 
C.  Rights of Individuals. 
1.  The grantee may not deny service or access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users, or residents on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age, or sex. The grantee must comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations relating to nondiscrimination. 
2.  The grantee must comply with all applicable equal employment opportunity requirements of federal, state, and local laws and regulations, as they now exist or as they may be amended from time to time. 
3.  Neither the grantee, nor any other person or entity may, without a subscriber's consent, tap, or arrange for the tapping, of any cable, line, signal input device, or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose other than routine maintenance of the system, detection of unauthorized service, polling with audience participation, or audience viewing surveys to support advertising research regarding viewers where individual viewing behavior cannot be identified. 
4.  In providing its services, or in pursuing any collateral commercial enterprise relating to those services, the grantee must take all reasonable precautions to prevent the invasion of a subscriber's or a resident's right of privacy, and other civil rights, as delineated or defined by applicable law. The grantee may not, without a lawful court order or other legal authority, use any interactive two-way equipment or capability of the cable system for unauthorized personal surveillance of any subscriber or resident. 
5.  No cable, line, wire, amplifier, converter, or other equipment owned by the grantee may be installed in a subscriber's premises, other than in lawfully-obtained easements, without first obtaining any required consent. If a subscriber requests service, permission to install upon that subscriber's property will be presumed. 
6.  Neither the grantee, nor any of its agents, employees or subcontractors, may sell, or otherwise make available to any person, without the prior written consent of the subscriber under state and federal privacy laws, any of the following: 
a.  A list containing the names and addresses any subscribers who have requested in writing to be removed from that list. 
b.  Any list that identifies the viewing habits of individual subscribers. This does not prohibit the grantee from providing to other persons composite ratings of subscriber viewing preferences. 
(Ord. 1371 N.S. § 1 (part), 1997)  
5.20.170 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms, phrases, and their derivations have the meanings set forth below. Words used in the present tense include the future tense, and words in the singular number include the plural number. Words not defined are to be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
"Basic cable service" or "basic service" means any service tier that includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals. 
"Cable television system" or "system", also referred to as "cable communications system" or "cable system", means a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment, that is designed to provide cable service, including video programming and any other lawful telecommunications services, and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the community; but this term does not include: 
1.  A facility that serves only to transmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
2.  A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple-unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless that facility uses any public rights-of-way; 
3.  A facility of a common carrier, except that such facility will be considered a cable system to the extent that facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; 
4.  Any facilities of an electric utility that are used solely for operating an electric utility system; or 
5.  An open video system that complies with Section 653 of Title VI of the Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
"Cable service" means the total of the following: 
1.  The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service; and 
2.  Subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service. 
"Channel" or "cable channel" means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum used in a cable system that is capable of delivering a television channel as defined by the federal communications commission. 
"City" means the city of Morgan Hill as represented by the city council or by any delegate, acting within the scope of its jurisdiction. 
"Council" means the city council of the city of Morgan Hill. 
"Franchise" means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city council, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, that authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, does not supersede the requirement to obtain any other license or permit required for the privilege of transacting business within the city as set forth in other ordinances and laws of the city. 
"Franchise agreement" means a franchise granted by ordinance, or a contractual agreement, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted, including references, specifications, requirements, and other related matters. 
"Franchise fee" means any fee or assessment of any kind imposed by the city on a grantee as compensation for the grantee's use of the public rights-of-way. The term "franchise fee" does not include: 
1.  Any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services); 
2.  Capital costs that are required by the franchise to be incurred by the grantee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities; 
3.  Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or 
4.  Any fee imposed under Title 17 of the United States Code. 
"Grantee" means any person receiving a franchise in accordance with this chapter, and that person's lawful successor, transferee, or assignee. 
"Gross annual cable service revenues" means the annual gross revenues received from all operations of the cable television system within the city, excluding refundable deposits, rebates, or credits, and further excluding any sales, excise, or other taxes or charges collected for direct pass-through to the local, state or federal government. Revenues collected as franchise fees from subscribers shall be included in gross annual cable service revenues as permitted by law. 
"Gross annual telecommunications service revenues" means the annual revenues received by a grantee from the operation of a cable system to provide telecommunications services other than cable service. 
"Installation" means the connection of the system to subscribers' terminals, and the provision of service. 
"Person" means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, or governmental entity. 
"Public, educational or government access facilities" or "PEG access facilities" means the total of the following: 
1.  Channel capacity designated for noncommercial public, educational, or government use; and 
2.  Facilities and equipment for the use of that channel capacity. 
"Service area" or "franchise service area" means the entire geographic area of the city as it is now constituted, or may in the future be constituted, unless otherwise specified in the ordinance or resolution granting the franchise, or in the franchise agreement. 
"Service tier" means a category of cable service or other services provided by a grantee and for which a separate rate is charged by the grantee. 
"Street" or "public way" means each of the following that has been dedicated to the public or is later dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and located within the city limits: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way, and similar public property and areas that the city authorizes to be included within the definition of street from time to time. 
"Subscriber" or "customer" or "consumer" means any person subscribing to, for any purpose, a service provided by the grantee by means of or in connection with the cable system, and who pays the charges for that service. 
(Ord. 1371 N.S. § 1 (part), 1997)  
5.20.180 - Severability. 
If any provision of this chapter is determined by any court of competent jurisdiction, or by any federal or state agency having jurisdiction over its subject matter, to be invalid and in conflict with any paramount federal or state law or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is determined by that court or agency to require modification in order to conform to the requirements of that paramount law or regulation, then that provision will be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent part of this chapter, and such determination will not affect the validity and enforceability of any other provisions. If that paramount federal or state law or regulation is subsequently repealed or amended so that the provision of this chapter determined to be invalid or subject to modification is no longer in conflict with that law or regulation, then that provision will again become effective and will thereafter be binding on the city and the grantee; provided, however, that the city must give the grantee thirty days written notice of that change before requiring compliance with that provision or such longer period of time as may be reasonably required for the grantee to comply with that provision. 
(Ord. 1371 N.S. § 1 (part), 1997)  
Chapter 5.21 - STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES 
 
5.21.010 - Purpose and application. 
This chapter is designed to regulate video service providers holding state video franchises and operating within the city pursuant to that franchise. On January 1, 2007, the state of California became the sole authority with power to grant state video franchises pursuant to the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 ("DIVCA"), codified at Public Utilities Code Section 5800 et seq. under the California Public Utilities Commission final rulemaking decision dated March 1, 2007. Pursuant to DIVCA, the city of Morgan Hill shall receive a franchise fee and a fee for public, educational and/or government (PEG) purposes from all state video franchise holders operating within the city. Additionally, the city acquired the responsibility to establish and enforce penalties, consistent with state law, against all state video franchise holders operating within the city for violations of customer service standards pursuant to DIVCA. 
(Ord. 1903 N.S. § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1904 N.S. § 2 (part), 2008)  
5.21.020 - State video franchise fees. 
Any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the city shall pay a fee to the city equal to five percent of the "gross revenue" of that state video franchise holder. Gross revenue, for the purposes of this chapter, shall have the definition set forth in California Public Utilities Code § 5860. The state franchise fee shall be remitted to the applicable local entity quarterly, within forty-five days after the end of the quarter for that calendar quarter. Each payment shall be accompanied by a summary explaining the basis for the calculation of the state franchise fee. If the holder does not pay the franchise fee when due, the holder shall pay a late payment charge at a rate per year equal to the highest prime lending rate during the period of delinquency, plus one percent. If the holder has overpaid the franchise fee, it may deduct the overpayment from its next quarterly payment. 
(Ord. 1903 N.S. § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1904 N.S. § 2 (part), 2008)  
5.21.030 - PEG support fees. 
A.  Any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the city shall pay a PEG fee to the city or the city's designee for capital support of Public, Educational, and/or Governmental (PEG) purposes that are consistent with state and federal law equal to no more than one percent of gross revenues, as defined by Section 5870(n). 
B.  Upon the expiration of the current local cable franchise, every state franchisee operating within the city shall pay a PEG capital support fee of equal to one percent of gross revenues per subscriber per month. 
C.  Pursuant to section 5870(l) of the California Public Utilities Code, every state franchisee operating within the boundaries of the city shall be responsible for a pro-rata, per subscriber share of any outstanding capital grant payments. 
(Ord. 1903 N.S. § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1904 N.S. § 2 (part), 2008)  
5.21.040 - PEG channels. 
A.  The current franchise with Charter Communications Holding Co., LLC provides for four Public, Educational and Governmental channels for PEG programming. Local franchisees and holders of a state franchise under DIVCA shall provide four PEG channels. 
B.  All state franchisees shall comply with the provisions of DIVCA related to PEG channels. Without limiting the foregoing, the PEG channels shall be carried on the basic service tier. To the extent feasible, the PEG channels shall not be separated numerically from other channels carried of the basic service tier and the channel numbers for the PEG channels shall be the same channel numbers used by the incumbent cable operator as defined in Public Utilities Code Section 5830(i) unless prohibited by federal law and shall provide video and sound quality, recording capability, channel accessibility and location equal to, or substantially equal to, that provided by the incumbent cable providers. After the initial designation of PEG channel numbers, the channel numbers shall not be changed without agreement from the local entity unless the change is required by federal law. 
C.  A state franchise holder shall have three months from the date city requests the PEG channels to designate the capacity. However, the three-month period shall be tolled by any period during which the designation or provision of PEG channel capacity is technically infeasible, including any failure or delay of the incumbent cable operator to make adequate interconnection available, as required by DIVCA. Any state franchise holder who believes that the designation or provision of PEG channel capacity is technically infeasible, shall provide to city, in writing, its reasons therefore and its plan for correcting or solving the infeasibility. City may hold a hearing on the claim of infeasibility and, thereafter, take such action as city deems proper to require the designation and provision of the PEG channels on the state franchise holder's system. 
(Ord. 1903 N.S. § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1904 N.S. § 2 (part), 2008)  
5.21.050 - Audit authority. 
Not more than once annually, the city manager or the manager's designee may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a holder of a state video franchise to ensure compliance with Section 5860. 
(Ord. 1903 N.S. § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1904 N.S. § 2 (part), 2008)  
5.21.060 - Customer service penalties. 
A.  The holder of a state video franchise shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service. 
B.  The city manager or the manager's designee shall monitor the compliance of state video franchise holders with respect to state and federal customer service and protection standards. The City Manager or the Manager's designee will provide the state video franchise holder written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service standards, and will allow the state video franchise holder 30 days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the thirty day time period will be subject to the following penalties to be imposed by the City: 
1.  For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of up to five hundred dollars may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars for each violation. 
2.  For a second violation of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of up to one thousand dollars may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed three thousand dollars for each violation. 
3.  For a third or further violation of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of up to two thousand five hundred dollars may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars for each violation. 
C.  A state video franchise holder may appeal a penalty assessed by the city manager to the city council within sixty days of the initial assessment. The city council shall hear all evidence and relevant testimony and may uphold, modify or vacate the penalty. The city council's decision on the imposition of a penalty shall be final. 
D.  As used herein, "Material Breach" is defined as set forth in DIVCA as section 5900. 
(Ord. 1903 N.S. § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1904 N.S. § 2 (part), 2008)  
5.21.070 - City response to state video franchise applications. 
A.  Applicants for state video franchises within the boundaries of the city must concurrently provide complete copies to the city of any application or amendments to applications filed with the California Public Utilities Commission (PUC). One complete copy must be provided to the city manager. 
B.  Within thirty days of receipt, the city manager will provide any appropriate comments to the PUC regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a state video franchise. 
(Ord. 1903 N.S. § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1904 N.S. § 2 (part), 2008)  
5.21.080 - Public rights of way. 
All state video franchisees shall comply with the provisions of Public Utilities Code section 5885, including but not limited to those provisions that govern the installation, construction and maintenance of its network in the public rights of way, the applicability of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) to projects by a state franchisee in the city of Morgan Hill, the approval or denial of applications for encroachment permits under section 5885(c). State franchisees shall comply with the provisions of Morgan Hill Municipal Code Chapter 12.08 governing Encroachment Permits. 
(Ord. 1903 N.S. § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1904 N.S. § 2 (part), 2008)  
5.21.090 - Reservation of rights. 
The city of Morgan Hill reserves the right to enact an ordinance or to enforce Chapter 5.20 of the municipal code to regulate cable television services within the city should it be determined by state or federal law, regulation or rule, that city may enter into a local franchise with providers of cable television or video services within the city. 
(Ord. 1903 N.S. § 2 (part), 2008: Ord. 1904 N.S. § 2 (part), 2008)  
Chapter 5.28 - AMUSEMENT AND ENTERTAINMENT PREMISES 
 
5.28.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is the protection of the public safety and welfare by allowing establishments to provide entertainment which does not create a public nuisance or require excessive public safety resources to maintain order. 
(Ord. 1379 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
5.28.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall be for the purpose of this chapter only, unless specifically adopted by another section of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code. 
"Dancing" means the movement of the human body, accompanied by music or rhythm, except however, dancing as used in this chapter means dancing by patrons only. 
"Entertainment" means a single event or series of events, or an ongoing activity or business, occurring as a principle use or business or part of another business, to which the public may be invited to watch, listen, or participate, or is conducted for the purposes of holding the attention of, gaining the attention of or diverting or amusing guests or patrons, including but not limited to: 
1.  Any amusement or event such as live music or other performance which is knowingly permitted by an establishment subject to this chapter, including presentations by performer(s) such as musicians, disc jockies, operators of karaoke, hypnotists, pantomimes, comedians, song or dance acts, dancing by the patrons, or other such demonstrations of talent or such activity which may be attended by members of the public whether of not the participants in said activities are compensated by the establishment. 
2.  Establishments are exempt from this chapter which only provide juke boxes, televisions, video games, video programs, or recorded music and no other entertainment as herein defined. 
"Establishment" means any location within the limits of the city of Morgan Hill to which the public may be invited where food and/or alcoholic beverages are served. 
"Lewd conduct" is the touching of genitals, buttocks or breasts in public view for the purposes of sexual, arousal, gratification or affront, or any violation of Sections 288, 288(a), 311.6, 314, 647(a) or 647(b) of the California Penal Code. 
"Obscene" is defined by any applicable current standard set by California or federal case law. 
(Ord. 1379 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
5.28.030 - Entertainment permit required. 
A.  No person shall provide or permit any type of entertainment or dancing in a restaurant, nightclub, bar or establishment where food and/or alcoholic beverages are served and which is open to the public unless such person shall first obtain a permit to do so from the chief of police as hereinafter provided. 
B.  No entertainment or dancing will be allowed in any establishment where food and/or alcoholic beverage is served, unless a permit therefor is granted in compliance with this chapter, and unless said establishment is in complete compliance with every other applicable law or ordinance which may otherwise apply to the operation of the establishment. 
(Ord. 1379 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
5.28.040 - Exemptions. 
Entertainment events which are conducted by or sponsored by nonprofit charitable organizations, community service organizations or are provided for members and their guests at a private club where admission is not open to the public, or at a private residence where the public is not invited, or conducted in connection with regularly established community recreation programs, carnivals, or recreation parks are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1379 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
5.28.050 - Entertainment restrictions. 
Entertainment provided by or allowed by the permittee shall be restricted to that type of entertainment which is specified in the entertainment permit. In addition, the permittee is responsible to preserve the peace and maintain order within and immediately adjacent to the premises upon which the entertainment permit has been granted and to comply with all conditions specified in the permit. 
(Ord. 1379 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
5.28.060 - Entertainment permit—Application. 
A.  If a conditional use permit, or any other entitlement or license, except a certificate of occupancy, is required for the use of any establishment which proposes to provide, or which does provide, entertainment or dancing, the provisions of those permits shall be satisfied before application is made to the city for a permit under the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  An application for an entertainment permit or the renewal of such permit shall be filed with the police department at least thirty days in advance of the term, date or dates for which the application is made on forms provided by the city and shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee. 
(Ord. 1379 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
5.28.070 - Permit—Application contents. 
Each application for an entertainment permit shall contain: 
A.  A complete identification of the applicant; 
B.  The names, residential addresses, business addresses, and telephone numbers of any copartners, including limited partners or limited liability partners, or if the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation, together with the date and place of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its officers, directors, and each stockholder owning more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation or if the applicant is a limited liability company, the name of the company shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of organization, together with the date and place of the organization and the names and addresses of each of its members; 
C.  The names, residential addresses, business addresses and phone numbers of the managers or persons in charge; 
D.  The names, residential addresses, business addresses and phone numbers and written consent of the owner of the premises who shall give consent to entertainment being conducted upon the premises by signing the application in the space provided; 
E.  A floor plan and site plan showing the building interior rooms and grounds, including parking spaces, the square footage, seating capacity of the area thereof to be used for dancing or entertainment and emergency exits; 
F.  The exact nature of the proposed business which the permit is being requested and the exact nature in detail of the dancing or entertainment which is being proposed; 
G.  Whether or not any person referred to in subsections A through D of this section has had a permit for the same or similar business suspended or revoked anywhere and, if so, the circumstances of such suspension or revocation. The suspension of an Alcoholic Beverage Control license shall be considered as being included within the purposes of the subsection; 
I.  The hours of operation; and 
J.  Such other related information as the chief of police may require to preserve the public peace, safety, health and welfare of the city or its inhabitants. 
(Ord. 1379 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
5.28.080 - Permit—Granting. 
Upon receipt of an application, and after an investigation, the chief of police shall approve the application for the entertainment permit or the renewal of such permit upon finding that: 
A.  A completed written application form therefor has been filed and the required fee has been paid to the city; and 
B.  As a result of such investigation all applicable provisions of this chapter with regard to permit application have been met and that the operation by the applicant will be carried on in a building, structure, and location which complies with and meets all of the health, zoning, fire, building and safety requirements and standards of the law of the state and the city applicable to business operation; and 
C.  The applicant, employees, agents or any person connected with or associated with the applicant as a partner, director, officer or manager has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction by final judgement within the last ten years of: 
1.  An offense involving the presentation, exhibition, or performance of an obscene production or play, or 
2.  An offense involving lewd conduct, or 
3.  A felony offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another; and 
D.  That the applicant, employees, agents, or any person connected with or associated with the applicant as a partner, director, officer or manager has not knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for the permit or in any report or record required to be filed with any city agency; and 
E.  That the applicant has not had a similar type of permit previously revoked for good cause within the past year, unless the applicant has shown a material change in the circumstances since the date of revocation. 
(Ord. 1379 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
5.28.090 - Permit—Conditions. 
A.  Upon the approval of the application for an entertainment permit or the renewal of such permit, the chief of police shall issue such permit to the applicant upon such terms and conditions and restrictions not in conflict with any paramount law and as may be necessary to protect the public peace, health, safety and general welfare of the city or its inhabitants. Such conditions shall appear on the face of the permit. 
B.  Every person holding a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall keep the permit posted in a conspicuous place in clear view upon the premises to which it applies. 
(Ord. 1379 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
5.28.100 - Notice of decisions. 
Notice of the decision of the chief of police with reference to a permit application pursuant to this chapter shall be given to the applicant or any other such person requesting such notice within twenty days after the receipt of an application for a permit or the renewal of such permit. 
(Ord. 1379 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
5.28.110 - Permit—Terms. 
The term date or dates for the permitted entertainment shall be for the dates of the specific occasion requested, or if the request is for a continuous permit, the permit shall be issued for a period of not longer than one year from the original date of issue, renewable at the time the establishment's annual business license is renewed. 
(Ord. 1379 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
5.28.120 - Revocation of permit—Hearing. 
A.  The chief of police may, by written notice, revoke or suspend the permit of any person holding same in the city, upon receiving satisfactory evidence that the permittee has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter, specifically those listed in Section 5.28.080, has failed to comply with the conditions specified on the permit or any other conditional use permit, entitlement or license which regulates the establishment, or the permittee, or employees of the permittee, are engaged in conduct or behavior at the premises which creates unreasonable noise or constitutes a nuisance. Complaints registered with the police department, fire department, community development department, the state Alcoholic Beverage Control Board, or the county health department, or other government agency that regulates the establishment may be considered in the determination of whether or not a nuisance has been created. 
B.  Upon receipt of a written notice of suspension or revocation of an entertainment permit, the permittee may seek a hearing with the chief of police within five working days to show cause why the permit should not be suspended or revoked. After the hearing, the chief of police shall serve notice of his or her written decision to the permittee within five working days. 
C.  Any permittee aggrieved by the decision of the chief of police to suspend or revoke such permit, may appeal to the city manager or his designee. The written appeal must be filed with the city manager within five working days of service of the chief of police's decision. The city manager or his designee may uphold the suspension or revocation of the permit granted under this chapter if, after a hearing it is determined that the entertainment is detrimental to the public safety or welfare or that the permittee has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter, has failed to comply with the conditions specified on the permit or any other conditional use permit, entitlement or license which regulates the establishment, or the permittee, or employees of the permittee, are engaged in conduct or behavior at the premises which creates unreasonable noise or constitutes a nuisance. Complaints registered with the police department, fire department, community development department, the state alcoholic beverage control board, or the county health department, or other government agency that regulates the establishment may be considered in the determination of whether or not a nuisance has been created. 
(Ord. 1379 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
5.28.130 - Revocation of permit—Reapplication. 
Whenever a permit is revoked under the terms of this chapter, no other application for a permit under this chapter shall be considered from the same applicant for the same type of use for a period of one year from the date of such revocation. 
(Ord. 1379 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
5.28.140 - Violation. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Any establishment or business providing entertainment or dancing maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter or without a valid permit shall be declared unlawful and a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 10, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 10, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 5.28.140 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 5.28.140 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 1379 N.S., § 1(part), adopted in 1998.  
Chapter 5.32 - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2283 N.S., § 1, adopted Oct. 17, 2018, amended Ch. 5.32 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 5.32, §§ 5.32.010—5.32.110, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2002 N.S., § 1, adopted Feb. 16, 2011; and Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 11, adopted May 2, 2018. 
 
5.32.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "City manager" means the city manager of the City of Morgan Hill or his/her designee. 
B.  "Massage" "massage services" or "massage therapy" means performing any act or practice of treating the external parts of the human body by bathing, rubbing, pressing, stroking, kneading, tapping, vibrating or touching or stimulating with the hands, any part of the body or any instrument. Types of massage may include but are not limited to activities commonly known as massage therapy, bodywork, acupressure, reflexology, deep tissue touch, and shiatsu release. 
C.  "Massage establishment" means any establishment, having a fixed place of business in the city where any person engages in or permits to be engaged in or carries on any of the activities mentioned in this chapter. Any establishment engaged in, permitted to be engaged in or carrying on any combination of massage and bath house, spa, sauna or other activity mentioned in this chapter shall be deemed a massage establishment. 
D.  "Massage practitioner" or "practitioner" means a person who is certified as such by the California Massage Therapy Council and who administers massage for compensation. 
E.  "Massage therapist" or "therapist" means a person who is certified as such by the California Massage Therapy Council and who administers massage for compensation. 
F.  "Outcall massage service" means any business or operation which provides massage services at a location designated by the customer or client or the massage practitioner or therapist or outcall massage service, other than at a fixed location of a massage establishment permitted under this chapter. 
G.  "Owner" of a massage establishment, or an outcall massage service, means any person who operates, maintains, or permits a massage establishment or outcall massage service. To the extent the "owner" is any type of association, partnership, corporation or other entity, "owner" includes all publicly named or registered persons, officers, directors, managers and shareholders within those entities. Where the "owner" is one or more persons, each such person is jointly and severally liable for compliance with this chapter. 
H.  "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, joint venture or any other combination of individuals for the purpose of doing business. 
I.  "Police chief" means the Morgan Hill police chief or his/her designee. 
J.  "State massage certification" means a massage practitioner or massage therapist certification issued by the California Massage Therapy Council created pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2283 N.S., § 1, 10-17-2018)  
5.32.020 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, nurses, physical therapists or other health professionals who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions under the laws of the State of California. 
B.  Persons performing massage in the offices of a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, physical therapist or other licensed medical professional, or at a hospital, nursing home, convalescent home, hospice or sanitarium when and while under the supervision of a licensed medical professional. 
C.  Barbers or cosmetologists who are duly licensed under the laws of the State of California while performing massage within the scope of their licenses. 
D.  Persons performing massages which are clearly incidental, but integral, to the operation of a personal fitness training center, gymnasium, athletic facility or health club, when the giving of massage for compensation is not a principal function of such businesses. In determining whether massage constitutes a principal or incidental function of personal fitness training centers, gymnasiums, athletic facilities or health clubs, the police chief shall consider the percent of income derived from massages, the amount of floor space devoted to and the number of employees assigned to massage services, as well as the manner in which the business advertises and holds itself out to the public. 
E.  Coaches and trainers acting within their scope of employment at an accredited high school, junior college, college or university. 
F.  Trainers of amateur, semiprofessional or professional athletes, or athletic teams, performing troupes or similar groups while engaging in their training responsibilities for and with athletes and performers; and trainers working in conjunction with a specific athletic event or performance. 
G.  Students performing massage therapy while at an approved massage school, as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 4600, and in the presence and active supervision of a massage therapist. 
H.  Persons administering massages or health treatments involving massage to other persons who are participating in a recreational or special event that has been approved by the city, provided that the following conditions are met: 
1.  Massage services are made available equally to all participants in the event; 
2.  The event is open to participation by the general public or a significant segment of the public; 
3.  The massage services are provided during the event in an open environment at the site of the event; 
4.  The sponsors of the event have approved the provision of massage services at the event; 
5.  The persons providing the massage services are in compliance with all applicable city codes and other laws. 
(Ord. No. 2283 N.S., § 1, 10-17-2018)  
5.32.030 - State massage certification required. 
A.  It shall be a violation of this chapter for: 
1.  Any person to perform massage services for compensation without a valid state massage certification; 
2.  A massage establishment or outcall massage service to engage in, conduct, or carry on, permit to engage in, in or upon any premises with the City of Morgan Hill the business of providing massage services or massage therapy unless all persons providing such massage services possess a valid state massage certification. 
B.  Any person holding a valid massage practitioner permit issued pursuant to prior Morgan Hill Municipal Code Chapter 5.32 may continue to provide massage therapy under that massage permit. The existing practitioner permit, and any renewal thereof, shall only be effective for and shall expire one year from the adoption of this ordinance. 
C.  Any massage establishment holding a valid massage establishment permit pursuant to prior Morgan Hill Municipal Chapter 5.32 may continue to provide massage therapy services as long as each of their employees, agents, independent contractors or other representatives providing massage therapy has a valid massage practitioner permit or state massage certification. The existing establishment permit, and any renewal thereof, shall only be effective for and shall expire one year from the adoption of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2283 N.S., § 1, 10-17-2018)  
5.32.040 - Massage establishment, massage services or outcall massage services—Business license required. 
A.  Any person operating a massage establishment, or engaging in the business of providing massage services or outcall massage services shall apply for and obtain a business license pursuant to Chapter 5.04 of this code and, in addition, shall submit the following information with the application: 
1.  Full name. 
2.  Date of birth. 
3.  State issued identification number. 
4.  Social Security number. 
5.  Home address and phone number. 
6.  Work address and phone number. 
7.  Color photograph. 
8.  Proof of state massage certification for each massage practitioner or massage therapist. 
B.  It shall be the responsibility of each owner or operator to notify the city of any change in persons providing massage services and to provide copies of the state massage certification for all such persons to the city prior to such persons providing massage services. 
C.  It shall be the responsibility of each owner or operator to notify the city of any intention to rename, change management, or convey the business to another person. 
D.  Each owner or operator of the massage business, who is not a CAMTC certified professional, is subject to background check, including criminal background checks, and submission of fingerprints for a state or federal background check. 
E.  Each owner or operator, who is not a CAMTC certified professional, shall complete a supplemental form, to include employment history for the five years preceding the date of application; including dates, name, and addresses of massage establishment or similar businesses owned or operated by the individual. 
F.  Any omission or falsified information within the application, will result in an automatic denial. 
G.  A copy of all the personal information, as required by Section 5.32.040.A, provided during the application of a city business license will be kept at the police department until said business or practitioner relinquishes the city business license. 
(Ord. No. 2283 N.S., § 1, 10-17-2018)  
5.32.050 - Operating requirements for massage establishments. 
Unless otherwise specified herein, all massage establishments shall comply with the following operating requirements. 
A.  Exterior Signs. A recognizable and legible sign should be posted at the main entrance identifying the business as a massage establishment. Such sign need not be the primary sign for the business, but should clearly identify the establishment to foot and/or automobile traffic. 
B.  Posting of State Massage Certification. Each person providing massage services shall have a valid state massage certification, a clearly legible copy of which shall be conspicuously posted in the room or location where massage services will be provided. 
C.  State Massage Certification—Verification. All massage establishments shall maintain on their premises evidence for review by local authorities that demonstrates that all persons providing massage services hold state massage certification. 
D.  Owner Responsible. An owner of a massage establishment shall be responsible for the conduct of all persons working on the premises or at their direction. 
E.  Any violation of provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city shall be justification for revocation of owner's business license under the procedures of Section 5.32.090 of this code. 
F.  Inspection. All massage establishments shall be open at all times during hours during which massage is being provided for inspection by any police officer, building official or code enforcement officer of the City of Morgan Hill. 
G.  Dressing Room. Clients of the massage establishment shall be furnished with a dressing room. Dressing rooms shall be used only by clients of the same sex at the same time. 
H.  Payment/Tips. All massage services and all tips, if any, shall be paid for in the reception area. Massage establishments may utilize a system where tip envelopes are provided in the treatment rooms to be utilized and deposited by the client in the reception area. 
I.  Alcohol Prohibited. No alcoholic beverages may be possessed or consumed on the premises of the massage establishment. 
J.  Doors to Massage Rooms/Dressing Rooms to be Unlocked. All doors leading into a massage establishment or area where massages are performed shall remain unlocked during business hours unless there is no staff available to assure security for clients and massage staff behind closed doors. 
K.  Standard of Dress. All employees or independent contractors of the massage business shall remain fully clothed in clean outer garments, the use of which is restricted to the massage business, at all times while on the premises of the massage establishment. At a minimum, such clothing shall be made of a nontransparent material and shall not expose the buttocks, genital area or breasts of any employee or the holder of the permit. Low cut blouses, miniskirts, bikini swimsuits and halter tops shall not be acceptable. 
L.  Operating Hours. All massage establishments shall be closed for business by no later than ten p.m. and shall open for business no earlier than seven a.m. Specific operating hours for each massage establishment may be set through the conditional use permit process. It shall be unlawful for any massage practitioner, therapist or other employee or independent contractor of a massage establishment to give or practice massage during the hours when the massage business is required to be closed. 
M.  Birth Control Devices Prohibited. No birth control device or aid, including but not limited to condoms, shall be stored, kept or distributed on the premises of a massage establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2283 N.S., § 1, 10-17-2018)  
5.32.060 - Sanitation requirements/condition of premises. 
A.  Required Maintenance of Massage Establishments. All premises and facilities of the massage establishments shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be thoroughly cleaned after each day of operation. The premises and facilities shall meet applicable code requirements of the city, including but not limited to those related to the safety of the structure, adequacy of the plumbing, heating, ventilating and waterproofing of rooms in which showers, water or steam baths are used. 
B.  Linens. All massage establishments shall provide clean, laundered sheets, towels and other linens in sufficient quantity for use by their clients. Such linens shall be laundered after each use and stored in a sanitary manner. No common use of linens or towels shall be permitted. Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets on massage tables, so long as such paper is used only once for each client and is then discarded into a sanitary receptacle. Sanitary receptacles shall be provided for the storage of all soiled linens. 
C.  Privacy Standards for Massage Rooms, Dressing Rooms and Rest Rooms. Dressing rooms and rest rooms may only be used by clients of the same sex at the same time. The massage establishments shall provide doors on all of its dressing rooms and massage rooms. Draw drapes, curtain enclosures or accordion-pleated enclosures are acceptable in lieu of doors for dressing and massage rooms. 
(Ord. No. 2283 N.S., § 1, 10-17-2018)  
5.32.070 - Prohibited acts. 
A.  Touching of Sexual and Genital Parts During Massage. No massage practitioner, therapist or any other employee or independent contractor of a massage establishment shall place either his/her hand or hands upon, or touch with any part of his/her body, a sexual or genital part of any other person in the course of a massage, or massage a sexual or genital part of any other person. Sexual and genital parts shall include the genitals, pubic area, anus or perineum of any person or the vulva or breast of a female. 
B.  Uncovering and Exposure of Sexual and Genital Parts Before, During or After Massage. No massage practitioner, therapist or other employee or independent contractor of a massage establishments shall uncover and expose the sexual or genital parts, as defined in subsection A above, of any client or themselves in the course of giving a massage, or before or after a massage. This subsection does not prohibit a client from turning over in the course of a massage, so long as the massage practitioner holds a towel, sheet, blanket or other drape over the client to protect his/her genital and sexual parts from exposure. 
(Ord. No. 2283 N.S., § 1, 10-17-2018)  
5.32.080 - Outcall massage services. 
A.  All outcall massage services with a principal place of business located inside city limits or which is located outside of city limits and provides massage services within city limits shall obtain and maintain a city business license. 
B.  State Massage Certification Required for Outcall Massage Services. Any person dispatched to give massages at locations within city limits from an outcall massage service located within or outside of city limits must obtain and maintain in effect a state massage certification and shall comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter. Such massage practitioners or therapists shall maintain their state certificates upon their persons or within their immediate reach at all times while performing massage in the city and shall display such certification upon the request of any city police officer or code enforcement officer. 
C.  Special Procedures for Massage Practitioners or Therapists Dispatched to Facilities Which are Open to the Public and/or Available for Rental or Hire in City Limits by Outcall Massage Service. Massage practitioners or therapists may be dispatched to facilities which are open to the public and/or available for rental or hire within the city limits by any outcall massage service only by the direct arrangement of the facilities which are open to the public and/or available for rental or hire in conjunction with an incidental service regularly provided by the facilities which are open to the public and/or available for rental or hire and only if the massage service and massage practitioners or therapists have complied with all requirements of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to perform massages at any facilities which are open to the public and/or available for rental or hire that does not have an appropriate business license. 
D.  Owner Responsible. An owner of an outcall massage service shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees or independent contractors working within city limits. Any violation of provisions of this chapter, or any other ordinance of the city, shall be justification for revocation of owner's business license under the procedures of Section 5.32.090. 
(Ord. No. 2283 N.S., § 1, 10-17-2018)  
5.32.090 - Revocation of business license. 
A.  Any massage establishment or outcall massage service operated or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter or other ordinance of the city shall result in the revocation of the business license of the massage establishment or outcall massage service in accordance with the procedures of Section 5.04.040 of this code. 
B.  Any massage practitioner or therapist that violates any provision of this chapter or other ordinance of the city shall result in the revocation of the business license of the massage practitioner or therapist in accordance with the procedures of Section 5.04.040 of this code. 
C.  The city reserves the right to place a temporary moratorium up to one (1) year on a massage establishment business which violates the provisions of this chapter or other ordinances of the city. The massage establishment business shall not be transferred except with prior written approval from the police department. 
(Ord. No. 2283 N.S., § 1, 10-17-2018)  
5.32.100 - Criminal penalties. 
A violation of any provision of this chapter is a misdemeanor and may be prosecuted in the name of the people of the state of California. The maximum fine or penalty for any violation of this article shall be one thousand dollars, or a term of imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2283 N.S., § 1, 10-17-2018)  
5.32.110 - Massage establishment operated, or massage services offered in violation of this chapter deemed a public nuisance. 
Any massage establishment which is opened, operated or maintained or massage services offered contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated according to the procedures of Chapter 1.18 of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2283 N.S., § 1, 10-17-2018)  
Chapter 5.36 - MOBILE HOME PARK RENTS*  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
5.36.010 - Purpose. 
A.  Mobile home owners, unlike apartment tenants or residents of other rental stock, are in the unique position of having made a substantial investment in a residence for which space is rented or leased. Removal and/or relocation of a mobile home from a park space is not a practical alternative to accepting an excessive rent increase in that it can only be accomplished at substantial cost, and in many instances may cause extensive damage to the mobile home and loss of appurtenances such as integrated landscaping and supporting structures inconsistent with the new location. Because mobile homes are often owned by senior citizens, persons on fixed incomes, and persons of low and moderate income, exorbitant rent increases fall upon these individuals with particular harshness. 
B.  The city has sponsored extensive negotiations to eliminate the need for the ordinance codified in this chapter. Only one of the city's mobile home parks achieved a mediated solution as a result of this delay. The remaining parks were unable to reach agreement after extensive negotiation; thus, necessitating the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
C.  Since approximately July, 1981, a heightened pattern of excessive rent increases has emerged within some of the mobile home parks in the city in disregard of the purposes and intent of the city's previous ordinances. Incorporation of these unduly excessive prior increases within the rate structure of this chapter without provisions for their review would materially defeat the purposes and intent of this chapter and the stability it seeks to bring about. 
D.  The city council declares that it is necessary in the public interest to establish a means by which to resolve the potentially divisive and harmful impasse between park owners and coach owners. After consideration of numerous factors, among which are the relatively small number of parks located within the city, the level of organization and communication between mobile home owners in each park, and mandates of state law, regulations which best fit the needs of the city have been selected. 
E.  The regulations which are set forth in this chapter are designed to produce stability in rent increases for mobile home park tenants while recognizing the rights of mobile home park owners to receive a just and reasonable return on their property. The standards, utilizing the concept of net operating income and a 1981 base year, adopted by Sections 5.36.250 through 5.36.320 of this chapter are intended to provide the necessary adjustment mechanism to meet constitutional requirements. 
F.  The council finds that the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter will not have a significant, substantial or adverse effect on the physical environment of the community because enactment of this chapter involves no deviation from the general plan and no change in the present use of any property within the city. 
(Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988)  
5.36.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  "Capital improvements" means those improvements which materially add to the value of property, appreciably prolong its useful life, or adapt it to new uses, and which are required to be amortized over the useful life of the improvement pursuant to the straight-line depreciation provision of the Internal Revenue Code, and the regulations issued pursuant thereto. 
B.  "City clerk" means the city clerk at the city of Morgan Hill or the clerk's designate. 
C.  "Consumer Price Index (CPI)" means the price index for all urban consumers for the San Francisco/Oakland Bay Area (all items), provided by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
D.  "Hearing panel" means a five-member ad hoc panel the members of which the city manager shall convene first from members of the planning commission, then, if less than five members of the planning commission are available, then the city manager shall convene remaining needed panel members from members of the parks and recreation commission or the library, culture and arts commission. 
E.  "Housing services" means and includes those services provided and associated with the use or occupancy of a mobile home space, including but not limited to repairs, insurance, maintenance, replacement, painting, light, heat, water, laundry facilities and privileges, refuse removal, parking, recreation facilities, security service and any other benefits, privileges or facilities. 
F.  "Mobile home" means a structure designed for human habitation and for being moved on a street or highway, whether commonly referred to as a mobile home or as a trailer. 
G.  "Mobile home owner" or "tenant" means any person owning a mobile home which is located within a mobile home park in the city. 
H.  "Mobile home park" means an area of land where two or more mobile home spaces are rented, or held out for rent, or made available for use, to accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation. 
I.  "Mobile home park owner" or "owner" means the owner, lessor, operator or manager of a mobile home park in the city. 
J.  "Mobile home space" or "space" means a site within a mobile home park designed and available for the location and use of a mobile home for human habitation. 
K.  "Net operating income" means that return to an owner as described in Article III of this chapter. 
L.  "Operating expenses" means those costs to an owner as described in Article III of this chapter. 
M.  "Space rent" means the consideration, including any bonus, benefits or gratuity demanded or received in connection with the use and occupancy of a mobile home space in a mobile home park, or for housing services provided, and security deposits, but exclusive of any amount paid for the use of the mobile home as a dwelling unit. 
N.  "Space rent increases" means any additional rent demanded of or paid by a tenant for a mobile home space including any reduction in housing services without a corresponding reduction in the moneys demanded or paid for space rent. 
(Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988) 
(Ord. No. 1929 N.S., § 2, 4-22-2009)  
5.36.030 - Exceptions to chapter provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
A.  Space rent or space rent increases during a thirty-day period commencing upon the completion of a new mobile home space or mobile home space first rented after July 1, 1986, where the mobile home previously occupying the space has been removed pursuant to a termination of tenancy. 
B.  Tenancies or rentals pursuant to agreements providing for a fixed term of a period of greater than twelve months meeting the criteria of California Civil Code Section 798.17, Subdivision (b) during the effective term of such rental agreement. 
C.  Mobile home spaces constructed and first held out for rent after January 1, 1990, as such "new construction" is defined under California Civil Code Section 798.7. 
D.  A one-time administrative fee of twenty-five dollars may be imposed for mobile home spaces where the mobile home remains, but ownership of the mobile home is transferred. The aforesaid charge is intended to provide a one-time compensation payment for administrative bookkeeping charges in connection with the ownership transfer. 
(Ord. 1356 N.S. § 1, 1997: Ord. 1090 N.S. § 1, 1992; Ord. 940 N.S. § 1, 1989: Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988) 
(Ord. No. 1929 N.S., § 2, 4-22-2009)  
5.36.035 - Rollback related to reinstatement of vacancy control. 
A rollback related in space rent shall be affected as set forth below for mobile homes transferred between October 4, 1989, and the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. This section shall only apply to space rent for spaces upon which there was a transfer of the mobile home, the mobile home remained on its space in the park, and the transfer occurred between October 4, 1989, and the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. The space rent for spaces governed by this section collectable from and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall be established as that space rent in effect at the time of the first transfer of the mobile home after October 4, 1989, adjusted by the amount authorized by any other rent adjustments applicable under this chapter which were applied to other spaces in the mobile home park during the period October 4, 1989, through and including the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. 
(Ord. 1090 N.S. § 2 (part), 1992)  
5.36.036 - Hearing process related to rollbacks. 
A.  A park owner whose space is subject to the provisions of Section 5.36.035 shall be entitled to invoke the hearing process before the hearing panel over the proposed rent rollback within forty-five days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. A petition under this section may only request review of the applicability and limitations on rents adjusted pursuant to Section 5.36.035 and is intended to afford the owner an opportunity to show that the application of the rollback will create a hardship or deprive the park owner of a fair, just and reasonable return. 
B.  It is the intent of this section that the space rent charged for any mobile home space by a mobile home park owner shall be no greater than the space rent which would apply if Ordinance No. 940, New Series, had not been adopted. It is the express intent of the city council in adopting this ordinance to reenact, reauthorize and reestablish vacancy control as part of the mobile home rent ordinance. 
(Ord. 1090 N.S. § 2 (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. 1929 N.S., § 2, 4-22-2009)  
Article II. - Rental Dispute Hearing Process 
 
5.36.040 - Hearing process—Established. 
There is established the Morgan Hill mobile home space rental dispute hearing process ("hearing process"). 
(Ord. 1356 N.S. § 2, 1997: Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988)  
5.36.050 - Space rent increases—Review procedures. 
Except as provided in this chapter, any space rent increase after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, which exceeds an aggregate of seventy-five percent of the increase of the CPI for the twelve-month period ending sixty days before notice of such rent increase is given, or eight percent, whichever is less, shall be subject to review under the hearing process. 
(Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988)  
5.36.060 - Space rent increases—Limit on annual increases. 
The space rent of any mobile home space may not be increased more than once in any twelve-month period except as allowed under Section 5.36.030 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988)  
5.36.070 - Space rent increases—Exceptions. 
If an owner has not raised space rent for more than twenty-four months prior to the latest increase, rental increases in excess of seventy-five percent of the increase in CPI for the twelve-month period ending sixty days before notice of such rent increase is given shall not be subject to this chapter, provided that such increases satisfy the following criteria: If the last increase was more than twenty-four months prior to the current increase, a rental increase not to exceed that set out in Section 5.36.320 of this chapter shall be allowed. 
(Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988)  
5.36.080 - Hearing process—Submission of petition by owner. 
Any owner whose mobile home park is subject to the provisions of this chapter and who seeks to increase rent in excess of the provisions of this chapter shall be required to invoke the hearing process by a petition filed with the city clerk which shall be processed and heard in the same manner as provided in this chapter for tenant applications, provided that the owner shall notify, in writing, all tenants subject to such rental increase and shall include in his filing with the city clerk a document executed by the person who has deposited into the regular first class mail or has personally served the notice affirming the source of the notice upon the tenants, listing the names and addresses of all such tenants. 
(Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988)  
5.36.090 - Hearing process—Submission of petition by tenants. 
A.  Upon written petition of more than twenty-five percent whose spaces are subject to the terms of this chapter, the rental dispute hearing process may be invoked. 
B.  In the petition the tenants shall designate an individual to serve as the tenant representative for the purposes of receipt of all notice, correspondence, decisions and finding of fact required in this chapter. Service of notice upon the designated tenant representative will constitute adequate and sufficient notice to the tenants who signed the petition. Failure to designate a tenant representative will render the petition incomplete and the petition will not be accepted for filing. 
(Ord. 1356 N.S. § 3, 1997: Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988)  
5.36.100 - Petitions—Form. 
The application for review must be filed on a petition form prescribed by the city manager and must be accompanied by such supporting material as the city manager shall prescribe including, but not limited to, a copy of the owner's notice of space rent increase. Allegations of service reductions shall be submitted in writing. The burden of proof regarding such service reductions shall be on the person alleging such reductions. 
(Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988) 
(Ord. No. 1929 N.S., § 2, 4-22-2009)  
5.36.110 - Petitions—Filing requirements. 
Except as provided in this chapter, a petition must be filed thirty calendar days prior to the effective date of the increase stated in the notice to tenant; provided however, that a tenant shall have at least ten calendar days after receipt of notice of a space rent increase from the owner in which to file a petition. 
(Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988)  
5.36.120 - Petitions—Consolidation. 
As soon as possible after petitions have been filed with respect to mobile home park spaces which are under common ownership or management but in no event more than seventy-two hours following receipt of a petition regarding a mobile home park space rent increase, the city manager shall, to the greatest extent possible, consolidate such petitions. 
(Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988) 
(Ord. No. 1929 N.S., § 2, 4-22-2009)  
5.36.130 - Space rent increases—Notice. 
Whenever an owner notifies a tenant or tenants of a proposed space rent increase which is subject to review under Section 5.36.050 of this article, the owner shall also notify the tenant by the same type of notice or, at the owner's option, in the same notice in a conspicuous manner of the tenant's right to utilize the rental dispute hearing process and shall provide the following: 
A.  A summary of this chapter approved by the city attorney; 
B.  A statement that a copy of the chapter or summary was provided to the tenant; and 
C.  The address and telephone number of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 998 N.S. § 1, 1990: Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988) 
(Ord. No. 1929 N.S., § 2, 4-22-2009)  
5.36.140 - Space rent increase—Effective when. 
Providing that a completed petition is timely filed, concerning a space rent increase subject to this chapter, that portion of the requested rental increase (and only that portion) which exceeds the seventy-five percent increase in CPI limitation described in this chapter, shall not take effect unless and until such time as a hearing panel has conducted a hearing pursuant to Section 5.36.150 and has approved such increase or portion thereof pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988) 
(Ord. No. 1929 N.S., § 2, 4-22-2009)  
5.36.150 - Hearing—Procedures. 
Within ten working days from the date the petition as described in this chapter is received by the city clerk, the city manager shall convene a hearing panel. The hearing panel shall conduct a hearing with all parties within thirty days that a petition is filed and deemed complete by the city manager, or within such additional time as may be mutually agreed upon by all parties to the hearing. The city manager shall give at least five calendar days' notice to the parties prior to the date of the hearing. The notice period shall commence upon deposit of the notice in the regular first class mail to the parties. Materials to be considered at the hearing must be made available to both parties to the hearing at least three working days in advance of the hearing date. Extensions of time for the hearing process may be mutually agreed upon by both parties with the concurrence of the members of the hearing panel. 
(Ord. 998 N.S. § 2, 1990: Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988) 
(Ord. No. 1929 N.S., § 2, 4-22-2009)  
5.36.160 - Hearing—Fee. 
The cost of hearings conducted under this chapter shall be paid by the city from fees collected under the provisions of Section 5.36.380. 
(Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988)  
5.36.170 - Hearing—Conduct. 
The hearing shall be chaired by a member of the hearing panel elected by the members of the hearing panel. Any party or their counsel may appear and offer such documents, testimony, written declaration or other evidence as may be pertinent to the proceeding. A record of the proceedings shall be prepared by the hearing panel and submitted to the city clerk who shall maintain it for a period not to exceed two years. 
(Ord. 998 N.S. § 3, 1990: Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988) 
(Ord. No. 1929 N.S., § 2, 4-22-2009)  
5.36.180 - Hearing—Determination. 
Based upon the evidence presented at the hearing, the hearing panel shall make a determination whether or not, in light of all the evidence presented, the proposed rent increase is reasonable under the circumstances, in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 5.36.250 and following of this chapter. The burden of proof regarding such reasonableness shall be on the owner unless otherwise indicated. The standards set forth in Section 5.36.250 and following are expected to provide for a just and reasonable return to owner in all foreseeable cases. However, an owner shall be permitted to include within the petition additional facts showing that due to unique or special circumstances, the strict application of the formulas set out in Section 5.36.250 and following prevents a just and reasonable return on the owner's property to owner. If the hearing panel concurs, then it may adopt an effective rent schedule or fix an increase thereto up to that required for a just and reasonable return to owner. 
(Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988) 
(Ord. No. 1929 N.S., § 2, 4-22-2009)  
5.36.190 - Hearing—Determination—Notification. 
Within thirty working days following the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing panel shall make a determination in writing that the proposed space rent increase is reasonable under the circumstances or not, and shall make written findings of fact upon which such determination is based. Within the thirty-working-day period, the city clerk shall cause copies of the determination and the findings to be mailed by regular first class mail to the parties. 
(Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988) 
(Ord. No. 1929 N.S., § 2, 4-22-2009)  
5.36.200 - Increase determined not reasonable—Remedies. 
Any rental or service charge increases which have been collected by mobile home park owners pursuant to an increase which is the subject of a petition for hearing and which is later determined by a hearing panel to be excessive, shall, within ninety calendar days be either returned to the tenants or credited to future rental charges at the option of the mobile home park owner. In no event, shall the time period exceed ninety calendar days for carrying out the decision of the hearing panel. 
(Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988) 
(Ord. No. 1929 N.S., § 2, 4-22-2009)  
5.36.210 - Determination—Deemed final. 
The determination of the hearing panel shall be final and shall be delivered to the parties in writing together with written findings of fact supporting such determination by depositing the same in the regular United States mail, first class mail, within thirty working days after the hearing provided in Section 5.36.150. Any party disputing the final conclusions and findings of the hearing panel may seek review of them pursuant to Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988) 
(Ord. No. 1929 N.S., § 2, 4-22-2009)  
5.36.220 - Determination—Applicability. 
The determination made under the provisions of this chapter shall be effective with respect to all mobile home park spaces, unless the tenant of such space has a written lease of a period greater than twelve months meeting the criteria of California Civil Code Section 798.17, subdivision (b), with the park owner which otherwise sets forth the rights and obligations of the parties with respect to rent. 
(Ord. 1356 N.S. § 4, 1997: Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988)  
5.36.230 - Specification of charges. 
For any rent increase approved pursuant to proceedings conducted in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the mobile home park owner shall, when demanding any space rent which includes such allowed amounts, specify with particularity that amount along with a citation as to the authority for that amount and a demonstration of its calculation. Any notice of termination of tenancy served by the mobile home park owner upon a mobile home park tenant on the basis of a failure to pay rent which includes such allowed charges, shall similarly show such charges and the authority for their imposition. 
(Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988)  
5.36.240 - Administrative regulations and procedures. 
The city manager, in consultation with the city attorney, may promulgate and issue administrative regulations and procedures in order to implement the provisions of this chapter and assure efficient and fair administration of the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1929 N.S., § 2, 4-22-2009)  
Article III. - Rent Increase Standards—Fair Return 
 
5.36.250 - Determination of reasonableness. 
The hearing panel shall determine whether rent increases are reasonable under the circumstances taking into consideration that the purpose of this chapter is to permit owners a just and reasonable return on their property while protecting tenants from arbitrary, capricious or unreasonable rent increases. The hearing panel's determination shall be made with reference to the standards set out in this article. 
(Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988) 
(Ord. No. 1929 N.S., § 2, 4-22-2009)  
5.36.260 - Rent adjustment proceedings—Terminology. 
For the purposes of space rent adjustment proceedings, the following definitions shall be used: 
A.  "Net operating income" equals gross income less operating expenses. 
B.  "Gross income" equals: 
1.  Gross rents, computed as gross rental income at one hundred percent paid occupancy; plus 
2.  Interest from rental deposits, unless directly paid by the landlord to the tenants (interest shall be computed at the rate of five and one-half percent of all deposits unless such deposits earn greater interest); plus 
3.  Income from laundry facilities, cleaning fees or services, garage and parking fees; plus 
4.  All other income or consideration received or receivable for or in connection with the use or occupancy of rental units and housing services, services, garage and parking fees; 
5.  Minus uncollected rents due to vacancy and bad debts to the extent that the same are beyond the owner's control. Uncollected rents in excess of three percent of gross rents shall be presumed to be unreasonable unless established otherwise. Where uncollected rents must be estimated, the average of the preceding three years experience shall be used, or some other comparable method. 
C.  1.  "Operating expenses" shall include the following: 
a.  Real property taxes; 
b.  Utility costs; 
c.  Management expenses (contracted or owner performed), including necessary and reasonable advertising, accounting, insurance and other managerial expenses and allowable legal expenses. Management expenses are presumed to be five percent of gross income, unless established otherwise; 
d.  Normal repair and maintenance expenses, including painting, normal cleaning, fumigation, landscaping and repair of all standard services, including electrical, plumbing and sanitary sewer; 
e.  i. Owner-performed labor, which shall be compensated at the following hourly rates upon documentation being provided showing the date, time and nature of the work performed: 
(A)  General maintenance at the general prevailing hourly wage as set out in the most recent "Report of The Labor Commission, U.S. Department of Labor," 
(B)  Skilled labor at two times such rate; 
ii.  Notwithstanding the above, an owner may receive greater or lesser compensation for self-labor if it can be shown that the amounts set forth above are substantially unfair in a given case. There shall be a maximum allowance under this subsection of five percent of gross income, unless the owner shows greater services for the benefit of tenants; 
f.  Rehabilitation or repair work done on or in a mobile home park in order to comply with an order issued by the building department, or to repair damage resulting from fire, earthquake or other natural disaster; 
g.  License and registration fees required by law to the extent the same are not otherwise paid by tenants; 
h.  Capital expenses with a total cost of less than one hundred dollars per year per benefited space, and the amortized portion of other capital expenses otherwise allowed by regulation. 
2.  Operating expenses shall not include: 
a.  Avoidable and unnecessary expenses/increases since the base year; 
b.  Mortgage principal and interest payments; 
c.  Any penalties, fees or interest assessed or awarded for violation of this or any other law; 
d.  Attorneys' fees and legal costs in connection with civil actions against the city; 
e.  Depreciation; 
f.  Any expense for which the owner has been reimbursed by any security deposit, insurance settlement, judgment for damages, settlement or any other method; 
g.  Fees assessed under Section 5.36.380 of this chapter. 
D.  Base year for purposes of these regulations shall mean calendar year 1981. 
E.  Consumer Price Index is defined in subsection D of Section 5.36.020 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988)  
5.36.270 - Presumption of base year net operating income. 
Except as provided in Section 5.36.280(A) of this article, it shall be presumed that the net operating income produced by a property during the base year provided a just and reasonable return on property. Owners shall be entitled to maintain and increase their net operating income from year to year in accordance with Section 5.36.310 of this article. 
(Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988)  
5.36.280 - Adjustment to income computation—Conditions. 
It may be determined that the base year net operating income yielded other than a just and reasonable return on property, in which case, the base year net operating income may be adjusted accordingly. In order to make such determination, the hearing panel must make at least one of the following findings: 
A.  Owner's operating and maintenance expenses in the base year were unusually high or low in comparison to other years. In such instances, adjustments may be made in calculating such expenses so the base year operating expenses reflect average expenses for the property over a reasonable period of time. The hearing panel shall consider the following factors: 
1.  The owner made substantial capital improvements during 1981, which were not reflected in the rent levels on the base date; 
2.  Substantial repairs were made due to damage caused by natural disaster or vandalism; 
3.  Maintenance and repair was below accepted standards so as to cause significant deterioration in the quality of housing services; 
4.  Other expenses were unreasonably high or low notwithstanding the following of prudent business practice. In making this determination, the fact that property taxes prior to 1981 may have been higher than in the base year shall not be considered. 
B.  The rent on the base date was disproportionate due to one of the enumerated factors below. In such instances, adjustments may be made in calculating gross rents consistent with the purposes of this chapter: 
1.  The rent on the base date was established by a lease or other formal rental agreement which provided for substantially higher rent at other periods during the term of the lease; 
2.  The rent on the base date was substantially higher or lower than at other times of the year by reason of seasonal demand or seasonal variations in rent; 
3.  The rent on the base date was substantially higher or lower than preceding months by reason of premiums being charged or rebates being given for reasons unique to particular spaces or limited to the period determining the base rent. 
C.  It shall be presumed that where net operating income is less than fifty percent of gross income in the base year, after making adjustments as permitted by subsections A and B of this section, the owner was receiving less than a just and reasonable return on property. In such a case, for purposes of determining base year net operating income, gross income shall be adjusted upward to twice the amount of adjusted base year operating expenses. 
(Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988) 
(Ord. No. 1929 N.S., § 2, 4-22-2009)  
5.36.290 - Determination of base year net operating income. 
A.  To determine the net operating income during the base year, there shall be deducted from the annualized gross income being realized on January 1, 1982, a sum equal to the actual operating expenses for calendar year 1981, unless the owner demonstrates to the satisfaction of the hearing panel that some other twelve consecutive month period is justified by reasons independent of the purpose of this article. In all cases, January 1, 1982, shall fall within the twelve-month period utilized in this chapter, except as provided in subsection B of this section. 
B.  In the event that the owner did not own the subject property on January 1, 1982, the operating expenses for 1981 shall be determined in one of the following manners, whichever the hearing panel determines to be more reliable in the particular case: 
1.  The previous owner's actual operating expenses as defined in subsection C of Section 5.36.260 of this article or, where unavailable; 
2.  Actual operating expenses for the first calendar year of ownership, discounted to 1981 by the schedule in Section 5.36.300 of this article. 
C.  In the event that a petition for rent increase involves less than fifty percent of the spaces in a mobile home park, the net operating income for the base year shall be determined only for the spaces affected by the petition. The net operating income for these spaces will be determined under the procedure outlined in Section 5.36.260. Should specific documentation not be available on individual spaces for the base year, the hearing panel shall make a reasonable determination of the net operating income. 
(Ord. 998 N.S. § 4, 1990: Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988) 
(Ord. No. 1929 N.S., § 2, 4-22-2009)  
5.36.300 - Increases in operating expenses—Amounts permitted. 
Where scheduling of rent increase, or other calculations require projections of income and expenses, it shall be assumed that operating expenses, exclusive of property taxes and management expenses, increase at ten percent per year, that property taxes increase at two percent per year, and that management expenses are five percent of gross income. 
(Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988)  
5.36.310 - Allowable rent increases. 
A.  Upon filing of a petition by an owner, rent increases may be permitted such that the owner's net operating income will be increased at the rate of forty percent of the increase in the CPI over the base year. The increase in the CPI shall be calculated by dividing the most recently reported monthly figure at the time of filing of the petition by the monthly figure for February 1981 = (2/81 CPI = 260.5). 
B.  In the event that a petition by an owner involves less than fifty percent of the spaces in a mobile home park, rent increases may be permitted such that the owner's net operating income on the affected spaces will be increased at the rate of forty percent of the CPI over the base year. 
(Ord. 998 N.S. § 5, 1990: Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988)  
5.36.320 - Limitations on annual increases. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no upward rent adjustment may be authorized for any given year in an amount in excess of twice the San Francisco/Oakland Bay Area Consumer Price Index (CPI) or fifteen percent, whichever is less. The applicable figure for the CPI shall be the figure for the twelve month period ending sixty days before the notice of rent space was given. If the amount of any individual adjustment otherwise justified under this article is greater than such limit, the full justified amount shall be granted over a period of years such that the rent does not increase by greater than the limit in any given year. 
(Ord. 998 N.S. § 6, 1990: Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988)  
Article IV. - Unlawful Acts—Penalty 
 
5.36.330 - Violation. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to demand, accept, receive, or retain any rent in excess of the amounts allowed under this chapter. 
B.  Any person may file a complaint regarding an alleged violation of this chapter with the city clerk. 
C.  The city attorney is authorized to, in his or her discretion, investigate and prosecute those complaints that in his or her determination merit prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 12, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 12, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 5.36.330 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 5.36.330 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 856 N.S., § 1(part), adopted in 1988.  
Article V. - Miscellaneous 
 
5.36.350 - Extension of time—Service by mail. 
Whenever any notice or determination called for by this chapter is served by mail, the time for compliance set out in this chapter shall be extended one calendar working day. Further when the last day for compliance falls upon a legal holiday, the time for compliance is extended to the next working day. 
(Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988)  
5.36.360 - Extension of time—Mutual agreement. 
By written agreement of the parties or upon application to the city manager, or, if a hearing panel has been convened, the hearing panel and for good cause shown, the time frames provided for under this chapter may be extended. 
(Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988) 
(Ord. No. 1929 N.S., § 2, 4-22-2009)  
5.36.370 - Duty of owner to provide copy of chapter. 
It shall be the duty of every owner to provide a summary copy of this chapter to each tenant who rents or leases a space from the owner. This summary copy will be composed by the city attorney and available through the city clerk. A single summary copy will be provided each owner by the city for reproduction by the owner. 
(Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988)  
5.36.380 - Rent stabilization fees. 
The costs of operation of this chapter shall be paid from fees assessed annually by the city upon park owners. Such fees shall be set by resolution which shall be reviewed annually. Such fees shall be assessed on each mobile home space other than those exempted under the provisions of subsections B, C and D of Section 5.36.030. The fees shall be assessed on October 1st of each year, for all spaces not exempted from the chapter as of September 30th of the same calendar year. No more than one-half of the per space charge may be collected by the park owner from the tenant of the space for which the fee is paid. Any park owner who has not paid the assessed rent stabilization fees within ninety calendar days of the receipt of the notice of a fee assessment shall be subject to a penalty in the form of a fine equal to five percent of the total assessment. Notice of the potential for a fine shall be included in the original notice of fee assessment. Fines may not be collected by the park owner from the tenant of the space for which the fee is paid. Any park owner who has not paid the rent stabilization fee within one hundred twenty calendar days of the notice of fee assessment shall be found to be in violation of the ordinance and subject to the penalties of Section 5.36.330. 
(Ord. 1356 N.S. § 5, 1997; Ord. 856 N.S. § 1 (part), 1988) 
(Ord. No. 1929 N.S., § 2, 4-22-2009)  
Chapter 5.40 - PRIVATE PATROL BUSINESSES 
 
5.40.010 - Private patrol defined. 
"Private patrol" means the business of providing a watch service, private security officer or any other occupation, the purpose of which is to afford additional protection for hire or consideration. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any business primarily operating an armored car service for transporting money or other valuable personal property under guard, or to any individual working for a single employer in a line of business other than as defined herein. 
(Ord. 557 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
5.40.020 - Notice of intent to conduct business—Required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of maintaining or operating a private ~patrol within the city without first filing a notice of intent to conduct business with the chief of police. 
(Ord. 557 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
5.40.030 - Notice of intent to conduct business—Contents. 
Notice shall be filed with the chief of police (on a form approved and provided by the chief of police) and shall include the following: 
A.  The name, residence and business address including telephone numbers of the applicant; 
B.  The name under which the business is to be operated; 
C.  A complete description of the services to be provided; 
D.  A photocopy of a current and valid license issued by the State of California Department of Consumer Affairs to the applicant. 
(Ord. 557 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
5.40.040 - Uniform and vehicles—Regulations. 
The chief of police may prescribe reasonable rules and regulations concerning the uniforms and insignia worn by uniformed employees of a private patrol operator and vehicles used by a private patrol operator to ensure the uniforms and vehicles are clearly distinguishable from the uniforms worn by and the vehicles used by local regular law enforcement officers. 
(Ord. 557 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
5.40.050 - Uniform and vehicles—Regulations—Compliance required. 
It is unlawful for any private patrol operator or any employee of a private patrol operator, while engaged in private patrol activities in the city to wear a uniform or insignia or use a vehicle except in compliance with those rules and regulations a copy of which shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. 557 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
Chapter 5.44 - SWIMMING POOL SERVICING 
 
5.44.010 - Swimming pool defined. 
"Swimming pool" means and includes both public and private swimming pools as more particularly defined in Chapter 8.12 of this code. 
(Ord. 259 N.S. § A (part), 1969)  
5.44.020 - Registration and certification requirements. 
A.  No person shall engage either in the business or occupation of treating swimming pool waters, or of cleaning filters, heaters or other appurtenances or appliances used or usable in connection therewith, or in the business of maintaining swimming pools or facilities or appurtenances or appliances thereof, within the city limits of the city, unless he is certified or registered in accordance with the provisions of Article 13, Chapter 1 of Title 5 of the Santa Clara Ordinance County Code, or unless he is expressly excused or exempted from such requirement by the provisions of such county code. 
B.  Any person registered or certified under the provisions of subsection A of this section may lawfully engage in such business or occupation only to the extent permitted pursuant to such registration or certification. 
(Ord. 259 N.S. § A (part), 1969)  
Chapter 5.52 - TOW CAR SERVICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note— Prior ordinance history: Ords. 504 N.S. and 766 N.S. 
 
5.52.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply: 
A.  "Tow car service" means any person engaged in the business of, or offering the services of a vehicle towing service whereby motor vehicles are or may be towed or otherwise removed from one place to another by use of a motor vehicle adapted to and assigned for that purpose. 
B.  "Rotation tow program" means a program established and maintained by the chief of police, or designee, containing the names of tow car services authorized by the city to respond to requests for police-generated tows. Tow car services that participate in this program will be summoned by the police department on a rotational basis and comply with program standards to ensure an adequate level of service to the community. This program shall contain a list of tow car services that have entered into a franchise agreement to provide police generated or owner requested tow services with the city. An operator, while participating in the rotation tow program, shall act and be an independent contractor and not an agent or employee of the City of Morgan Hill. The rotation tow program shall have a minimum of two tow car services, to include at least one each, of the following: 
1.  A tow car service authorized by the American Automobile Association to provide road service to members. 
2.  A tow service not authorized by the American Automobile Association. 
3.  A tow car service capable of towing heavy or large trucks or trailers of other vehicles. 
C.  "Police-generated tow" means any tow requested by the city of Morgan Hill Police Department in the course of official police activities including, but not limited to, the tow of a vehicle that is subject to impound under the Vehicle Code, driven by a driver who is arrested, detained, incapacitated or physically unable to drive the vehicle, involved in a traffic collision or accident, or abandoned and subject to towing under the Vehicle Code or the Morgan Hill Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 1316 N.S. § 1 (part), 1997) 
(Ord. No. 1964 N.S., § 1, 11-18-2009; Ord. No. 1965 N.S., § 1, 12-2-2009; Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 13, 5-2-2018)  
5.52.020 - Tow service operation. 
No tow car service may participate in the rotation tow program unless they comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws governing the operation of such business and equipment, possess a state board of equalization license required by the California Revenue and Taxation Code, and possess a city of Morgan Hill business license. All participants in the rotation tow program must comply with all the requirements of their franchise agreement with the city pursuant to Section 5.52.070. 
(Ord. 1316 N.S. § 1 (part), 1997) 
(Ord. No. 1964 N.S., § 1, 11-18-2009; Ord. No. 1965 N.S., § 1, 12-2-2009)  
5.52.030 - Authorized responses. 
No tow car service shall respond to the scene of a collision or emergency for the purpose of towing motor vehicles unless called there by the police department, one of the parties involved in the collision or his or her authorized agent. 
(Ord. 1316 N.S. § 1 (part), 1997)  
5.52.040 - Rotation tow program—Rules and application. 
The chief of police may make such rules and regulations for participation in the rotation tow program as deemed necessary to implement this chapter and to provide adequate service to the public. These rules and regulations shall meet or exceed current California Highway Patrol standards including but not limited to state certificate and insurance requirements, equipment, response time, storage yards, hours of operations and performance standards. 
A.  Nothing in these rules and regulations shall cause the city to incur any costs arising from the lawful towing of a vehicle or abatement of abandoned vehicles by a tow company participating in the rotation tow program. 
B.  Tow services are eligible to respond to city requests for participation in the rotation tow program only if they meet the qualifications for operation listed in Sections 5.52.020 and 5.52.070 of this chapter, operate a place of business within twenty miles of the city limits, and maintain a tow truck and a storage yard within five miles of the city limits for all vehicles towed at the request of the city of Morgan Hill. 
(Ord. 1316 N.S. § 1 (part), 1997) 
(Ord. No. 1964 N.S., § 1, 11-18-2009; Ord. No. 1965 N.S., § 1, 12-2-2009)  
5.52.050 - Towing list—Investigation. 
A.  Within thirty days of receiving an application for participation in the rotation tow program, the chief of police or his designee shall cause an investigation to be conducted to determine the suitability of the applicant. The findings of the investigation shall be provided to the chief of police within thirty days of assignment. If the chief of police finds the applicant qualified, the name may be added to the towing list if there is a vacancy or need for additional towing service as deemed by the chief of police. If the current towing list is adequate, the applicant will be placed on the reserve list. If the chief of police finds that the applicant is not qualified, the applicant shall be given the reasons for disqualification in writing. 
B.  Tow services shall annually renew their participation in the rotation tow program, including knowledge of and compliance with any newly revised rule or regulation established by the chief of police. Tow services currently on the towing list, as well as reserve list, shall maintain their positions on those lists regardless of date of renewal, absent the showing of cause to remove a tow car service from the aforementioned lists. 
(Ord. 1316 N.S. § 1 (part), 1997)  
5.52.060 - Rotation tow program—Grounds for removal. 
A tow car service may be removed from the rotation tow program by the chief of police, or designee, if it is determined that: 
A.  The approval of the application was obtained by fraud or by concealment of a material fact or facts which, if known, would have caused the disqualification of the applicant. 
B.  The tow car service has violated any of the requirements of this chapter or any subsequent rule and regulation established pursuant hereto. 
C.  The tow car service is found to have failed to pay agreed upon fees or reimbursements though fraud or by concealment of a material fact or facts. 
D.  The services rendered or the cooperation which the city has received are unsatisfactory and/or inadequate as a matter of public safety. 
E.  Any violation of the terms of the franchise agreement with the city. 
F.  Repeated violations of the franchise agreement when other sanctions have failed to deter the violations. 
(Ord. 1316 N.S. § 1 (part), 1997) 
(Ord. No. 1964 N.S., § 1, 11-18-2009; Ord. No. 1965 N.S., § 1, 12-2-2009)  
5.52.070 - Franchise for rotation tow program. 
A.  Each application for franchise shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the name, address and telephone numbers of each partner. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall also state the names, addresses and telephone numbers of its directors, main officers, major stock holders and associates and the names, addresses and telephone numbers of any parent or subsidiary company. 
(2)  A complete and executed copy of the latest Morgan Hill franchise agreement for vehicle tow services. 
(3)  The city may at any time demand, and the applicant shall provide, supplementary, additional or other information as the city may deem reasonably necessary to determine whether the requested franchise should be granted. 
B.  The city in its sole discretion may grant or deny such franchise, or limit the number of tow car services in the rotation tow program, if it deems such action to be in the public interest. In making its decision, the city may consider whether the applicant is qualified to render prompt and efficient police-generated tow service, the quality of service, ease of administration, the compliance with past agreements with the city, financial condition, experience and any other considerations that will safeguard the city's public interest. Any grant of franchise shall be subject to such terms, conditions, rules, regulations, restrictions, limitations, governmental or contractual in nature as the city may deem advisable to protect citizens or to promote the efficient conduct of official police business, to preserve the rights and interests of the city in its streets and public places and to otherwise protect the interest of the city and its people. 
C.  The city shall require, as a condition for a grant of franchise, the payment of franchise fees or other reimbursement. Such franchise fees or reimbursement options shall be in addition to other applicable taxes, fees and charges, if any, payable by tow operators. 
(Ord. 1316 N.S. § 1 (part), 1997) 
(Ord. No. 1964 N.S., § 1, 11-18-2009; Ord. No. 1965 N.S., § 1, 12-2-2009)  
5.52.080 - Rights of city reserved. 
A.  The grant of every franchise shall be subject to the right of the city, whether reserved in such grant or not, to make all regulations which shall be necessary to secure, in the best manner, the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public, including the right to make and enforce all such regulations as shall be reasonably necessary to secure adequate, sufficient and proper public service. 
B.  Every franchise granted shall be subject to the right of the city, whether reserved therein or not, to prescribe and regulate the rates, fares, rentals or charges made for the service rendered under such franchise; to require such reports, accounts or special information about its affairs to be furnished, as the council may prescribe or deem necessary or convenient, for the purpose of fixing such rates, fares, rental or charges, or for any other lawful purpose, to be made in such form and verified by such persons as the council shall prescribe, to have full and free access, at any and all reasonable times, to all books, records and papers of such franchise holder with the right to examining the same and privilege of taking copies of the same or any part thereof. 
C.  Every franchise granted shall be subject to the rights of the city, whether reserved or not to provide for the termination or forfeiture thereof for any breach or failure to comply with any of the terms, limitations or conditions thereof; or the terms, limitations or conditions of the franchise agreement executed by city and franchisee and in all such cases, the city shall have the power to declare the termination and forfeiture of any such franchise or privilege the same as though in each instance such power was expressly reserved. 
(Ord. No. 1964 N.S., § 1, 11-18-2009; Ord. No. 1965 N.S., § 1, 12-2-2009) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1964 N.S., § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 2009, renumbered the former § 5.52.080 as § 5.52.090 and enacted a new § 5.52.080 as set out herein. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes.  
5.52.090 - Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 13, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 13, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 5.52.090 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 5.52.090 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 1316 N.S., § 1(part), adopted in 1997; Ord. No. 1964 N.S., § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 2009; and Ord. No. 1965 N.S., § 1, adopted Dec. 2, 2009.  
Chapter 5.54 - TAXICAB SERVICE 
 
5.54.010 - Purpose and intent. 
This chapter is to further the public convenience and necessity of transportation services by taxicabs and protect the general public health, safety and welfare by establishing an orderly method of regulating the licensing and operation of such vehicles within the city. 
(Ord. 1461 N.S. § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.54.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined and shall be construed as set forth herein unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
"Chief of police" means the chief of the Morgan Hill police department, or his or her duly authorized agents and representatives. 
"City manager" means the city manager, or his or her duly authorized agents and representatives. 
"For hire" means a vehicle is "for-hire" if any fare, fee, charge or other consideration is payable for the transportation service of the vehicle, whether paid or not. 
"Owner" means the person, firm, association or corporation who is registered with the Department of Motor Vehicles of the state of California ("DMV") as the owner of a vehicle or vehicles used in the transportation of persons for compensation, or who has a legal right to possession of such vehicle pursuant to a lease or rental agreement. The act or omission of any owner's officer, agent, employee or independent contractor, or of any driver whose services are engaged or allowed by any of the above, is for all purposes the act or omission of the owner operating the for-hire transportation services regulated by this chapter. 
"Taxicab" means a passenger vehicle having a seating capacity of no more than eight persons, excluding the driver, used in the transportation of passengers within the jurisdictional limits of this city, irrespective of whether such operations extend beyond the city, the compensation for which is determined by a taximeter or other device which determines a charge for distance traveled and/or time expended. 
"Taxicab driver permit" means a permit issued to each driver of a taxicab or public transportation vehicle. 
"Taxicab license" means a license issued by the city to operate a taxicab business within the city, irrespective of where such business is located. 
"Taximeter" means any instrument or device approved for use under the applicable laws of the state, which mechanically or electronically calculates the charge for the use of a taxicab. 
(Ord. 1461 N.S. § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.54.030 - Taxicab license—Requirements. 
No owner of a taxicab business shall operate or permit the operation of a taxicab on the streets of the city without having obtained from the chief of police a taxicab license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1461 N.S. § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.54.040 - Taxicab license—Application. 
Every applicant for a taxicab license shall execute and file with the chief of police a verified application upon forms furnished by the police department. In addition, each applicant shall supply: 
A.  Evidence that applicant has paid all applicable city charges, fees, or assessments. 
B.  Satisfactory proof that the location of the proposed business is properly zoned and is in compliance with any required land use permits for the conduct of the proposed business. 
C.  Evidence that the applicant is the registered owner of each vehicle used in the proposed business. 
D.  Duplicate copies of insurance policies which comply with the requirements of Section 16500 of the California Vehicle Code for each vehicle used by the proposed business. 
E.  A sworn statement that each vehicle is in safe operating condition, made by either the proprietor of a public garage engaged in auto repair who is licensed by the state of California, or by a mechanic licensed by the state of California and employed by the applicant, who has inspected and examined such vehicles. 
F.  A certification that the holder maintains a mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program conforming to Part 40 of Title 49 and Part 382 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations and California Government Code Section 53075.5 for all drivers of vehicles operated by the licensee and/or owner. 
(Ord. 1461 N.S. § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.54.050 - Taxicab license—Renewal. 
The renewal of a taxicab license shall be made every two years. The renewal procedure shall include the review and updating of the owner's taxicab license application information and may be subject to applicable fees. If there are substantial changes in the owner's application information, the chief of police may require that the owner submit a new application for review and approval. 
(Ord. 1461 N.S. § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.54.060 - Taxicab license—Fee. 
The applicant for a taxicab license shall submit with the application a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 1461 N.S. § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.54.070 - Taxicab license—Grounds for denial, suspension or revocation. 
The chief of police may deny an application for, suspend, or revoke a taxicab license on any of the following grounds: 
A.  Public convenience and necessity do not require the proposed service; 
B.  The application fails to contain all of the required information as set forth in this chapter: 
C.  Any of the information contained in the application is false or misleading; 
D.  Any vehicle proposed for operation is not safe, and the applicant has failed to remove such vehicle from service or to substitute a safe vehicle in its place; 
E.  The applicant has failed to comply with any term, condition or requirement in a taxicab license previously issued by any agency, or the terms, conditions or requirements of this chapter; 
F.  The applicant, within five years prior to the date of application, was convicted of a crime, and the crime is substantially related to the qualifications, functions or duties of the taxicab business; 
G.  The applicant, within five years prior to the date of application, has done an act involving violence, dishonesty or fraud with the intent to injure another, or benefit the applicant or another; 
H.  The applicant has had a taxicab license issued under the provisions of this chapter revoked within three years prior to the date of filing of the application; or 
I.  The applicant has failed to pay when due, any applicable taxes imposed by the city; 
J.  Cancellation or suspension of any insurance policy or coverage required to be maintained by the chapter; 
K.  Overcharge of, or attempt to overcharge, taxicab fares which have been registered as required by this chapter; 
L.  The applicant committed any act or omission which, if it existed at the time the application was filed, would have resulted in the denial of the application. 
(Ord. 1461 N.S. § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.54.080 - Taxicab license—Issuance/Denial. 
A.  The chief of police may either deny the application, or issue a taxicab license to the applicant within thirty days of the receipt of the completed license application. 
B.  The chief of police may impose such terms, conditions or restrictions on the taxicab license as the chief deems necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare including provision of adequate and dependable service to the public, and protection of the use of public streets and facilities. 
C.  The taxicab license issued pursuant to this chapter, and all interests, rights and obligations pertaining thereto, are personal to the owner, and are not transferable or assignable, by operation of law or otherwise. 
(Ord. 1461 N.S. § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.54.090 - Taxicab driver permit—Required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate any of the vehicles regulated by this chapter or allow any vehicle under his or her ownership or management and regulated by this chapter to be driven or operated without first obtaining a taxicab driver permit ("permit") to do so. 
B.  Permits will entitle the driver to work for only that owner whose name appears on the permit. A new permit will be required for each subsequent employment. 
(Ord. 1461 N.S. § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.54.100 - Taxicab driver permit—Application—Fee. 
A.  Applicants for permits shall file applications with the chief of police upon forms provided by the police department. Applicants shall provide a certificate that the applicant has tested negative for listed controlled substances and alcohol pursuant to the requirements of California Government Code Section 53075.5 and Part 40 of Title 49 and Part 382 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
B.  No permit shall be issued to any of the following persons: 
1.  Any person under the age of twenty-one years. 
2.  Any person convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude or narcotics, or who, within five years prior to the filing date of the application, was convicted of any offense involving conduct which requires registration under California Penal Code Section 290. 
3.  Any person convicted of recklessly driving a vehicle within the two years immediately preceding the filing date of the application for a permit. 
4.  Any person convicted of driving a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol and/or a controlled substance within the five years immediately preceding the filing date of the application for a permit. 
5.  Any person not possessing a valid, permanent California driver's license at the time of the filing date of the application or thereafter. 
6.  Any person who fails to test negative for listed controlled substances and alcohol pursuant to the requirements of California Government Code Section 53075.5 and Part 40 of Title 49 and Part 382 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
7.  Any person who has knowingly made a false statement, or concealed a material fact, or otherwise committed any fraud in the application. 
8.  Any person who has had a taxicab driver's permit issued by any agency revoked within three years prior to the date of application. 
C.  Applicants for permits shall pay to the chief of police a nonrefundable fee which shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 1461 N.S. § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.54.110 - Taxicab driver permit—Issued. 
A.  The taxi driver permit shall be in the form of a card which shall bear the signature, photograph and fingerprints of the applicant and the name of the applicant's employer, who shall be the owner of a taxicab license. Such permits are valid for two years from the date of issuance. Such cards shall be issued in duplicate, and one copy with fingerprints, photograph and signature of the applicant shall be kept on file with the chief of police, and the other card shall be conspicuously displayed in the taxicab of the permit holder at all times such taxicab is operated. 
B.  Upon termination of employment from the owner whose name appears on the permit, the taxicab driver permit shall be automatically revoked and the permit holder shall immediately surrender the taxicab driver permit card to the chief of police. 
(Ord. 1461 N.S. § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.54.120 - Taxi driver permit—Grounds for denial, suspension or revocation. 
The chief of police may deny renewal of, suspend or revoke a taxicab driver permit if the holder has, since granting of the permit: 
A.  Been convicted of a felony or a crime of moral turpitude including but not limited to pandering; using, possessing, selling or transporting narcotics, or imparting information for obtaining narcotics; or has been convicted of a offense involving conduct which requires registration under California Penal Code Section 290. 
B.  Been convicted of driving recklessly or while under the influence of alcohol and/or controlled substances, or consumed drugs or alcohol or is under the influence of drugs or alcohol while on duty. 
C.  Had his or her California driver's license expired, revoked or suspended. 
D.  Had two or more convictions of any of the offenses set forth in Sections 22350 through 22352 of the California Vehicle Code and amendments thereto, or any such combination of offenses occurring during any continuous period not exceeding twelve months. 
E.  Failed to test negative for listed controlled substances and alcohol pursuant to the requirements of California Government Code Section 53075.5 and Part 40 of Title 49 and Part 382 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
F.  Has knowingly made a false statement, or concealed a material fact, or otherwise committed any fraud in the application for a permit. 
G.  Violated any provision of this chapter or other requirements as imposed by the chief of police. 
H.  Committed any act or omission, which if it existed at the time the application was filed, would have resulted in the denial of the application. 
I.  Overcharged, or attempted to overcharge taxicab fares as registered with the police department. 
(Ord. 1461 N.S. § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.54.130 - Schedule of rates and fares. 
A.  Every owner who holds a taxicab license must register a current schedule of rates and fares with the chief of police at the time of application or renewal of the license and within fifteen days of any change in the rate or fare schedule. 
B.  No driver shall operate a taxicab unless the schedule of rates and fares for the use of the taxicab are posted in a conspicuous, permanent and secure manner in the passenger compartment of the taxicab. 
(Ord. 1461 N.S. § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.54.140 - Full use of taxicabs. 
A.  Any person who hires a taxicab shall have the exclusive right to use the entire taxicab. There shall not be additional charges for any of the person's companions or personal belongings. 
B.  No owner or driver shall carry or solicit, or permit to be carried or solicited, any additional passenger unless the person first hiring the taxicab consents to the acceptance of such additional passenger. 
(Ord. 1461 N.S. § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.54.150 - Operating regulations. 
A.  No owner or driver of any taxicab shall refuse to provide taxicab service to a person who requests to be taken to a destination within the city unless the person requesting such service does not appear to be in a sober or orderly manner, the service is requested for an unlawful purpose, or the taxicab has already been hired. 
B.  Unless otherwise directed by the passenger hiring the taxicab, the driver of such taxicab shall take the most direct, expeditious and safe route from the starting point to the destination point. 
C.  No driver shall accept, take into the vehicle, or transport any larger number of passengers than the rated seating capacity of the vehicle. 
D.  No driver shall leave the side of the vehicle to solicit passengers. 
E.  No driver shall charge a rate or fare greater than the rates and fares registered with the city and posted in the taxicab. 
F.  Every driver shall, if requested, give a correct receipt upon payment of the correct fare. 
G.  Every driver and owner shall comply with orders issued by the chief of police including but not limited to equipment, minimum hours of operation, identification, safety inspections, accident reporting, insurance, and records of maintenance. 
(Ord. 1461 N.S. § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.54.160 - Notice and hearing for suspension and revocation. 
Revocations and suspensions of taxicab licenses and taxicab driver permits shall be administered as follows: 
A.  Except as provided in Section 5.54.170 of this chapter, a taxicab license or a taxicab driver permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be revoked or suspended only after the owner or driver has been given reasonable notice and opportunity to be heard. 
B.  Whenever the chief of police has reasonable cause to believe that grounds for the suspension or revocation of a license or permit exists, he or she shall give the holder of the taxicab license or taxicab driver permit written notice stating the alleged grounds for the suspension or revocation, the effective date of the suspension or revocation, and information on the appeal process. This notice will be by certified mail, return receipt requested, sent to the address shown on the last application or renewal, or by personal service. 
C.  The decision of the chief of police to revoke or suspend a taxicab license or taxicab driver permit may be appealed to the city manager or designate. Upon receipt of a request for an appeal hearing, the city manager, or designate, shall conduct a hearing within forty-five days of the request. The city manager, or designate, shall conduct a hearing within forty-five days of the request. The city manager, or designate, shall notify the permit holder in writing of the date, time, and place of the hearing. The hearing shall not be less than ten days after the service of the notice of hearing by postage of the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service. 
D.  At the hearing, both the holder of the taxicab license or taxicab driver permit and the chief of police shall have the right to appear and be represented by counsel and to present evidence and arguments which are relevant to the grounds for the appeal. Within ten working days of the conclusion of the hearing, the city manager or designate shall issue a written decision which states whether the decision of the chief of police is upheld, modified, or reversed; the length of any suspension, and the effective date of the suspension or revocation. The decision of the city manager or designate shall be served on the holder of the permit by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service. 
E.  The decision of the city manager or designate shall be final and binding. 
F.  Unless otherwise specifically prohibited by law, the burden of proof is on the license or permit holder in any hearing or other matter under this chapter. 
G.  Upon a written decision of the city manager or designate which suspends or revokes a taxicab license or taxicab driver permit, the holder of the taxicab license or taxicab driver permit shall surrender the license and/or permit to the chief of police immediately after service of the notice of the decision. 
(Ord. 1461 N.S. § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.54.170 - Emergency suspension. 
A.  The chief of police may issue an order suspending a taxicab license or a taxicab driver permit for a period not exceeding ten days without having conducted a hearing therefor, if the chief determines that the continued use of the license or permit will cause immediate hazard to the public safety, health or welfare. 
B.  Within ten days of the effective date of the order, the chief of police shall hold a hearing for the owner or driver to show cause why the license or permit should not be suspended or revoked. 
C.  The order issued by the chief of police under Subsection A of this section shall also contain a notice of the hearing setting forth the date, time and place of the hearing. 
(Ord. 1461 N.S. § 1 (part), 1999)  
5.54.180 - Para-transit providers—Exemption. 
A para-transit provider, who provides para-transit services to eligible individuals with disabilities in order to effectuate the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 under contract with any government agency while in the performance of providing para-transit services under such government contract controls shall be exempt from the regulatory requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1461 N.S. § 1 (part), 1999)  
Chapter 5.60 - ADULT BUSINESSES PERMIT SYSTEM AND STANDARDS 
 
5.60.010 - Police permits. 
In order to retain law-abiding management and operation of "adult businesses," as defined Title 18, the owners of all such businesses, prior to establishment of their business use, shall obtain police permits as defined and described herein. The purpose of issuance of police permits is to protect adult business patrons and the community from management of adult businesses which may have a history of being convicted of one or more specified criminal acts, or may be involved with organized crime, including prostitution, child pornography, or related crimes. 
A.  Permit—Application. 
1.  Any person required to obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter shall file a written application therefor with the chief of police. The term "chief of police" used herein means either the actual chief of police or a person designated by the city manager. The chief of police shall prepare written application forms for such permits which shall require thereon such information as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  The exact nature of the adult business proposed to be conducted; 
b.  The present name and address of each applicant and each owner, officer, or stockholder with over ten percent of the stock in a corporation, and previous addresses of each applicant and owner for a period of three years immediately prior to the date of application, and the dates of residence at each; 
c.  Written proof that each applicant and each owner is at least eighteen years of age; 
d.  Sufficient personal description from valid identification for each applicant to verify identity; 
e.  The business, occupation or employment history of each applicant and each owner for three years immediately preceding the date of application; and 
f.  The names and residence addresses of all owners and all persons currently employed or intended to be employed in the place of entertainment, regardless of the nature of employment (including independent contractors), the proposed actual nature of the work performed or to be performed, and fingerprints from each applicant and all such employees. 
2.  A filing and processing fee as established by a resolution of the city council shall be paid contemporaneously with the filing of the permit application. 
B.  Permit Investigation. The chief of police, upon receipt of a written application for a permit, shall conduct an appropriate investigation to determine whether the permit should be issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Based on his or her investigation, the chief of police shall issue a permit if he or she finds that the operation proposed by the application complies with the applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the building, zoning, and health regulations of the city, and the applicant, and any employee of the applicant, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction, by final judgment, of any of the following: 
1.  An offense involving the presentation, exhibition, or performance of an obscene production, motion picture, play, or act; 
2.  An offense involving lewd conduct or sexual relations on the premises of an adult business or at any other place where such actions may be prohibited by law; 
3.  An offense involving misconduct with children; 
4.  Any other "specified criminal act" as defined in this chapter, including, but not limited to, sexual assault, prostitution, pimping or pandering; or 
5.  An offense under this chapter. 
C.  The chief of police shall not issue a permit if the applicant has made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement in the permit application or any other document required by the city. 
D.  Conformity with Zoning Regulations. No police permit shall be issued to a business which is outside one of the industrial zoning districts identified in Title 18 except for those which are found to be nonconforming uses. 
E.  Permit Conditions. Permits may be issued conditionally in order to insure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
F.  Permit—Denial. If the chief of police finds any of the facts, as set forth in Sections 5.60.010(B), (C), and (D) of this chapter are present, he or she shall decline to issue the permit. 
G.  Permit—Notification of Decision. The chief of police shall make a decision with reference to a permit application no later than sixty calendar days following submission of an application containing all information required by this chapter. The chief of police shall give written notice of his or her decision to the applicant and to any other person requesting such notice. 
H.  Permit—Denial—Appeal Procedures. 
1.  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the chief of police with reference to the issuance, conditional issuance, or denial of a permit shall have a right to appeal. An appeal must be filed within fifteen days after the service of notice of decision to the applicant by the city. A letter of appeal must briefly state therein the basis for such appeal, together with a filing and processing fee as established by a resolution of the city council. 
2.  Upon receipt of such letter of appeal and fee, the city clerk shall set the matter for consideration by the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting. The city clerk shall give the appealing party and any other person, including the applicant if the applicant is not also the appealing party, at least five days written notice of the time and place of such hearing. 
3.  At the time and place set for the hearing upon the appeal from the decision of the chief of police, the council shall give the appealing party, and any other interested party, a reasonable opportunity to be heard in order to show cause why the determination of the chief of police should not be upheld. In all such cases, the burden of proof to show that the action taken was arbitrary, capricious, or in excess of the chief's authority shall be upon the appealing party. The determination of the city council shall be final and conclusive. 
I.  Permit—Suspension or Revocation. 
1.  The chief of police shall suspend any permit issued under this chapter if he or she finds any fact that would require an application for permit to be denied under Section 5.60.010 of this chapter or for any other violation of this chapter. In the case of such suspension, the chief of police shall serve the permittee with a written order of suspension which shall state the reasons therefor. The order shall be effective immediately if personally served, or forty-eight hours after the same has been deposited in the course of transmission in the United States Postal Service. Immediately upon such order becoming effective, the permittee shall cease all operations under the permit. 
2.  The order of suspension shall be deemed a revocation of the permit to which it relates unless the permittee, within fifteen days after its effective date, files an appeal from the order in the manner set forth in this chapter. Where an appeal is taken, the order shall be stayed pending a determination thereon by the city council. The determination shall be final and conclusive. 
J.  Permit—Posting Required. Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be posted on the premises where the business or enterprise for which the permit is issued is conducted and shall remain so posted during the period the permit shall be in force. 
K.  Changes of Operation After the Permit Issuance. 
1.  Permits issued under this chapter shall be in force and effect for a period of three years following issuance. 
2.  A permittee shall provide, to the chief of police, any and all information required under Section 5.60.010 of this chapter, as to any employee five days prior to employment. 
3.  No permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be assigned or transferred in any manner, nor shall any person, other than those therein mentioned, engage in the enterprise for which the permit is issued. As used in this chapter, "transfer" includes, but is not limited to, any modification of a business entity operating an adult business or otherwise required to be disclosed pursuant to Section 5.60.010(A) of this chapter, including the transfer of ten percent or more of the stock of any corporation. 
L.  Violation—Penalty. It is unlawful to violate any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1152 N.S. § 1 (part), 1993) 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 14, 5-2-2018)  
5.60.020 - Operational standards. 
Each and every adult business shall be operated in compliance with the standards set forth as follows: 
A.  Hours of Operation. No adult business shall be operated before nine o'clock in the morning nor after eleven o'clock in the evening, in order to prevent gathering of patrons at hours which may be disruptive to nearby land uses. 
B.  Advertising and Display. The city council finds that adult businesses should be conducted in a manner so as to not unduly impact nearby businesses or land uses. Therefore, signs, window displays and building painting and colors shall be restrained, not in garish colors or textures, in a manner similar to other businesses in the area, and shall not depict or advertise specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities nor specific products, instruments, devices or other merchandise in connection with specified sexual activities. Any advertisements, signs, displays of merchandise or any other exhibit depicting adult business activities placed within the interior of buildings or premises such as waiting areas, office area and other areas behind windows shall not show specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. All such areas shall be arranged or screened to prevent public viewing from outside such buildings or premises. No outdoor loudspeakers or other outdoor sound equipment advertising or directing attention to an adult entertainment use are allowed. 
C.  Minors. No minor under the age of eighteen may be admitted to an adult business. The owner or manager of an adult business shall require a California driver's license or other equivalent identification from any patron who appears to be under age thirty. 
D.  Open Inspection. The police department and any other investigating officials of the city shall have the right to enter all areas which are open to the public in adult businesses from time to time during regular business hours, to make reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with building, fire, electrical, plumbing, health regulations or provisions of this chapter. A warrant shall be obtained whenever required by law. This section applies to all areas of an adult business, including massage rooms, minitheater or peep shows and any other areas of the business. Notice of this right to enter shall be posted conspicuously in the lobby or other entrance of the building. 
E.  Security and Lighting. An on-site security program, including required interior and exterior lighting plans, shall be prepared and implemented and include, when directed by the chief of police, provision of on-site security personnel during all business hours, which security personnel shall be licensed in accordance with the California Business and Professions Code and Section 5.40.010 et seq. of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code. In addition, for all adult businesses whether or not security guards are required, the parking areas of each adult business shall be illuminated in all evening hours with at least one footcandle of lighting, measured at ground level on any exterior part of the premises; and in addition, all interior portions of the adult business, except any areas devoted to mini motion picture theaters ("peep shows") or motion picture theaters, shall be illuminated during all hours of operation providing a minimum illumination of two footcandles of light. 
(Ord. 1152 N.S. § 1 (part), 1993)  
Chapter 5.64 - TOBACCO RETAILER'S LICENSE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2199 N.S., § 1, adopted May 18, 2016, amended Ch. 5.64 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 5.64, §§ 5.64.010—5.64.170, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2104 N.S., § 1, adopted April 16, 2014. 
 
5.64.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is intended to set forth a local license process for tobacco retailers to ensure that retailers comply with tobacco control laws and city business standards to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and to encourage responsible tobacco retailing and to discourage violations of tobacco-related laws, especially those which prohibit or discourage the sale or distribution of tobacco products to minors. This chapter is not intended to expand or reduce the degree to which the acts regulated by federal or state law are criminally proscribed or to alter the penalties provided therein. 
(Ord. No. 2199 N.S., § 1, 5-18-2016)  
5.64.020 - Definitions. 
A.  The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section: 
1.  "Arm's length transaction" means a sale in good faith and for valuable consideration that reflects the fair market value in the open market between two informed and willing parties, neither of which is under any compulsion to participate in the transaction. A sale between relatives, related companies or partners, or a sale for which a significant purpose is avoiding the effect of the violations of this chapter is not an arm's length transaction. 
2.  "City" means the City of Morgan Hill and each of its officers and employees designated to enforce or administer the provisions of this chapter. 
3.  "Licensee" means a tobacco retailer or their authorized representative and/or employee with a valid tobacco retailer's license. 
4.  "Person" means any natural person, partnership, cooperative association, corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity. 
5.  "Proprietor" means a person with an ownership or managerial interest in a business. An ownership interest shall be deemed to exist when a person has a ten percent or greater interest in the stock, assets, or income of a business other than the sole interest of security for debt. A managerial interest shall be deemed to exist when a person can or does have or share ultimate control over the day-to-day operations of a business. 
6.  "Self-service display" means the open display or storage of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia in a manner that is physically accessible in any way to the general public without the assistance of the retailer or employee of the retailer and a direct person-to-person transfer between the purchaser and the retailer or employee of the retailer. A vending machine is a form of self-service display. 
7.  "Smoking" means possessing a lighted tobacco product, lighted tobacco paraphernalia, or any other lighted weed or plant (including a lighted pipe, cigar, hookah pipe, or cigarette of any kind) and means the lighting of a tobacco product, tobacco paraphernalia, or any other weed or plant (including a pipe, cigar, hookah pipe, or cigarette of any kind). 
8.  "Tobacco paraphernalia" means cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other item designed for the smoking, preparation, storing, or consumption of tobacco products. 
9.  "Tobacco product" means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, snus, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco; and any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human body, but does not include any cessation product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependence. 
10.  "Tobacco retailer" means any person who sells, offers for sale, or does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia, and "tobacco retailing" shall mean the doing of any of these activities. This definition is without regard to the quantity of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia sold, offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange. 
B.  Any reference in this chapter to a specific state or federal statute or municipal code provision shall be construed to mean that state or federal statute or municipal code provision as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2199 N.S., § 1, 5-18-2016)  
5.64.030 - Tobacco retailer's license required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco retailer in the city without first obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco retailer's license pursuant to this chapter for each location at which that activity is to occur. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to vest in any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer's license any status or right to act as a tobacco retailer in contravention of any provision of law. 
(Ord. No. 2199 N.S., § 1, 5-18-2016)  
5.64.040 - Operating regulations and prohibitions. 
Every person engaged in tobacco retailing activities shall comply with each and every provision set forth below: 
A.  Location. Tobacco retailing activities shall be conducted at a fixed location and within the enclosed area of the tenant space completely accessible to the general public during the hours of business operation. 
B.  Display of license. Each tobacco retailer's license shall be prominently displayed in a publicly visible location at the licensed location. 
C.  Minimum age for persons selling tobacco. No person who is younger than the minimum age established by state law for the purchase or possession of tobacco products shall engage in tobacco retailing. 
D.  Minimum age for the purchase of tobacco. No person engaged in tobacco retailing shall sell or transfer tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia to a person whose legal age is under minimum age established by state law for the purchase or possession of tobacco products. 
E.  Positive identification required. Persons engaged in tobacco retailing may not sell or transfer a tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia to another person who appears to be under the age of twenty-seven years without first examining the identification of the recipient to confirm that the recipient is at least the minimum age under state law to purchase and possess a tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia. 
F.  Compliance with the City of Morgan Hill's Smoking Pollution Control Regulations. Persons engaged in tobacco retailing shall ensure that the tobacco retailing activities comport with Morgan Hill Municipal Code Chapter 8.44, Title 8, titled "Smoking Pollution Control". 
G.  Self-service displays prohibited. Tobacco retailing by means of a self-service display is prohibited. 
H.  License nontransferable. A tobacco retailer's license may not be transferred from one person to another or from one location to another. A new tobacco retailer's license is required whenever the proprietor(s) of a tobacco retailing location change. 
I.  Lawful business operation. In the course of tobacco retailing or in the operation of the business or maintenance of the premises for which a tobacco retailer's license is issued, it shall be a violation of this chapter for any tobacco retailer or any tobacco retailer's agent or employee to violate any federal, state, or local law applicable to tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, or tobacco retailing. 
(Ord. No. 2199 N.S., § 1, 5-18-2016)  
5.64.050 - Application procedure; unlawfully providing false information. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to supply inaccurate or false information on a tobacco retailer's license application. 
B.  All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the City of Morgan Hill Finance Department, shall be accompanied by payment in full of the license fee, and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name, address, and telephone number of each proprietor of the business seeking a license; 
2.  The business name, address, and telephone number of the single fixed location for which a license is sought; 
3.  A single name and mailing address authorized by each proprietor to receive all communications and notices (the "authorized address") required by, authorized by, or convenient to the enforcement of this chapter. If an authorized address is not supplied, each proprietor shall be understood to consent to the provision of notice at the business address specified in subparagraph (2) above; 
4.  Proof that the location for which a tobacco retailer's license is sought has been issued a valid state tobacco retailer's license by the California Board of Equalization; 
5.  Whether or not any proprietor or any agent of the proprietor has admitted violating, or has been found to have violated, this chapter and, if so, the dates and locations of all such violations within the previous five years; 
6.  Such other information as the city deems necessary for the administration or enforcement of this chapter as specified on the application form required by this section; 
7.  Any person applying for a tobacco retailer's license pursuant to this chapter agrees to fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its officers, employees and agents for all claims, losses, or liabilities that arise out of the issuance or use of the tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia; and 
8.  The application shall be signed by each proprietor or an authorized agent thereof. 
C.  A licensed tobacco retailer shall inform the city in writing of any change in the information submitted on an application for a tobacco retailer's license within ten business days of a change. 
D.  All information specified in an application pursuant to this section shall be subject to disclosure under the California Public Records Act (California Government Code Section 6250 et seq.) or any other applicable law, subject to the laws' exemptions. 
(Ord. No. 2199 N.S., § 1, 5-18-2016)  
5.64.060 - Issuance of license. 
Upon the receipt of a complete application for a tobacco retailer's license and the license fee required by this chapter, the city shall issue a tobacco retailer's license, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. A tobacco retailer's license shall not be issued if substantial evidence demonstrates to city that one or more of the following exists: 
A.  The information presented in the application is inaccurate or false. Intentionally supplying inaccurate or false information shall be a violation of this chapter; 
B.  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing at a location for which a tobacco retailer license has been denied pursuant to this chapter. However, this subparagraph shall not constitute a basis for denial of a license if the applicant provides the city with documentation demonstrating, by clear and convincing evidence, that the applicant has acquired or is acquiring the location or business in an arm's length transaction, and is not associated with the previous applicant in any way; 
C.  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing for a proprietor to whom this chapter prohibits a license to be issued; or 
D.  The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing that is prohibited pursuant to this chapter, that is unlawful pursuant to the Morgan Hill Municipal Code, or that is unlawful pursuant to any other law. 
(Ord. No. 2199 N.S., § 1, 5-18-2016)  
5.64.070 - License renewal and expiration. 
A.  Each tobacco retailer's license issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on June 30 of each year, subject to suspension or revocation as provided in this chapter. 
B.  Renewal of license. Each tobacco retailer shall renew their tobacco retailer's license and submit the license fee prior to July 1 of each year. A tobacco retailer's license is invalid if the term of the license has expired and the license was not timely renewed and the appropriate fee was not paid. 
C.  Expiration of license. A tobacco retailer's license not timely renewed shall expire on June 30 of each year To renew a license not timely renewed pursuant to subparagraph (A), the proprietor must: 
1.  Submit the license fee and application renewal form; and, 
2.  Submit a signed affidavit affirming that the proprietor has not sold and will not sell any tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia after the license expiration date and before the license is renewed. 
(Ord. No. 2199 N.S., § 1, 5-18-2016)  
5.64.080 - Fee for license. 
A.  Each tobacco retailer who applies for or holds a tobacco retailer's license shall pay all associated fees in the amounts established by the city council. Fees are nonrefundable except as may be required by law. 
B.  The fee to issue or renew a tobacco retailer's license shall be established from time to time by the city council. 
C.  No tobacco retailer's licensee shall be issued or renewed prior to the full payment of any applicable fees. 
D.  Licenses renewed after July 31 of each year shall be assessed a ten percent penalty and licenses renewed after August 31 of each year shall be assessed an additional fifteen percent penalty. 
(Ord. No. 2199 N.S., § 1, 5-18-2016)  
5.64.090 - License conveys a limited, conditional privilege. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to grant any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer's license any status or right other than the limited conditional privilege to act as a tobacco retailer at the location in the city identified on the face of the license. 
B.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to render inapplicable, supersede, or apply in lieu of any other provision of applicable law, including but not limited to, any provision of this code, or any condition or limitation on smoking in an enclosed place of employment pursuant to California Labor Code Section 6404.5. For example, obtaining a tobacco retailer license does not make the retailer a "retail or wholesale tobacco shop" for the purposes of California Labor Code Section 6404.5. 
(Ord. No. 2199 N.S., § 1, 5-18-2016)  
5.64.100 - Compliance monitoring. 
A.  The Morgan Hill Police Department and Finance Department shall have primary responsibility for monitoring compliance with this chapter. Any peace officer may enforce the penal provisions of this chapter. The city may designate any number of additional persons to monitor compliance with this chapter. 
B.  Inspections may be conducted so as to allow the city to determine, at a minimum, if a tobacco retailer is conducting business in a manner that complies with laws regulating youth access to tobacco products and paraphernalia. 
C.  The city shall not enforce any law establishing a minimum age for tobacco purchasers or possession against a purchaser of tobacco that otherwise might be in violation of such law because of the person's age if the potential violation occurs when: 
1.  The purchaser (hereinafter referred to as "youth decoy") is participating in a compliance check supervised by a peace officer or a code enforcement official of the city; 
2.  The youth decoy is acting as an agent of a person designated by the city to monitor compliance with this chapter; or 
3.  The youth decoy is participating in a compliance check funded in part, either directly or indirectly through subcontracting, by the Santa Clara County Department of Health or the California Department of Health Services. 
(Ord. No. 2199 N.S., § 1, 5-18-2016)  
5.64.110 - Tobacco retailing without a license. 
A.  In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, if a court or hearing officer of competent jurisdiction determines that any person has engaged in tobacco retailing at a location without a valid tobacco retailer's license, either directly or through the person's agents or employees, the person shall be ineligible to apply for, or to be issued, a tobacco retailing license as follows: 
1.  After a second violation of retailing without a license at a location within any sixty-month period, no tobacco retailer license shall be issued for the person or the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been transferred in an arm's length transaction), until one calendar year has passed from the date of the second violation; 
2.  After a third or subsequent violation of this section at a location within any sixty-month period, no new license may issue for the person or the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been transferred in an arm's length transaction), until five calendar years have passed from the date of the most recent violation. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, prior violations at a location shall continue to be counted against a location and license ineligibility periods shall continue to apply to a location unless: 
1.  The location has been fully transferred to a new proprietor(s); and 
2.  The new proprietor(s) provide the city with clear and convincing evidence that the new proprietor(s) have acquired or is acquiring the location in an arm's length transaction, and are not associated with the prior proprietor(s) in any way. 
(Ord. No. 2199 N.S., § 1, 5-18-2016)  
5.64.120 - False and misleading advertising prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for a tobacco retailer without a valid tobacco retailer license or whose license has been revoked to: 
A.  Keep tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia within public view. 
B.  Display any advertisement relating to tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia that promotes the sale or distribution of such products from the tobacco retailer's location or that could lead a reasonable consumer to believe that such products can be obtained at that location. 
(Ord. No. 2199 N.S., § 1, 5-18-2016)  
5.64.130 - Penalties and enforcement. 
A.  The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity. 
B.  Whenever evidence of a violation of this chapter is obtained, in any part, through the participation of a person under the age of eighteen years old, such a person shall not be required to appear or give testimony in any civil or administrative process brought to enforce this chapter and the alleged violation shall be adjudicated based upon the sufficiency and persuasiveness of the evidence presented. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to violate Section 5.64.040(D). 
D.  Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall also constitute a violation of this chapter. 
E.  Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances pursuant to Morgan Hill Municipal Code. Any nuisance may be abated as provided in Chapter 1.18 of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2199 N.S., § 1, 5-18-2016; Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 15, 5-2-2018)  
5.64.140 - Suspension or revocation of a tobacco retailer's license, or forfeiture of seized tobacco and tobacco paraphernalia. 
A.  In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, the city may suspend or revoke a tobacco retailer's license on the grounds set forth in this section after the licensee has been afforded notice and an opportunity to be heard, consistent with the hearing procedures set forth in Morgan Hill Municipal Code Sections 1.19.060 through 1.19.100, inclusive. If, after the passage of fifteen (15) calendar days from the mailing or personal delivery of the notice, the licensee has not requested a hearing, the suspension, revocation, or forfeiture shall become final. Any suspended or revoked tobacco retailer's license shall be surrendered to the city and all operations covered by such license shall cease once the suspension or revocation becomes final. 
1.  A tobacco retailer's license may be suspended or revoked on one or more of the following grounds: 
a.  A tobacco retailer's license was issued contrary to this chapter, contrary to any other law, or on the basis of false or misleading information; 
b.  One or more of the bases for denial of a license pursuant to this chapter existed at the time application was made or at any time before the license issued; and/or 
c.  A court or hearing officer of competent jurisdiction has determined that a licensee has violated a provision of this chapter. 
B.  For violations of Section 5.64.040(D), the city shall have the additional authority: 
1.  Upon a finding by the city of a first violation of Section 5.64.040(D) at a location within a sixty-month period, the license shall be subject to suspension for thirty days. 
2.  Upon a finding by the city of a second violation of Section 5.64.040(D) at a location within a sixty-month period, the license shall be subject to suspension for ninety days. 
3.  Upon a finding by the city of a third violation of Section 5.64.040(D) at a location within a sixty (60) month period, the license shall be subject to suspension for one (1) year. 
4.  Upon a finding by the city of a fourth violation of Section 5.64.040(D) at a location within a sixty-month period, the license shall be subject to revocation. 
C.  Tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia offered for sale or exchange in violation of this chapter are subject to seizure by the city or any peace officer and shall be forfeited after the person, the person's agents or employees, or any other owner of the tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia seized is given reasonable notice and an opportunity, consistent with the hearing procedures set forth in Morgan Hill Municipal Code Sections 1.19.060 through 1.19.100, inclusive, to demonstrate that the tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia were not offered for sale or exchange in violation of this chapter. The decision by the city is final and is subject to judicial review pursuant to Morgan Hill Municipal Code Section 1.19.125. Forfeited tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia may be destroyed after all internal appeals have been exhausted and the time in which to seek judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6 or other applicable law has expired without the filing of a lawsuit or, if such a suit is filed, after judgment in that suit becomes final. 
(Ord. No. 2199 N.S., § 1, 5-18-2016)  
5.64.150 - Appeal. 
A.  Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.20 of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code, the licensee can appeal a decision of the city to suspend and/or revoke a tobacco retailer's license. Compliance with the procedures set forth in Section 5.64.140 shall be deemed to fulfill the procedural requirement of Section 1.20.020. 
(Ord. No. 2199 N.S., § 1, 5-18-2016)  
5.64.160 - New license after revocation. 
A.  After first revocation at a location within any sixty-month period, no new license may be issued for the location until one calendar year has passed from the date of revocation. 
B.  After second or more revocations at a location within any sixty-month period, no new license may be issued for the location until five calendar years days have passed from the date of the most recent revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2199 N.S., § 1, 5-18-2016)  
5.64.170 - Nondiscrimination. 
No person shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant exercises any rights afforded by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2199 N.S., § 1, 5-18-2016)  
Chapter 5.68 - FIREARMS DEALERS 
 
5.68.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, are defined as follows: 
"Applicant" means the firearms dealer as defined in this chapter who is making application to the city for a firearms dealer permit or gunsmith permit as required by Cal. Penal Code § 26700. 
"Chief of police" means the chief of police of the city or his/her designee charged with the administration of this chapter, subject to the administrative direction of the city manager. 
"Collector of curios and relics" means a person who is a collector of any antique firearm or any firearm that is a curio or relic as defined in Sections 178.11 et seq. of Title 27 of the Code of Federal Regulations and who only possesses a valid Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms Federal Firearms License of Type 03 (collectors of curios and relics). 
"Engaged in business" means the conduct of a business by the selling, transferring, or leasing of any firearm; or the preparation for such conduct of business as evidenced by the securing of applicable federal and state licenses; or the holding of one's self out as engaged in the business of selling, transferring, or leasing of firearms in quantity, in series, or in individual transactions, or in any other manner indicative of trade. 
"Firearm" means any device, designed to be used as a weapon or modified to be used as a weapon, from which a projectile is expelled through a barrel by the force of an explosion or other form of combustion. 
"Firearms dealer" means a person engaged in the business of selling, transferring, leasing, or advertising for sale, transfer, or lease any firearm with the exception of a Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms Federal Firearms License of Type 03 (collectors of curios and relics) and Type 01 (limited to those who engage only in gunsmith activities and do not conduct any sales transactions). Included in this definition are persons involved solely in the warehousing and storage of firearms. 
"Gunsmith" means a person whose occupation is to design, modify, make or repair firearms. For the sales of firearms, refer to "firearms dealer" under subsection (f) of this section. 
"Permittee" means the person(s) listed on the firearms dealer permit issued by the city. 
"Person" means any natural person, firm, corporation, organization, company association, business trust, joint-stock company, partnership, joint venture, club, or the agent, servant, manager, officer, employee, or lessee of any of them, and any municipal, political, or governmental corporation, district, body, or agency other than the city. 
(Ord. No. 2292 N.S., § 1, 12-5-2018)  
5.68.020 - Permit required. 
A.  Firearms Dealers. No person, partnership, cooperative, corporation, firm, or association will engage in the business of operating or managing any business in the city which sells, transfers, leases, or offers or advertises for sale, transfer, or lease, any firearm without first obtaining a firearms dealer permit from the chief of police. Application for any such permit shall be made in writing to the chief of police in such form as shall be prescribed by him/her. The applicant shall provide all information requested, including proof of compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, or the application will not be deemed complete. Persons who are collectors of antique firearms as described in Section 5.68.010(c) shall not be required to obtain and maintain a firearms dealer permit. 
B.  Gunsmiths. No person, partnership, cooperative, corporation, firm, or association will engage in the business of operating or managing a business which designs, modifies, makes or repairs firearms in the city without first obtaining a gunsmith permit from the chief of police. Application for any such permit shall be made in writing to the chief of police in such form as shall be prescribed by him/her. The applicant shall provide all information requested, including proof of compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, or the application will not be deemed complete. 
(Ord. No. 2292 N.S., § 1, 12-5-2018)  
5.68.030 - Application fee. 
The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as set forth in the city of Morgan Hill master fee resolution. The fee shall include an amount necessary to cover the full cost of processing, background, issuance, inspection, enforcement, and hearing procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2292 N.S., § 1, 12-5-2018)  
5.68.040 - Administration of chapter—Application and investigation for permits. 
A.  The chief of police shall administer this chapter. 
B.  The chief of police shall conduct an appropriate investigation to determine the eligibility of each owner, partner, employee, manager, officer, agent, lessee, or other responsible person engaged in the business for which the applicant is seeking a firearms dealer permit or gunsmith permit. This investigation shall be conducted for the protection of the public safety and to determine if a permit may be issued. The applicant, owner, partner, employee, manager, officer, agent, lessee, or other responsible person engaged in the business shall fully cooperate by providing necessary authorization for access to private records and information. 
(Ord. No. 2292 N.S., § 1, 12-5-2018)  
5.68.050 - Permit approval, renewal, suspension, conditions and revocation criteria. 
The chief of police may issue or renew a permit only if the following criteria are met. The chief of police is hereby authorized to adopt all necessary administrative regulations to carry out the intent of this section including, but not limited to, the imposition of additional criteria. The chief of police may deny a new permit or suspend, revoke or impose reasonable conditions for issuance or renewal of an existing permit for failure to meet the following criteria: 
A.  Applicants must be at least twenty-one years old. 
B.  The applicant must hold all required federal, state and local licenses and authorizations. 
C.  The applicant has no prior revocation, or denial of similar permit, for good cause within the last two years. 
D.  The applicant has provided accurate statements of fact on his/her application. 
E.  The applicant must have paid all applicable fees as provided in the city of Morgan Hill master fee resolution. 
F.  The applicant is free of a conviction for any of the following offenses: 
1.  Any offense that would disqualify the applicant from owning or possessing a firearm under federal, state and local laws. 
2.  Any offense related to the manufacturing, sale, possession, use, or registration of any firearm or dangerous or deadly weapon. 
3.  Any offense involving the use of force or violence against the person of another. 
4.  Any offense involving the manufacturing, sale, possession, or use of any controlled substance as defined in the California Health and Safety Code. 
G.  The applicant is not an unlawful user of any controlled substance as defined by the California Health and Safety Code, or an excessive user of alcohol to the extent that it would impair his/her ability to be a dealer in firearms. 
H.  The applicant is not a mental patient in a hospital or institution, or on leave of absence from any hospital or institution, or adjudicated by a court to be a danger to others as a result of a mental disorder or illness, or a mentally disordered sex offender, or suffers from any psychological disturbance which would impair his/her ability to be a firearms dealer. 
I.  The applicant proposes to operate the business in a manner which complies with all federal, state, and local laws. 
J.  The applicant operates his or her business: 
1.  Within a zoning district where the proposed use is permitted by zoning regulations; or 
2.  Within a zoning district where applicant has obtained required permits or approvals as prescribed by this code and general law. 
K.  The applicant can provide evidence of possessory interest in the property at which he/she proposes to conduct business. 
(Ord. No. 2292 N.S., § 1, 12-5-2018)  
5.68.060 - Security requirements—Chief of police authority to adopt administrative regulations. 
Firearms security regulations shall be adopted as provided in this section. 
A.  The primary objectives of this chapter are to discourage theft from the premises of firearms dealers, to provide a safe and secure facility for storage and sale of firearms, and to ensure that firearms dealers use best practices to prevent the sale of firearms to unauthorized purchasers. To this end the permittee shall comply with all firearms dealer regulations prescribed by the chief of police. The chief of police is hereby authorized to adopt all necessary administrative regulations to carry out the intent of this chapter. 
B.  The chief of police shall adopt firearms security regulations requiring, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  The provision of secure locks, windows and doors, adequate lighting and an alarm security system in accordance with permitted city security regulations and/or specified by the chief of police. 
2.  The storage of all firearms on the premises out of reach of customers in secure, locked locations, so that the access to the firearms is controlled by the dealer and/or owner, partner, employee, manager, officer, agent, lessee, or other responsible person engaged in the business and to the exclusion of others. Storage of ammunition, gunpowder or other flammable or explosive material shall be in accordance with the Uniform Fire Code and the city's hazardous materials management ordinance (Chapter 8.40). 
3.  Training requirements to detect and prevent straw purchases, where a person buys a firearm for someone who is prohibited from firearms possession. 
(Ord. No. 2292 N.S., § 1, 12-5-2018)  
5.68.070 - Permit forms. 
All permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be in a form prescribed by the Attorney General of the state. 
(Ord. No. 2292 N.S., § 1, 12-5-2018)  
5.68.080 - Permit duration. 
A.  All permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire one year after the date of issuance, unless suspended or revoked prior to the expiration date. 
B.  All permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to renewal after one year. The permittee shall file a renewal application and pay all applicable fees as specified in the city of Morgan Hill master fee resolution. Such application will then be reviewed by the chief of police for compliance with the provisions of this chapter. A permit will be issued by the chief of police for a renewal application which meets the provisions specified in this chapter. The permit will be valid for one year. 
C.  Applications for renewal of an existing valid permit must be completed and received by the chief of police, in completed form, no later than thirty days prior to the expiration of the current permit. 
(Ord. No. 2292 N.S., § 1, 12-5-2018)  
5.68.090 - Home occupation permit transition period. 
A.  A federally licensed firearms dealer possessing a home occupation permit for the sale of firearms from his/her residence will be required to cease selling firearms from his or her home by December 31, 2021. A residentially based firearms dealer shall be subject to all provisions specified in this chapter; however, such dealer shall be exempted from the requirement for liability insurance. 
B.  A federally licensed firearms dealer conducting business as a gunsmith from a residence under a home occupation permit will be permitted to continue to operate in the manner prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2292 N.S., § 1, 12-5-2018)  
5.68.100 - Permit conditions. 
A.  All permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the following conditions. The violation of any of the listed conditions will be grounds for suspension or revocation of the permit by the chief of police. 
1.  No firearms dealer permit will be issued to a person engaged in the business of selling, transferring, leasing, or advertising for sale, transfer, or lease any firearm from a residence. 
2.  The business shall be conducted only in the building located at the street address indicated on the permit. 
3.  The sales of firearms shall be conducted only by the person(s) listed on the firearms dealer permit issued by the city, known as the "permittee." If the permittee is to be assisted by another person such as an owner, partner, employee, manager, officer, agent, lessee, or other responsible person engaged in the business of the sale of firearms, these individuals must be reviewed under the requirements of Section 5.68.050(a), (e), (f), (g), and (h). 
4.  The assignment of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter is unlawful and any such assignment shall render the permit null and void. In addition, the attempt to transfer or assign any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be further grounds for revocation. 
5.  The permittee shall comply with Cal. Penal Code §§ 27510, 28050-28070, 28100, 28105, 28150-28180, and 28200-28250, to the extent that the provisions remain in effect. 
6.  The permittee shall comply with all sections of this chapter. 
B.  Any permit pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to additional conditions as the chief of police deems reasonably related to the purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2292 N.S., § 1, 12-5-2018)  
5.68.110 - Permit denial, suspension, conditioning, revocation, denial of renewal. 
A.  The chief of police may deny a new permit application or suspend, modify, revoke or deny renewal of an existing permit for failure of the applicant or permittee to satisfy any of the criteria provided in Sections 5.68.050, 5.68.060, 5.68.090, 5.68.100, 5.68.140 and 5.68.150. 
B.  Any decision to deny a new permit application, suspend, revoke, modify or deny renewal of an existing permit shall be given to the applicant or permittee in writing, addressed to the permittee or applicant at the address on the application, and shall set forth the factual and legal grounds for the decision. 
(Ord. No. 2292 N.S., § 1, 12-5-2018)  
5.68.120 - Appeal of adverse action. 
A.  Within thirty days after the date of deposit of the decision of the chief of police in the mail in accordance with Section 5.68.110, the applicant or permittee may appeal the decision in writing to the city manager, setting forth the factual and legal grounds for appeal. 
B.  The city manager (or designee) shall: 
1.  Set a time and place for the hearing on the appeal; 
2.  Appoint a city hearing officer to conduct a hearing; and 
3.  Notify the applicant or permittee in writing of such date and time not later than thirty days from the date the appeal was received by the city manager. 
C.  The hearing shall be conducted within forty-five days from the date the appeal was received by the city manager. In any hearing under this section, the applicant shall bear the burden of proof to establish entitlement to the requested permit by a preponderance of the evidence. 
D.  After hearing the appeal, the city hearing officer may: 
1.  Refer the matter back to the chief of police for a new investigation and decision consistent with direction provided by the hearing officer; 
2.  Affirm the decision of the chief of police; 
3.  Approve the application for a permit subject to any conditions the hearing officer may prescribe; or 
4.  Approve the application for a permit without conditions. 
E.  The decision of the city hearing officer shall be the final administrative determination and is subject to judicial review. 
(Ord. No. 2292 N.S., § 1, 12-5-2018)  
5.68.130 - Costs of appeal and attorneys' fees. 
In any appeal hearing conducted under this chapter, the city hearing officer shall award all costs of the hearing, including direct and indirect staff costs and overhead, hearing officer costs and attorneys' fees, to the city whenever the city prevails. 
(Ord. No. 2292 N.S., § 1, 12-5-2018)  
5.68.140 - Permit liability insurance. 
A.  No firearms dealer permit shall be issued or renewed pursuant to this chapter unless there is in full force and effect prior to issuance of a permit or renewal a policy of insurance in such form that the city attorney and city risk manager deem proper, executed by an insurance company approved by the city attorney whereby the applicant or permittee is insured against liability for damage to property and for injury to or death of any person as a result of the sale, transfer or lease, or advertising for sale, transfer or lease, or advertising for lease, any firearm. The minimum liability limits shall not be less than one million dollars for damages to or destruction of property in any one incident, and one million dollars for the death or injury of any one person; provided, however, that additional amounts may be required by the city attorney if deemed necessary. Person(s) engaged in the business of operating or managing a gunsmith business which designs, modifies, makes or repairs firearms will not be required to obtain and maintain liability insurance as discussed in this section. 
B.  The policy of insurance shall name the city, its officers, agents and employees as additional insureds. Applicants and permittees shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, and employees from claims arising from the negligence of the applicant or permittee. Such policy of insurance shall contain an endorsement providing that the policy will not be canceled until notice in writing has been given to the chief of police sixty days prior to cancellation. 
C.  A federally licensed firearms dealer possessing a home occupation permit shall be exempted from this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2292 N.S., § 1, 12-5-2018)  
5.68.150 - Inspection authority. 
The chief of police or his/her designee shall have the right to enter any firearms dealer establishment from time to time during regular business hours to make reasonable inspections to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter are being complied with. A warrant shall be obtained whenever required by law. 
(Ord. No. 2292 N.S., § 1, 12-5-2018)  
5.68.160 - Compliance. 
Any person engaging in the business of selling, transferring, or leasing, or advertising for sale, transfer, or lease, or offering for sale, transfer, or lease, any firearm on the effective date of this chapter shall have sixty days from the effective date to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2292 N.S., § 1, 12-5-2018)  
5.68.170 - Temporary suspension. 
A.  If a firearm dealer violates any federal, state or local county or city law, the chief of police may immediately suspend the right of the dealer to sell firearms. 
B.  The temporary suspension will not exceed three days. If the violation results in a criminal charge brought in federal or state court, such permit to sell firearms may be suspended until the case is adjudicated in a court of law. 
C.  Notice of suspension and rights to appeal and costs shall be the same as provided in Sections 5.68.110, 5.68.120 and 5.68.130. 
(Ord. No. 2292 N.S., § 1, 12-5-2018)  
Title 6 - ANIMALS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 6.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
6.04.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of Chapters 6.04 through 6.32 of this title, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in Chapters 6.04 through 6.32 of this title are defined as follows: 
A.  "Administrator" means the person appointed by the city manager to administer the city animal control services, or any person authorized or designated by the administrator to act on his behalf. 
B.  "Animal" means any live vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, including but not limited to livestock, household pets and other small animals, except fish. 
C.  "Animal service officer" means any person authorized to act on behalf of the chief of police in the enforcement of this title, and on behalf of the county health officer in the enforcement of rabies control laws. 
D.  "Animal menagerie" means any place where dangerous animals are kept or maintained for any purpose, including places where dangerous animals are boarded, exhibited, trained or kept for hire. 
E.  "Animal shelter" means a facility operated by a public jurisdiction or by an accredited, tax exempt humane organization for the purpose of impounding, harboring, selling, placing or destroying seized, stray, distressed, homeless, abandoned or unwanted animals. 
F.  "Cat" means a domestic cat (Felis catus.) 
G.  "Commercial kennel" means any person engaged in the commercial breeding of dogs or cats, or both, for sale, individually or in litter lots; or in the boarding, training, sale or hire of dogs and/or cats for compensation, except that animal hospitals maintained by a veterinarian licensed by the state as part of the practice of veterinary medicine, animal shelters or private kennels shall not be considered commercial kennels. 
H.  "Dangerous animal" means any wild, exotic or venomous animal, or other animal which, because of its size, disposition or other characteristic, would constitute a danger to persons or property. 
I.  "Dog" means a domestic dog (Canis familiaris.) 
J.  "Grooming parlor" means any commercial place where animals are trimmed, bathed or groomed. 
K.  "Horse establishment" means any person keeping three or more horses, donkeys, mules, jack, hinny, jenny burros or ponies for any or all of the following purposes: 
1.  For hire to be ridden or driven; 
2.  For giving riding instruction; 
3.  For boarding with compensation. 
L.  "Owner" means any person who acknowledges ownership of an animal or who harbors or keeps any animal for five or more consecutive days. 
M.  "Person" means any individual, establishment, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, corporation or company. 
N.  "Pet shop" means a person who obtains animals for sale, exchange, barter or hire to the general public as a principal or agent, or on consignment, or who holds himself out to be so engaged. 
O.  "Private kennel" means a person who maintains within or adjoining his private residence six or more dogs over four months of age, or six or more cats over four months of age, but no more than a combined total of eight dogs and cats, such animals to be for that person's recreational use or for exhibition in conformation shows, field or obedience trials and where the sale of offspring is not the primary function of the kennel. The maintenance of more than two male dogs or cats used for breeding purposes for which compensation is received, or the parturition or rearing of more than two litters of dogs or cats in any one calendar year from the total number of females owned or maintained by that person on the premises, shall be a rebuttable presumption that such animals are owned or maintained for the purpose of commercial breeding and the owner and the premises shall be subject to the permit requirements of a commercial kennel. 
P.  "Quarantine" means isolation of an animal in a place and manner approved by the health officer. 
Q.  "Sterilized animal" means one that has been surgically rendered incapable of reproduction. 
(Ord. 1518 N.S. § 1, 2001; Ord. 1442 N.S. §§ 1—4, 1999; Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 822 N.S. § 1, 1987; Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981) 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 16, 5-2-2018)  
6.04.020 - Chapter not to regulate use of land. 
Chapters 6.04 through 6.32 of this title are not intended to regulate the use of land. The zoning ordinances of the city regulate the number and types of animals which may be maintained in various zoning districts. Nothing in Chapters 6.04 through 6.32 of this title are intended to supersede the provisions of the city's zoning ordinances. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
Chapter 6.08 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 17, adopted May 2, 2018, amended Ch. 6.08 to read as set out herein. The former Ch. 6.08, §§ 6.08.010—6.08.030, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 553 N.S., § A(part), adopted in 1981; Ord. 822 N.S., §§ 2—4, adopted in 1987; Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), adopted in 1995; Ord. 1320 N.S., § 4, adopted in 1997; Ord. 1442 N.S., §§ 5, 6, adopted in 1999; Ord. 1518 N.S., § 2, adopted in 2001; Ord. 1838 N.S., § 1(part), adopted in 2007; and Ord. 1950 N.S., § 2, adopted Oct. 7, 2009. 
 
6.08.010 - Administrator and animal service officer—Powers and duties. 
The administrator, any peace officer, and any animal service officer acting in and for the city shall have the following powers and authority: 
A.  To enforce the provisions of Chapter 6.04 through 6.32 of this title and state laws relating to the care, treatment, impounding and destruction of animals; 
B.  To arrest or issue citations to any person who violates any provision of Chapter 6.04 through 6.32 of this title and state laws relating to the care, treatment, impounding and destruction of animals in the manner provided by Section 836.5 of the Penal Code of the state; 
C.  To collect fees as authorized by implementing resolution in an amount sufficient to defray the costs of various services required for the execution of animal control services beyond licensing fees and which shall be paid by the owner or person in charge thereof, if known; 
D.  To act as a public officer pursuant to Food and Agricultural Code, Section 7; 
E.  The administrator, pursuant to Section 14503 of the California Corporations Code of the state, may deputize as animal service officer any humane officer of the Humane Society of Santa Clara County; 
F.  The administrator may formulate rules and regulations in conformity with and for the purpose of carrying out the intent of Chapters 6.04 through 6.32 of this title. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 17, 5-2-2018)  
6.08.020 - Inspection—Authority—Procedure. 
A.  The administrator, animal service officer or any peace officer shall have the power to enter upon and inspect any premises where any animal is kept or harbored when the administrator, animal service officer or any peace officer has probable cause to believe there has been a violation of the provisions of Chapters 6.04 through 6.32 of this title. 
B.  Such entry and inspection shall be made only after the occupant of the premises has been given written and oral notice of the inspection by the administrator, animal service officer or peace officer. If the land is unoccupied, the administrator, animal service officer or peace officer shall make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having control of the property before making entry. 
C.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the administrator, animal service officer or peace officer has reasonable cause to believe the keeping or maintaining of any animal is so hazardous as to require an immediate inspection to save the animal or protect public health or safety, he or she shall have the power to immediately enter and inspect the property without the use of unreasonable force. If the property is occupied, the administrator, animal service officer or peace officer shall first attempt to notify the occupant and demand entry. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 17, 5-2-2018)  
6.08.030 - Violation. 
A.  It is unlawful to violate or permit the violation of any of the provisions of Title 6. 
B.  For purposes of this title, a bail forfeiture shall be deemed to be a conviction of the offense charged. 
C.  Violation of Section 6.12.020 or Section 6.24.030 by the owner of an unsterilized dog shall be twice the fine for a sterilized dog. However, if an owner voluntarily sterilizes such dog within fifteen days of receiving a citation, and provides veterinary evidence to the animal service officer that such surgery was successfully performed, the enhanced fine shall be waived and the owner shall only remit the fine for a sterilized animal. 
D.  In addition to any other relief, any reasonable costs incurred by the City in seizing, impounding and for confining any dangerous animal shall be a charge against the owner. Such charge shall be in addition to any fine or penalty provided for violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 17, 5-2-2018)  
Chapter 6.12 - DOGS AND CATS 
Sections: 
 
6.12.010 - Maximum number of dogs, cats or litters. 
A.  No person shall keep or maintain more than five dogs over four months of age, or more than five cats over four months of age, or any combination totaling five dogs and cats, including no more than one unspayed female dog or one unspayed female cat, on any premises except a premises maintained by a veterinarian licensed by the state for the practice of veterinary medicine, without a valid permit from the administrator for a private kennel, commercial kennel, pet shop, animal menagerie or animal shelter. A female dog or cat shall be rebuttably presumed to be unspayed, unless the owner provides evidence of spaying. Written certification from a licensed veterinarian that an animal cannot be spayed for health reasons or is incapable of breeding shall be deemed a satisfactory substitution for a certificate showing an animal is spayed. 
B.  Any person currently owning more than five cats or dogs, but less than eight animals, and meeting the conditions described in Section 6.12.010(A) above, may retain this number of owned animals without penalty provided that: 
1.  All the animals are licensed by the city; 
2.  No replacement is made of any animal, over the current maximum of five total, due to change in ownership, death, or any other circumstance. 
The provisions of this subsection shall be applicable only to dogs or cats born or acquired before January 1, 1995. 
(Ord. 1212 N.S., 1995: Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 822 N.S. § 5, 1987: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.12.020 - Dogs—Restraint required—Exceptions. 
The owner or person with the right to the control of any dog or dogs shall keep such dog or dogs confined to said person's own premises within such enclosures as may be appropriate or dogs may be restrained by means of a leash sufficient to keep the dog upon the premises, such leash to be capable of restraining at least four times the weight of such dog except: 
A.  Guide dogs for the blind or deaf while performing their duties; 
B.  Dogs participating in field or obedience trials or exhibitions; 
C.  Dogs assisting their owner or handler in legal hunting or in the herding of livestock; 
D.  Dogs assisting a security guard or assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement activities; 
E.  Dogs being trained for any of the purposes set forth in this section on private land with permission of the land owner, so long as such dogs are under direct control of such individuals to assure that they do not violate any other provision or law; 
F.  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the keeping of potentially dangerous dogs shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 6.28. 
(Amended during 10/08 supplement; Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 822 N.S. § 6, 1987: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.12.030 - Dogs—License required. 
No person shall maintain or board any dog four months of age or older which has not been licensed pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 6.04 through 6.32 of this title, except: 
A.  A license shall not be required for an animal owned or under the control of a nonresident of the city, and which is to be kept in the city for less than thirty days; 
B.  A license shall not be required for dogs temporarily brought into the city for entry into an event, show or exhibition scheduled not more than ten days thereafter. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.12.040 - Dogs—Vaccination—Condition for license. 
Every owner of a dog over four months of age shall cause such dog to be vaccinated with an antirabies vaccine approved by the State Department of Public Health. Revaccination shall be made at such intervals of time as may be prescribed by the State Department of Public Health. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be a condition to the issuance or renewal of dog licenses. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.12.050 - Dogs—Vaccination—Certification required. 
Every veterinarian who vaccinates or causes or directs to be vaccinated in the city any dog with antirabies vaccine shall certify that such animal has been vaccinated. Every veterinarian shall submit to the licensing authority a copy of the form within ten days of the beginning of each month, for any dog which he vaccinates or directs to be vaccinated with antirabies vaccine during the previous month. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.12.060 - Dog licenses—Fees—Exemptions. 
A.  Dog license fees, including reduced fees for spayed females or neutered males, for each dog within the city shall be fixed by resolution. Dog license fees shall not be refundable in whole or in part. 
B.  The administrator may require the submission of a certificate of a licensed veterinarian stating that a dog has been spayed or neutered, or cannot be spayed or neutered for health reasons and is incapable of breeding prior to issuance of a license at a lesser fee. 
C.  An additional fee shall be fixed to be paid for a license purchased more than sixty days after expiration of a previously issued license or sixty days after notice to the owner to obtain a license. 
D.  Licenses and tags for dogs used principally for the purpose of guiding persons who are blind or deaf, and for dogs used in law enforcement by any governmental agencies shall be issued upon request without charge. 
E.  The administrator may waive the license fee for only one dog kept in a household where the owner of the dog is over the age of sixty-five years, provided such owner presents or qualifies for a state Medi-Cal Card. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.12.070 - Dog licenses—Issuance conditions. 
Upon payment of the license fee and the presentation of a valid certificate of vaccination by a duly licensed doctor of veterinary medicine, the administrator shall issue a license stating the name and residence of the person to whom the license is issued, the amount paid, the date of issuance and expiration thereof, the date of expiration of the vaccination, and a description of the dog for which such license is issued, together with the number of the metallic tag accompanying the same. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.12.080 - Dog licenses—Wearing required—Duplicate license fees. 
A.  With each dog license, the administrator shall issue a metal tag bearing an identifying number and the words and letters "Morgan Hill, CA. Dog Lic." Each dog shall wear the metal tag issued for it at all times except when being shown at a dog show, exhibition or event. In the event it is necessary to issue a duplicate tag, a fee shall be charged as set by resolution. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to attach a metal tag issued pursuant to this chapter to any dog other than the dog for which it was issued. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.12.090 - Dog licenses—Registration period—Renewal. 
A.  The term of any dog license issued under this chapter shall commence on the date of the issuance of the license and shall terminate twelve months from the date of issue. 
B.  Dog licenses shall be renewed upon expiration. When license is renewed after the expiration date, the new license period shall begin on the expiration date of the previous period. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.12.100 - Dog licenses—Recordkeeping by city. 
The administrator shall keep a record of all licenses issued by him, together with a description of the dog for which such license is issued. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.12.110 - Dog licenses—Presentation of license on request. 
Upon request of any authorized animal service employee or any peace officer, the owner or person having control of a dog shall present the dog's license to that person. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981) 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 18, 5-2-2018)  
6.12.130 - Cats—Registration certificates—Issuance. 
The administrator shall make registration certificates available to owners of cats. A registration certificate shall be issued stating the name and address of the person to whom the certificate is issued, the date of issuance, a description of the cat for which the certificate is issued and the number of the metal tag accompanying the certificate. Resolution shall fix the cat registration fee. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.12.140 - Cats—Registration period. 
A registration certificate issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for a period of twelve months from the date of issue. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.12.150 - Cats—Issuance of metal tags. 
With each registration certificate, the administrator shall issue a metal tag bearing an identifying number and the words and letters "Morgan Hill, CA. Cat Reg." In the event it is necessary to issue a duplicate tag, a fee shall be charged as set by resolution. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.12.160 - Cats—Certificate recordkeeping by city. 
The administrator shall maintain a registry of all cat registration certificates together with a description of the cat for which each certificate is issued. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.12.170 - Adoption of animals. 
A.  Any person adopting an unspayed or unneutered dog or cat from any humane society animal shelter, public pound or society for the prevention of cruelty to animals shelter in the city shall have such animal spayed or neutered on or before a date specified in the adoption agreement, unless a licensed veterinarian states in writing that the date specified in the adoption agreement is inappropriate for the animal in question. On submission of such written statement to the person at such shelter or pound responsible for ensuring compliance with this section, the adoption agreement will be modified accordingly. 
B.  As a condition for adoption, the person adopting an animal may be required to deposit with the pound or shelter an amount sufficient to cover the cost of spaying or neutering such animal by a veterinarian or spaying or altering clinic designated by the person adopting the animal. The deposit shall be forwarded to the veterinarian or clinic upon receipt by the pound or shelter of a notice from the veterinarian or clinic that the cat or dog has been spayed or neutered. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 701 N.S. § A, 1984)  
6.12.180 - Potentially dangerous dogs—Classified. 
"Potentially dangerous dog" means a dog which has been classified as potentially dangerous at one of three levels based upon specific behavior exhibited or possession of certain characteristics as described in this section as follows: 
A.  Level 1 behavior is established if a dog at large is found to menace, chase, display threatening or aggressive behavior or otherwise threaten or endanger the safety of any domestic animal; is unlicensed pursuant to Chapter 6.12 of this title; has escaped its enclosure on one prior occasion; or is a member of a breed of dog which in the five years preceding its designation has been identified as responsible for at least two deaths of persons in the United States as documented by statistics compiled by the United States Humane Society. 
B.  Level 2 behavior is established if a dog is found to menace, chase, display threatening or aggressive behavior or otherwise threaten or endanger the safety of any person; if a dog, while under restraint or on a leash, aggressively bites any person; or while at large, aggressively bites or causes physical injury to any person or domestic animal; or while restrained or confined in accordance with this chapter, aggressively bites any person. 
C.  Level 3 behavior is established if a dog, whether or not confined, causes the serious injury or death of any person; while at large, kills or causes a serious or life threatening injury to any domestic animal; engages in or is found to have been trained to engage in exhibitions of fighting; has been classified as a Level 2 potentially dangerous dog and repeats the behavior described in subsection B of this section after the owner receives notice of the Level 2 classification; is a dog seized under Section 599aa of the Penal Code, as may be amended, where the owner or keeper has been convicted under subdivision (a) of Section 597.5 of the California Penal Code, as may be amended; or is a dog used in the commission of a crime that constitutes a misdemeanor or a felony. 
D.  Notwithstanding subsections A through C of this Section, the administrator shall have discretionary authority to refrain from classifying a dog as potentially dangerous, even if the dog has engaged in the behaviors specified in subsections A through C of this section, if the administrator determines that the behavior was the result of one or more of the following circumstances: 
1.  The injury or damage was sustained by a person who at the time the injury or damage was sustained: was teasing, assaulting, abusing or tormenting the dog; was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the private property of the owner or person having a right to control the dog; or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
2.  The injury or damage was sustained by a domestic animal that, at the time the injury or damage was sustained, was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog, or trespassing upon the private property of the owner or person having the right to control the dog. 
3.  The dog was protecting or defending a person within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an unjustified attack or assault. 
4.  The injury or damage to a domestic animal was sustained while the dog was working as a hunting dog, or predator control dog on the property of, or under the control of its owner or the person having a right to control the dog, and the damage or injury was to a species or type of domestic animal appropriate to the work of the dog. 
E.  Dogs used by public police agencies are exempted from the classifications under subsections A through C of this section for behaviors or characteristics exhibited in their capacity with the public police agency. 
(Ord. 1838 N.S. § 1 (part), 2007: Ord. 1442 N.S. § 7, 1999; Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 18, 5-2-2018)  
6.12.190 - Potentially dangerous dogs—Classification procedure. 
A.  The administrator or his/her designate shall have authority to determine whether any dog has engaged in the behaviors or exhibits any of the characteristics specified in Section 6.12.180. This determination shall be based upon an investigation that includes the observations of and testimony about the dog's behavior or characteristics, including, but not limited to, the dog's upbringing and the owner's control of the dog. These observations and testimony can be provided by animal service officers or other witnesses who personally observed the animal's behavior or characteristics. The witnesses shall sign a written statement attesting to this behavior. 
B.  The administrator or animal service officer shall give the dog's owner written notice by certified mail or personal service of the dog's specified behavior or characteristics and the dog's classification as a potentially dangerous dog with the additional restrictions, as outlined in Section 6.12.200 of this title, applicable to that dog by reason of its classification. If the owner denies that the behavior in question occurred, the owner may request a hearing before the administrator which shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.32.080. The owner and any other persons having relevant evidence concerning the dog's behavior as specified in the written notice shall be allowed to present testimony. The administrator shall determine whether behavior or characteristics specified in Section 6.12.180 were exhibited or possessed by the dog in question. The administrator shall issue an order containing its determination, which shall be final. 
C.  Once the owner has received notice of the dog's classification as a Level 1, 2 or 3 potentially dangerous dog pursuant to subsection B of this section, the owner shall comply with restrictions specified in the notice until such time as the administrator's final decision is issued. Failure to comply with the specified restrictions pending the completion of all appeals shall be a violation of this chapter. Additionally, the administrator shall have authority to impound the dog pending completion of all appeals. 
D.  If the administrator finds that a dog has engaged in Level 3 behavior, the dog may be impounded pending completion of all appeals. If the administrator's final decision is that the dog engaged in Level 3 behavior, the dog's owner shall be liable for the cost of the dog's impoundment. 
E.  If there are no additional instances of behavior described in Section 6.12.180 within a thirty-six month period from the date of final designation as a Level 2 potentially dangerous dog, the owner may petition the administrator to remove or reclassify the dog's designation as a potentially dangerous dog Level 2. 
F.  The imposition of regulations pursuant to this section shall not prevent the administrator from also issuing a citation pursuant to Section 6.08.030. 
G.  Upon a conviction for a second violation of any provision of this title, the administrator or animal service officer may order impoundment of the dog. 
(Ord. 1838 N.S. § 1 (part), 2007: Ord. 1442 N.S. § 8, 1999) 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 18, 5-2-2018)  
6.12.200 - Potentially dangerous dogs—Regulations. 
In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, the owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall comply with the following regulations: 
A.  If the dog has engaged in Level 1 behavior or has been designated a Level 1 potentially dangerous dog, the dog shall be restrained by a physical device or structure that prevents the dog from reaching any public sidewalk or adjoining property whenever that dog is outside the owner's home and not on a leash under the control of a person at least eighteen years of age and who is physically capable of restraining the animal. The administrator shall adopt administrative rules establishing specifications for the required device or structure. The administrator may require that the dog's owner prove financial responsibility, including posting a bond or certificate of insurance in the amount of fifty thousand dollars, and may require the owner or person having a right to control the dog to attend dog obedience, or such other class as may be determined appropriate by the administrator, with the dog. 
B.  If the dog has engaged in Level 2 behavior or has been designated a Level 2 potentially dangerous dog, the following regulations shall apply: 
1.  The owner shall confine the dog within a building or secure enclosure whenever the dog is not inside the home of the owner or on a leash as described below. Such kennel, pen or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached thereto. Such enclosure must be constructed in a manner so that it cannot be broken down by any action of the confined dog. All structures used for confinement of such animals must be locked with a key or combination lock of sufficient strength to insure confinement of such animals. Such structures must be erected upon a secure bottom or floor constructed of concrete or other materials sufficient to prevent the animal from digging free. Sides of the structure shall be imbedded not less than two feet into the ground behind a solid fence not less than six feet in height. The secure enclosure must be located so as not to interfere with the public's legal access to the owner's property. 
2.  A Level 2 dog may be permitted off the premises only when it is securely muzzled, and is leashed on a leash not to exceed three feet in length and under the control of a person eighteen years of age or older, and who is physically capable of restraining the animal. The leash must be capable of restraining four times the weight of the animal. The leash must be attached to an escape-proof commercial quality walking harness which fastens securely across the shoulders and mid-chest encompassing the rib area and upper abdomen of the dog. No collar of any type or material will be sufficient to satisfy the above requirements. Level 2 potentially dangerous dogs shall not be leashed or tethered at any time to inanimate objects such as trees, posts or buildings. The muzzling device must be constructed so that it is impossible for the dog to remove it without human assistance. 
3.  Transportation of Level 2 potentially dangerous dogs shall only be in locked animal carriers equivalent in construction quality to those used by commercial air carriers. 
4.  No Level 2 potentially dangerous dog shall be left unconfined nor unattended in or about any motor vehicle. 
5.  Level 2 potentially dangerous dogs enclosed in a house, apartment, building or similar structure shall be allowed only where the windows and doors of the structure are secured to prevent such dog from exiting without the assistance of the owner or person with the right to control such dog. 
6.  The administrator may require that the Level 2 potentially dangerous dog owner prove financial responsibility including posting a bond or certificate of insurance in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars, and may require the owner or person having a right to control the dog to attend dog obedience, or such other class as may be determined appropriate by the administrator, with the dog. 
7.  A person owning or having charge of a dog classified as a Level 2 potentially dangerous dog shall post warning signs on the property where the dog is kept, in conformance with the provisions of Section 6.28.050. 
8.  To insure correct identification, all dogs that have been classified as Level 2 potentially dangerous shall be marked with a permanent identifying mark. The administrator shall adopt rules specifying the character, location and manner of this marking. The owner of the dog shall provide, at the owner's expense, at least two dated, colored photographs depicting a full frontal, facial view and one full side view clearly showing the color and approximate size of the dog. 
C.  Any dog that has been found to have engaged in Level 3 behavior as described in Section 6.12.180 shall be euthanized. 
D.  In addition to the normal licensing fees established by the city council, there may be an annual fee for dogs that have been classified as potentially dangerous. This additional fee set in resolution, shall be imposed at the time the license of the potentially dangerous dog expires and shall be payable at the time the license is renewed. 
(Ord. 1838 N.S. § 1 (part), 2007: Ord. 1442 N.S. § 9, 1999)  
Chapter 6.16 - SALE OF ANIMALS 
Sections: 
 
6.16.010 - Approved locations for sale. 
It is unlawful for any person to display for sale, offer for sale, exchange, barter or give away any animal except in the following places: 
A.  Pet shop, commercial kennel, private kennel, pet grooming parlor, animal menagerie, animal shelter or horse establishment, which have a valid permit; 
B.  Private residence. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.16.020 - Dog or cat restrictions. 
No person or establishment shall display, sell, exchange, barter or give away any cat or dog under eight weeks of age, except as a surrender to a licensed animal shelter. Proof of age of the dog or cat may be required by the administrator. Proof of age may include, but not be limited to, a certification by a licensed veterinarian attesting to the animal's age. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.16.030 - Immunization requirements—Written verification. 
All cats or dogs over eight weeks age, before they are sold, must be immunized against common disease, in the case of dogs against distemper; in the case of cats against panleukopenia. The seller of a dog or cat shall provide to the buyer at the time of sale a signed statement from the seller attesting to the date of vaccination and the seller's knowledge of the animal's health. Such statement shall also include the animal's immunization history, and the record of any known disease, sickness or internal parasites that the animal is afflicted with at the time of transfer of ownership, including treatment and medication. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.16.040 - Grounds for returning dogs or cats—Procedures. 
A.  Any person purchasing a dog or cat from a person or establishment required to be licensed or registered pursuant to this title may, within five days of such purchase, cause such animal to be examined by a veterinarian licensed by the state, and, if such examination reveals clinical signs of a contagious or infectious disease or serious congenital defects, not otherwise disclosed to the purchaser as required by Section 6.16.030 of this chapter, the purchaser may, within one day of the examination, return such animal to the seller. When returned, such animal must be accompanied with a certificate signed by the examining veterinarian stating examination findings. Upon return of such animal for the reasons stated in this section, the seller shall reimburse the purchaser for the cost of the animal. 
B.  If the seller refuses to reimburse the purchaser for the cost of the animal upon the purchaser's offer to return it, the purchaser may file a complaint with any judge of the municipal court stating a cause of action for violation of this section. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
Chapter 6.20 - ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS 
Sections: 
 
6.20.010 - General standards. 
Every person who owns, conducts, manages or operates any commercial kennel, private kennel, pet shop, pet grooming parlor, animal menagerie, animal shelter or horse establishment shall comply with each of the following conditions: 
A.  Housing. 
1.  Housing facilities for animals shall be structurally sound and shall be maintained in good repair to protect animals from injury and restrict entrance of other animals or the escape of animals so contained therein. 
2.  Every building or enclosure wherein animals are maintained shall be properly ventilated to prevent drafts and to remove odors; heating and cooling shall be provided as required, according to the physical need of the animals, with sufficient light to allow observation of animals. 
3.  All animal rooms, cages, kennels, runs, stalls and corrals shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate and proper accommodation and protection from the weather for the animals kept therein. 
4.  All animal facilities shall be constructed and operated in a manner that reasonably protects public health and safety, and safety to animals. 
B.  Sanitation. All animal facilities shall be maintained and operated in a clean and sanitary condition and in a manner that avoids causing odors or attraction of flies and vermin and excessive noise. 
C.  Care of Animals. 
1.  All animals shall be supplied with a quantity of wholesome food suitable for the species and age of the respective animals, as often as the feeding habits of such animals require, sufficient to maintain a reasonable level of nutrition. All animals shall have available to them sufficient potable water. Food and water shall be served in separate, clean receptacles. 
2.  No animal, except those animal(s) in pasture provided with adequate feed and water, shall be without attention for more than twenty-four consecutive hours. The name, address and telephone number of a person responsible for the animal shall be posted in a conspicuous place, visible from outside the facility or at the main gate of a pasture where animals are kept, unless the owner or attendant of the animal or animals is immediately available on the premises. 
3.  All sick, diseased or injured animals shall be isolated from healthy animals at all times, and shall be given proper medical treatment. The administrator may order the operator of the facility to immediately seek licensed veterinarian treatment for any animal. 
4.  All animals shall be treated in a humane manner. 
D.  Compliance. 
1.  The administrator or his authorized representative shall have the authority to enter the animal facility except by means of force when he has reason to believe that the provisions of the permit or this title, applicable state law or the rules or regulations of the administrator are being violated. The failure of the operator to consent to the entry shall be deemed just cause for the revocation of the permit. 
2.  Failure of the applicant or a permit holder to comply with any of the provisions of the permit, this title or applicable state law, or the rules and regulations of the administrator shall be deemed just cause for the denial of any permit, either original or renewal, or for revocation of a permit. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.20.020 - Permit required—Fee. 
No person shall conduct, operate or keep any pet shop, commercial kennel, private kennel, pet grooming parlor, animal menagerie, animal shelter or horse establishment without first obtaining an appropriate permit from the administrator. The annual permit fee for the animal facilities described in this section shall be fixed by resolution. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.20.030 - Permit—Application—Conditions. 
A.  An application for a permit to operate and keep a pet shop, commercial kennel, private kennel, pet grooming parlor, animal menagerie, animal shelter, horse establishment or dangerous animal shall be in writing on a form approved by the administrator. The applicant shall furnish a list of the types of animals to be maintained or used for any purpose, together with the approximate number of animals of each type. 
B.  The administrator may establish regulations and standards relating to: 
1.  The maximum number and species of animals to be kept or maintained on the premises; 
2.  The construction, sanitation and maintenance of facilities; and 
3.  Any other regulations and standards in conformity with and for the purpose of carrying out the intent of this title. 
C.  Compliance with such rules and regulations shall be prerequisite to the issuance and continued validity of any permit provided pursuant to this title. 
D.  The permittee shall maintain a record of the names and addresses of persons from whom animals are received and to whom the animals are sold, traded or given. This shall be available to the administrator upon request. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.20.040 - Permit—Inspection of premises. 
As a condition to the issuance or renewal of a permit under this chapter, the administrator or his authorized representative shall have the authority to inspect the animal facility at any reasonable time. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.20.050 - Permit—Denial or revocation—Conditions. 
The administrator may deny or revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter in the following situations: 
A.  Whenever he determines by inspection that any animal facility fails to meet any of the conditions of the permit, this title or applicable state law; 
B.  Whenever he has reason to believe that the applicant or permit holder has willfully withheld or falsified any information required for a permit; 
C.  If the applicant or permit holder has been convicted by a court of law of more than two violations in a twelve-month period of this title, or state laws relating to animals or public nuisance caused by animals, or has been convicted of cruelty to animals in this or any other state within the previous five years. For the purposes of this chapter, a bail forfeiture shall be deemed to be a conviction of the offense charged. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981) 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 19, 5-2-2018)  
6.20.060 - Permit—Denial or revocation—Appeal procedures. 
A.  Prior to denial or revocation of a permit, the administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the intent to deny or revoke the permit, the reasons for such denial or revocation, and that the applicant may make a written request for a hearing before the administrator within five days after receipt of such notice if he wishes to challenge the denial or revocation. 
B.  The administrator shall set the time and place for hearing and cause notice of such hearing to be mailed to the person requesting such hearing at least five days before the date of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted according to Section 6.32.070 of this title. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.20.070 - Permit—Denial or revocation—Time restrictions for reapplication. 
If a permit has been denied or revoked, the administrator shall not accept a new permit application from the same person for the same activity at the same location less than six months after such denial or revocation, unless the applicant shows, and the administrator finds, by inspection and/or investigation, that the grounds upon which the first application was denied or the permit revoked no longer exist. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.20.080 - Permit—Expiration and renewal—Late penalty. 
A.  Any permit issued under this chapter shall expire twelve months from the date of issuance. The procedure for the renewal of a permit shall be the same as for an original permit. 
B.  Upon failure to make application for the renewal of permit within thirty days of the expiration of a permit, or prior thereto, the applicant shall pay in addition to the permit fee a ten-dollar penalty for late renewal. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.20.090 - Permit—Nontransferable. 
Permits issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter are not transferable. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
Chapter 6.24 - ANIMAL RESTRICTIONS 
Sections: 
 
6.24.010 - Animals in city buildings—Animals and vehicles. 
A.  No person having the control or care of any animal or animals shall suffer or permit such animal to enter or remain in city-owned or city-managed buildings other than a building used for the purpose of care, detention, control or treatment of animals, or a building used for training classes, shows or exhibitions; except persons who are blind or deaf and who use dogs for guidance, or for other use because of physical disabilities; or persons who are working with dogs in connection with public police purpose, or persons authorized by the administration. 
B.  No person, other than an individual then actually in the process of working a dog or other animal for ranching purposes, shall transport or carry the animal in a motor vehicle on any public highway or public roadway, unless the animal is safely enclosed within the vehicle by means of a container, cage or other device which will prevent the animal from falling from, jumping from, or being thrown from the motor vehicle. 
C.  No person shall leave any dog or other animal in an unattended motor vehicle without adequate ventilation or in such a manner as to subject the animal to extreme temperatures which may adversely affect the health or well-being of the animal. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 727 N.S. § 1, 1985: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.24.020 - Public nuisances. 
A.  No person owning or having control of any animal shall permit such animal to do any of the following: 
1.  Defecate on public or private property without immediately cleaning and removing the excrement to a proper receptacle; 
2.  Permit an animal to obstruct the reasonable and comfortable use of property in any neighborhood or community by urinating or defecating on private property, chasing vehicles, molesting, or biting passersby; 
3.  Permit unsanitary conditions to exist on the premises where the animal is kept which would cause odors, attract flies or vermin, or otherwise be injurious to public health and safety, or indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by the neighborhood, community or persons; 
4.  Keep, maintain, cause or permit to be kept or maintained any dog, cat or other animal or fowl, whether licensed or not, that interferes with the reasonable and comfortable use of property in any neighborhood or community by howling, yelping, barking or other noise, frequently or for extended periods of time. Each day that such disturbance is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  The animal service officer, or any peace officer, may seize and impound any animal causing a public nuisance. 
C.  A violation of this section is declared to be a public nuisance. 
D.  Any private person may maintain an action under Civil Code Section 3493 for enforcement of this chapter declaring certain acts a public nuisance, if such acts are specially injurious to such person. 
(Ord. 1442 N.S. §§ 10, 11, 1999; Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 822 N.S. § 8, 1987; Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981) 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 20, 5-2-2018)  
6.24.030 - Animals running at large. 
It is unlawful for any person owning or having control of any animal, whether licensed or not, to cause, permit or allow such animal to stray or run at large upon any public street or other public place, or upon any private place or property or common area of any planned development, cluster, townhouse or condominium project without the consent of the owner or person in control thereof, except that nothing contained in this section shall apply to dogs on a leash, held by a person capable of controlling the dog, or to dogs which are off-leash in a specially designated off-leash dog park as authorized by the city or to cats. 
(Ord. 1838 N.S. § 1 (part), 2007: Ord. 1442 N.S. § 12, 1999: Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.24.035 - Animal bites causing injury. 
It is unlawful for any person owning or having control of any animal, whether confined or not, to keep, maintain, cause, permit or allow such animal to bite another person or domestic animal which causes serious injury to that person or domestic animal. For the purpose of this section, serious injury means any injury which requires treatment other than basic first aid. 
(Ord. 1838 N.S. § 1 (part), 2007: Ord. 1442 N.S. § 13, 1999)  
6.24.040 - Animal service seizure—Conditions. 
Except as provided in Section 6.24.080(B), an animal service officer shall not seize or impound a dog for running at-large under the provisions of this title when the dog has not strayed from and is upon the private property of the dog owner or the person who has a right to control the dog, or upon private property to which the dog owner or person who has a right to control the dog has a right of possession, nor shall the animal service officer seize or impound a dog which has strayed from but then returned to the enclosed portion of private property of his owner or the person who has a right to control the dog as required in this section, but in such a case, a citation may be issued; provided, however, that if the owner or person who has a right to control the dog is not at home, the dog may be impounded, but the officer shall post a notice of such impoundment on the front door of the residence of the owner or person who has a right to control the dog. The notice shall state the following: that the dog has been impounded, where the dog is being held, the name, address and telephone number of the agency or person to be contacted regarding release of the dog, and an indication of the ultimate disposition of the dog if no action to regain it is taken within a specified period of time by its owner or by the person who has a right to control the dog. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 20, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 20, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 6.24.040 to read as set out herein. The former § 6.24.040 pertained to animal control seizure—conditions and derived from Ord. 553 N.S., § A(part), adopted in 1981; Ord. 822 N.S., § 9, adopted in 1987; and Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), adopted in 1995.  
6.24.050 - Abandoned animals—Prohibited. 
It is unlawful to abandon any animal in the city. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.24.060 - Disposal of deceased animals. 
A.  Upon the death of any animal, the owner or person in charge thereof shall provide for the burial, incineration or other disposition of the body of such animal. If the owner or person in charge of any dead animal is unable to provide for burial or other disposition, he may request the animal service officer to dispose of the body of such animal. 
B.  Upon learning that the body of a dead animal has not been disposed of in a safe and sanitary manner, the animal service officer shall dispose of such body immediately; provided, however, that the animal service officer shall not be required to remove and dispose of bodies of dead animals on state highways or on state property. 
C.  The administrator shall collect a fee sufficient to defray the costs incident to removal and disposal of dead animals which shall be paid by the owner or person in charge thereof, if known. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981) 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 20, 5-2-2018)  
6.24.070 - Animal bites—Quarantine—Examination—Violation. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person having knowledge that any animal is known to have or is suspected of having bitten any person to fail to immediately report that fact to city animal control services, the administrator, or health officer with full information in regard to the incident. 
B.  Upon receipt of such a report, an animal services officer shall seize and quarantine such animal for a period of fourteen days or such other period as may be prescribed by the State Department of Health. The animal services or health officer may order the owner to quarantine the animal on his or her premises. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to fail, refuse, or neglect to quarantine any animal as ordered by the animal services or health officer, or to refuse to allow the animal services or health officer to inspect any private premises where the animal is kept. It is unlawful for an animal to be removed or released during the quarantine period without written permission of the animal services or health officer. 
D.  The administrator may charge a fee, as set forth by resolution, for the costs of quarantining dogs and inspections for quarantine of dogs. Any fee charged shall be paid by the owner or person who has legal custody of the dog. Such a fee shall be in addition to the actual costs of the animal control or health officer in housing, feeding, and otherwise caring for quarantined dog. 
E.  Any animal which dies or is destroyed while under quarantine shall be submitted to the laboratory of the county health department for rabies examination. 
(Ord. 1442 N.S. § 14, 1999; Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981) 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 20, 5-2-2018)  
6.24.080 - Control and seizure of diseased or vicious animals. 
A.  No person owning or having charge of any animal which that person knows to be infected with any disease transmittable to humans shall permit such animal to be or remain within the city other than at an approved veterinary hospital unless the administrator/animal service officer or other appropriate authority approves an alternative means of confinement. 
B.  The animal service officer or a peace officer shall seize any animal he or she reasonably believes to be infected with disease transmittable to humans, or to be dangerous. The animal service officer shall keep such animal in a safe place for a period sufficient to observe, examine and determine whether it is diseased or dangerous so as to be a menace to public health or safety. 
C.  Diseased or vicious animals which are a danger to public health or safety shall be impounded and may be euthanized. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 822 N.S. § 10, 1987: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981) 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 20, 5-2-2018)  
6.24.090 - Poisoning or abusing animals. 
In addition to Penal Code Section 596, it is unlawful for any person to willfully administer poison to any dog, cat or other domestic animal or to willfully place, expose or leave poisonous or harmful substances of any kind in any place with intent to injure or kill any dog, cat or other domestic animal. Further, it is unlawful for any person to maliciously kill, maim, wound, mutilate, torment, torture or physically abuse any animal. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981) 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 20, 5-2-2018)  
6.24.100 - Leg-hold traps. 
It is unlawful for any person to use within the city a leg-hold steel-jawed trap, steel-jawed trap, or steel leg-hold traps as defined in California Fish and Game Code Section 4004, as may be amended. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 879 N.S., 1988) 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 20, 5-2-2018)  
Chapter 6.28 - DANGEROUS ANIMALS 
Sections: 
 
6.28.010 - Permit required. 
No person shall keep, have, maintain, sell, trade or let for hire a dangerous and/or vicious animal, including a potentially dangerous dog, Level 1, 2, or 3, without first obtaining a permit from the administrator. Compliance with the rules and regulations set by this title and the administrator shall be prerequisite to the issuance and continued validity of any permit provided pursuant to this title. This section shall not apply to any assistance dog, including guide dogs, signal dogs and service dogs, trained or in training to assist a qualified individual with a disability. 
(Ord. 1838 N.S. § 1 (part), 2007: Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981) 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 21, 5-2-2018)  
6.28.020 - Permit required—Exemptions. 
No permit shall be required of any zoo, university, college, governmental research agency or other bona fide scientific institution, as determined by the administrator, engaging in scientific or public health research. For the purposes of this chapter, a zoo shall be considered any organization which exhibits animals to the general public at regular specified hours, equaling at least thirty hours a week for thirty-six weeks a year, and whose animals, whether maintained for exhibit purposes or not, are not for sale to private individuals. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.28.025 - Permit—Application—Conditions. 
A.  An application for a permit to maintain or keep a dangerous and/or vicious animal, including a potentially dangerous dog, Level 1, 2, or 3 shall be in writing on a form approved by the administrator. The application shall be made by the animal owner or person having a right to control the animal. 
B.  The application shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name, address and telephone number of the owner and other person having a right to control the animal; 
2.  The animal's name and description; 
3.  A statement specifying all convictions within the past five years of the owner or any persons having a right to control the animal, by any court of law, for any violation of this title, or of any other law(s) relating to animals, public nuisance caused by animals, or cruelty to animals in this or any other state, and any citations issued for violations of this title which were upheld by a hearing officer or which were not contested by the applicant. For purposes of this section, a forfeiture of bail shall be deemed to be conviction of the offense charged; 
4.  The number of the license issued to the applicant pursuant to Chapter 6.12; and 
5.  At least two dated, colored photographs depicting a full frontal, facial view and one full side view clearly showing the color and approximate size of the dog. 
(Ord. 1838 N.S. § 3 (part), 2007)  
6.28.030 - Permit—Fee—Expiration—Renewal. 
The fee for a permit or license to keep any animal, or to keep or maintain a dangerous animal, and fees for dogs that have been classified as potentially dangerous, shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 822 N.S. § 12, 1987: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.28.035 - Permit—Inspection of premises. 
By having obtained a permit under this chapter, the owner or person having the right to control the animal thereby consents to allow the administrator or his authorized representative to inspect the premises where the animal is located at any reasonable time and in a reasonable manner. Inspections under this section are not subject to the requirements of Section 6.08.020 of Chapter 6.08 of Title 6. 
(Ord. 1838 N.S. § 3 (part), 2007)  
6.28.040 - Permit—Denial or revocation. 
A.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the administrator may deny or revoke a permit issued pursuant to this chapter in the following situations: 
1.  Whenever the administrator determines by inspection or upon complaint from any person that the owner or person having a right to control the potentially dangerous, dangerous, or vicious animal has failed to meet any of the provisions of Title 6 or any conditions of the permit, or has failed to meet any other requirement for maintenance of the animal under this chapter or other applicable law; 
2.  Whenever the administrator has reason to believe that the applicant or permit holder has willfully withheld or falsified any information required for a permit; 
3.  If the applicant or permit holder has been convicted within the past five years, by a court of law, for any violation of this chapter, or any other law(s) relating to animals, public nuisance caused by animals, or cruelty to animals in this or any other state, and any citations issued for violations of this title which were upheld by a hearing officer or which were not contested by the applicant. For the purposes of this chapter, a bail forfeiture shall be deemed to be a conviction of the offense charged; 
4.  Whenever the owner fails to pay in full all fines, and impound, boarding or other outstanding fees; 
5.  Whenever the owner or person having a right to control the potentially dangerous, dangerous, or vicious animal fails to allow the administrator or animal services officer to conduct a lawful inspection of the potentially dangerous, dangerous, or vicious animal or the premises where the animal is located; 
6.  Whenever the owner or person having a right to control the potentially dangerous, dangerous, or vicious animal fails to appear at a compliance hearing to appeal the revocation of the permit for a potentially dangerous, dangerous, or vicious animal; 
7.  Whenever the keeping or maintenance of any such animal endangers the safety of any person or persons or property; 
8.  Whenever the keeping of the animal would constitute a public nuisance; or 
9.  Whenever the animal would be subject to suffering, neglect, cruelty or abuse. 
B.  The administrator, in his discretion, may require any such animal to be properly caged, tethered or restrained in zoo-type facilities that meet or are in addition to, or more restrictive than, state guidelines issued under the provisions of Section 671 of Title 14 of the California Administrative Code and federal standards issued under Chapter 1 of Title 9 of the Code of Federal Regulations. Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit the keeping of dangerous animals where zoning provisions or state law would prohibit such keeping. 
(Ord. 1838 N.S. § 1 (part), 2007: Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.28.050 - Warning signs required—Posting. 
The owner of a dangerous animal or Level 2 potentially dangerous dog shall post the entrances to the property where the animal is kept with a legible sign to be approved by the administrator warning persons of a dangerous animal. The sign shall be capable of being understood by a child. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 822 N.S. § 13, 1987: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.28.060 - Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter or to fail to comply with the requirements of this chapter. Such person is liable for each and every violation thereof, and for each and every day or fractional part thereof during which such violation continues. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 21, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 21, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 6.28.060 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 6.28.060 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 1320 N.S., § 5, adopted in 1997.  
6.28.070 - Permit—Denial or revocation—Appeal procedures. 
A.  Prior to denial or revocation of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the intent to deny or revoke the permit, the reasons for such denial or revocation, and that the applicant may make a written request for a hearing before the administrator within five days after receipt of such notice if he wishes to challenge the denial or revocation. 
B.  The administrator shall set the time and place for hearing and cause notice of such hearing to be mailed to the person requesting such hearing at least five days before the date of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted according to Section 6.32.080 of this title. 
(Ord. 1838 N.S. § 3 (part), 2007)  
6.28.080 - Permit—Denial or revocation—Time restrictions for reapplication. 
If a permit under this chapter has been denied or revoked, the administrator shall not be required to accept a new permit application from the same applicant for two years from the date of such denial or revocation. 
(Ord. 1838 N.S. § 3 (part), 2007)  
6.28.090 - Prohibition of owning, possessing, controlling or having custody. 
Any person having a right to control a potentially dangerous, dangerous, or vicious animal may be prohibited from owning, possessing, controlling or having custody of any dog for up to three years, if the hearing officer determines, after a hearing, that ownership or possession of a potentially dangerous, dangerous, or vicious animal by that person would create a significant threat to the public health, safety, and welfare. Thereafter, such persons must demonstrate to the administrator that he or she is capable of directly restraining the animal he or she seeks to own, possess, control, or have custody of. 
(Ord. 1838 N.S. § 3 (part), 2007)  
6.28.100 - Prohibited dog ownership by convicted felons. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the United States, the state of California, or any other state, government, or country, to own, purchase, receive, or have in his or her possession or under his or her custody or control a dog that poses a danger to the public's health, safety, or welfare if misused by such convicted felon, unless the person possesses a current, valid prohibited dog permit for that dog as provided in this chapter. A convicted felon under this title shall not include felons whose convictions were set aside pursuant to Penal Code Section 1203.4. 
B.  "Misuse" by a convicted felon means use of a dog in a threatening or aggressive manner or in the commission of a crime. 
C.  Additionally, a dog poses a danger to the public's health, safety, or welfare, if misused by a convicted felon under this section, if any of the following apply: 
1.  The dog weighs more than twenty pounds; 
2.  The dog has been designated a potentially dangerous Level 1, 2, or 3 under Chapter 6.12 of this title; or 
3.  The dog is designated by the administrator as posing a danger to the public's health, safety, or welfare if misused by a convicted felon based upon the following factors: 
a.  The nature of any complaints regarding the dog, 
b.  The strength of the dog, including jaw strength, 
c.  The dog's tolerance for pain, 
d.  The dog's tendency to refuse to terminate an attack, 
e.  The dog's potential propensity to bite humans or other domestic animals, 
f.  The dog's potential for unpredictable behavior, 
g.  The dog's aggressiveness, or 
h.  The likelihood that a bite by the dog will result in serious injury. 
D.  Any dog whose owner or keeper is in violation of this section shall be impounded, or impounded subject to destruction, at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. 1838 N.S. § 3 (part), 2007; Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 21, 5-2-2018)  
6.28.110 - Prohibited dog permit. 
Any convicted felon who wishes to own, purchase, receive or have in his or her possession or under his or her custody or control a dog weighing more than twenty pounds under Section 6.28.100(C)(1) of this chapter, or a dog that the administrator designates as posing a danger to the public's health, safety or welfare if misused by a convicted felon under Section 6.28.100(C)(3) of this chapter, may apply for a prohibited dog permit to own, keep or maintain that dog. If there is probable cause to believe that a dog poses a danger to the public's health, safety or welfare if misused by a convicted felon, the dog may be impounded pending a determination made under this article and until any required permit is obtained. If the administrator designates a dog as posing a danger to the public's health, safety or welfare if misused by a convicted felon, written notice of this designation shall be mailed to the owner or person having a right to control the dog. The owner or person having a right to control the potentially dangerous dog must pay an application fee and apply for the prohibited dog permit within fifteen calendar days after the mailing of the written notice of designation. The administrator may deny a prohibited dog permit if he or she determines that the dog poses a danger to the public's health, safety or welfare, or may condition the issuance of the permit upon the permittee's written agreement to comply with conditions of ownership to be determined by the administrator. These conditions of ownership may include, but are not limited to, those found under Section 6.12.200 of this title. A prohibited dog permit may subsequently be revoked by the administrator if there is probable cause to believe that the convicted felon's continued ownership of the dog poses a danger to the public's health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. 1838 N.S. § 3 (part), 2007)  
6.28.120 - Permit—Expiration and renewal—Late penalty. 
A.  Any permit issued under this chapter shall expire twelve months from the date of issuance. The procedure for the renewal of a permit shall be the same as for an original permit. 
B.  Upon failure to make application for the renewal of a permit within thirty days of the expiration of a permit, or prior thereto, the applicant shall pay, in addition to the permit fee, a ten-dollar penalty for late renewal. 
(Ord. 1838 N.S. § 3 (part), 2007)  
6.28.130 - Permit—Nontransferable. 
Permits issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter are not transferable. 
(Ord. 1838 N.S. § 3 (part), 2007)  
6.28.140 - Appeal hearing. 
At the appeal hearing, petitioner and the animal control division may be represented by counsel, may present oral and written evidence, and may cross-examine witnesses. Strict rules of evidence need not apply. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to relying in the conduct of serious affairs. The petitioner shall be given written notice of the decision within fifteen days of the hearing. The administrator shall order the animal released without conditions, released with conditions, shall designate the animal vicious, dangerous and/or potentially dangerous Level 1, 2 or 3 and order release with conditions, or as for dogs designated Level 3 shall order the animal destroyed. The decision of the administrator shall be final and shall be supported by the weight of the evidence. Any release conditions imposed by the administrator shall be solely in the interest of protecting public health, safety and property and may include the obligation to inform, along with animal control, any city, county, postal, service utility company, employee, meter reader, and anyone else that comes on the property with implied consent or peaceably and lawfully of the animal's dangerousness. 
(Ord. 1838 N.S. § 3 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 6.32 - IMPOUNDMENT 
Sections: 
 
6.32.010 - Notification of owners required. 
The animal service officer shall give notice of impoundment to the owner of every animal impounded if he is known. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981) 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 22, 5-2-2018)  
6.32.020 - Fees and charges. 
A.  An impoundment fee shall be charged to the owner of each animal impounded, in an amount fixed by resolution. 
B.  In addition, a fee for keeping an impounded animal shall be charged in an amount sufficient to defray the costs of keeping the animal, as determined by the administrator. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.32.030 - Proper care required. 
The administrator shall assure that all impounded animals receive suitable and adequate food, water and shelter. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.32.040 - Redemption. 
The administrator or animal service officer may permit an owner or other person entitled to custody of an impounded animal to redeem such animal. No animal may be redeemed without payment of the fees for impounding and keeping the animal, and without compliance with the licensing provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981) 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 22, 5-2-2018)  
6.32.050 - Disposition time limitation—Diseased or injured animals. 
A.  No animal may be disposed of until ninety-six hours have elapsed from the date of impoundment, exclusive of the day of impoundment and the days that the impounding facility is closed to the public. 
B.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, an animal which has been determined by a veterinarian licensed by the state or by other authorized personnel to be diseased or injured to the extent that emergency veterinary care will not alleviate intense suffering, shall be destroyed in accordance with all state and county humane laws as soon as possible. 
(Ord. 1442 N.S. § 15, 1999: Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981)  
6.32.060 - Summary seizure and post-seizure hearing. 
A.  Except as provided in Section 6.24.040 of this title, an animal service officer or peace officer may seize and impound an animal for violation of any provision of this title or state law prior to a hearing in any of the following situations where the officer reasonably believes it is necessary: 
1.  To protect public health, safety and property; 
2.  To protect an animal which is injured, sick or starving and must be cared for; and 
3.  Where the owner is not present, to protect an animal from injury which has strayed onto public property or a public right-of-way. 
Upon the seizure and impoundment of an animal, the authority responsible for same shall post a notice of such impoundment on the front door of the residence of the owner or person who has a right to control the animal. The notice shall state the following: that the animal has been impounded, where the animal is being held, the name, address and telephone number of the agency or person to be contacted regarding release of the animal, and an indication of the ultimate disposition of the animal if no action to regain it is taken within a specified period of time by its owner or by the person who has a right to control the animal. 
B.  If the owner or person who has the right to control the animal wishes to challenge the impoundment, the owner shall personally deliver or mail a written request for a hearing, such that it is received by the administrator within seventy-two hours of the seizure and impoundment. 
C.  The administrator shall promptly set the time and place for the hearing and shall cause notice of such hearing to be deposited in the mail to the party requesting a hearing at least five days before the date of the hearing. 
D.  The hearing shall be conducted as set forth in Section 6.32.080 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 822 N.S. § 14, 1987: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981) 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 22, 5-2-2018)  
6.32.070 - Hearing prior to animal deprivation. 
A.  Except as provided in Sections 6.12.190, 6.24.040, 6.24.080 and 6.32.060 of this title, the administrator, animal service officer, or a peace officer may not seize or impound any animal, without the consent of the owner or person entitled to custody of the animal, unless an appeal hearing is held as set forth in Section 6.32.080 of this chapter. 
B.  If the owner or person who has a right to control an animal refuses to consent to an impoundment of any animal owned by such person, the animal service officer may issue a notice commanding the person to appear before the administrator at a set time. Failure of a person to appear at the hearing will result in the immediate impoundment of the animal. Such failure to appear will also constitute a waiver of administrative remedies after which the person will have no further recourse regarding the impoundment order. 
(Ord. 1442 N.S. § 16, 1999: Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 822 N.S. § 15, 1987: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981) 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 22, 5-2-2018)  
6.32.080 - Appeal hearing. 
At the appeal hearing, petitioner and the animal service division may be represented by counsel, may present oral and written evidence, and may cross-examine witnesses. Strict rules of evidence need not apply. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. The petitioner shall be given written notice of the decision within fifteen days of the hearing. The administrator shall order the animal released without conditions, released with conditions, shall designate the animal vicious, dangerous and/or potentially dangerous Level 1, 2 or 3 and order release with conditions, or as for dogs designated Level 3 shall order the animal destroyed. The decision of the administrator shall be final and shall be supported by the weight of the evidence. Any release conditions imposed by the administrator shall be solely in the interest of protecting public health, safety and property and may include the obligation to inform, along with animal control, any city, county, postal, service utility company, employee, meter reader, and anyone else that comes on the property with implied consent or peaceably and lawfully of the animal's dangerousness. 
(Ord. 1838 N.S. § 1 (part), 2007: Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 822 N.S. § 16, 1987: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981) 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 22, 5-2-2018)  
6.32.090 - Failure to appeal impoundment. 
Any person who fails to appeal any seizure or impoundment by the animal service officer under this title within seventy-two hours from impoundment as specified in Section 6.32.050 of this chapter will forfeit all rights of ownership and control of the animal. All rights of ownership and control shall be transferred to the city. Final disposition of the animal shall be determined by the administrator in accordance with the provisions of this title and state law. 
(Ord. 1442 N.S. § 17, 1999: Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 553 N.S. § A (part), 1981) 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 22, 5-2-2018)  
6.32.100 - Mandatory sterilization for multiple impounds. 
Any unsterilized dog impounded more than twice from the same owner shall be sterilized at the owner's expense prior to redemption. At the option of the owner, a private veterinarian may perform the required spaying or neutering. The impounding agency may require that transportation to a private veterinarian be performed by the impounding agency. 
(Ord. 1518 N.S. § 3, 2001)  
6.32.110 - Hearing for mandatory sterilization for multiple impounds. 
Any owner of an impounded animal subject to mandatory sterilization may petition, in writing, for a hearing to be conducted by the animal control program manager or his/her designee within seven days following notice of the second impoundment. The hearing shall be for purposes of determining the mandatory sterilization issue only, and not for any other purpose under this Title. The hearing shall be held within seven days of receipt of such petition. After the hearing, the hearing officer may require that the animal be spayed or neutered at the owner's expense, unless the hearing officer determines that good cause exists for not requiring that the animal be spayed or neutered. However, mandatory sterilization shall not be required if the animal was not restrained or confined due to an act of God, emergency or other mitigating factor not caused by the intentional or negligent act of the owner, a member of the owner's household or any other person in control of the animal. 
(Ord. 1518 N.S. § 4, 2001)  
Chapter 6.36 - ANIMALS AND LAND USE 
Sections: 
 
6.36.010 - Short title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Animal Ordinance," and may be cited as such. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 135 § 1, 1962)  
6.36.020 - Purpose. 
The city council finds and determines that the keeping of certain animals, domestic fowl and rabbits within the city limits, unless properly regulated as to location, size of flocks, number of animals and sanitary conditions, is detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare, and that the public interest requires that the city council prescribe regulations for the more efficient control thereof. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 135 § 2, 1962)  
6.36.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  "Agricultural zone," "commercial zone," "industrial zone" and "residential zone" mean all areas within the city zoned for agricultural uses, commercial uses, industrial uses and residential uses, respectively, as established by the official zoning ordinances of the city. 
B.  "Corral" means an area enclosed by fencing for the keeping of livestock. 
C.  "Enclosed premises" means any lot or premises so enclosed as to prevent any animal or fowl confined thereon, escaping therefrom, or any animal or fowl from entering thereon. 
D.  "Health officer" means the county health officer acting as the health officer of the city. 
E.  "Household pets" means and includes dogs, cats, canaries, parrots and other kindred birds and animals which are legal to possess in the state of California, that are usually or ordinarily kept as household pets. 
F.  "Livestock" means and includes horses, ponies, mules, burros, jacks and jennies, cows, bulls, calves, heifers, llamas, sheep, goats, and all other domestic or domesticated animals that are legal to possess within the state of California except swine, hogs, pigs and other household pets. 
G.  "Person" means an individual, firm, partnership or corporation, and their heirs, assigns, executors, administrators or agents. 
H.  "Private use" means keeping of animals for private purposes and enjoyment and occasional sale. 
I.  "Poultry" means and includes chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, pigeons and all other fowl including birds which are kept in outdoor aviaries. 
J.  "Poultry ranch" means any premises, including outdoor aviaries, where a combined total of fifteen or more domestic fowl and poultry are kept, maintained, harbored or controlled by any person. Poultry under three months of age and not exceeding fifteen in number shall not be considered in computing the number of fowl on the premises. 
K.  "Public stable" means any building or structure for the keeping of two or more horses which are not owned by the occupant of the premises, and are so kept for remuneration, hire or sale. 
L.  "Rabbits and small animals" means and includes hares, hamsters, chinchillas and guinea pigs, and all types of rodents. 
M.  "Rabbit ranch" means any premises where eight or more rabbits are kept, maintained, harbored or controlled by any person. Rabbits under three months of age and not exceeding fifteen in number shall not be considered in computing the number of rabbits on the premises. 
N.  "Rear yard" means a yard extending across the full width of the lot between the main building and the rear lot line; the depth of the required rear yard shall be measured horizontally from the nearest part of the main building toward the rear lot line. 
(Ord. 1721 N.S. § 2, Exh. A (part), 2005: Ord. 1443 N.S. § 1, 1999: Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 135 § 2, 1962)  
6.36.040 - Keeping of livestock, poultry ranch and rabbit ranch—Generally. 
It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain or cause or permit to be kept or maintained, any livestock, poultry ranch or rabbit ranch as defined in this chapter, except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the regulations prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1443 N.S. § 2, 1999: Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 135 § 8 (part), 1962)  
6.36.050 - Keeping of livestock, poultry ranch and rabbit ranch—Minimum area requirements. 
Other than as allowed for keeping of livestock for private uses in residential zoning districts and on open space properties with a private residence, in accordance with Section 6.36.175 of this chapter, in any residential and/or commercial zone, no livestock, poultry ranch or rabbit ranch shall be maintained on an area of less than one acre, and the number of livestock thereof shall not exceed a number per acre of two adult livestock in any combination of the foregoing livestock and their immature offspring; provided, that the total number on any one lot, site, farm or ranch shall not exceed two adult livestock and their immature offspring, unless by revocable special permit of the city council after a recommendation by the planning commission that the keeping of additional livestock will not be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the abutting property owners. 
(Ord. 1721 N.S. § 2, Exh. A (part), 2005: Ord. 1443 N.S. § 3, 1999: Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 135 § 8(a), 1962)  
6.36.060 - Keeping of livestock, poultry ranch and rabbit ranch—Distance from residences. 
Other than as allowed for keeping of livestock for private uses in residential zoning districts and on open space properties with a private residence, in accordance with Section 6.36.175 of this chapter, all open enclosures, whether pasture land or corral, shall be not less than one hundred feet from the nearest school, church, hospital or dwelling used for human habitation, other than the residence of the owner of such livestock; provided, however, that in all cases where the distance from the nearest school, church, hospital or dwelling used for human habitation, other than the residence of the owner of such livestock, is less than two hundred feet, the person in control of the premises where the livestock is kept also shall obtain a revocable special permit for one year, or more, issued by the city council after the matter has been presented to and acted upon by the planning commission. The city council need not follow the recommendation of the planning commission. Any renewal of the special permit may be made by the council without further consideration by the planning commission. The council may impose any conditions in such permit deemed by it necessary to preserve the health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood. 
(Ord. 1721 N.S. § 2, Exh. A (part), 2005: Ord. 1443 N.S. § 4, 1999: Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 231 N.S. § B, 1968: Ord. 135 N.S. § 8(b), 1962)  
6.36.070 - Keeping of livestock, poultry ranch and rabbit ranch—Setbacks. 
All open enclosures containing livestock, poultry ranch or rabbit ranch shall be set back at least thirty feet from any traveled street, except an alley; except that livestock kept for private uses in residential zoning districts and on open space properties with a private residence shall be set back in accordance with the corral location approved in conjunction with issuance of a residential private livestock permit. 
(Ord. 1721 N.S. § 2, Exh. A (part), 2005: Ord. 1443 N.S. § 5, 1999: Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 135 § 8(c), 1962)  
6.36.080 - Keeping of animals—Exclusions from chapter for medical uses or veterinary care. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the keeping of household pets or small animals by a licensed veterinarian, or of small animals for hospital or medical purposes by any hospital or clinic, regardless of the zone, providing all other provisions relating to the keeping of such animals as required by this chapter, are strictly adhered to. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 135 § 8(d), 1962)  
6.36.090 - Animal use permit and residential private livestock permit—Issuance. 
All permits required in matters pertaining to sanitation and the preservation of public health as provided in this chapter and the laws of the state shall be known as animal use permits and residential private livestock permits. Permits so issued shall be in the name of the owner, operator or lessee in whose name the permit is issued, and such permits shall not run with the land. 
(Ord. 1721 N.S. § 2, Exh. A (part), 2005: Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 135 § 14, 1962)  
6.36.100 - Animal use permit—Uses requiring permit—Fees. 
Businesses and occupations that operate public stables, rabbit or poultry ranches, or keep other types of livestock or fowl shall require an animal use permit as outlined in this chapter where zoning permits such a business and occupation. Such businesses and occupations shall be required to pay a biennial permit fee as set by resolution of the city council, due and payable on July 1st, for each premises used for the purpose set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1443 N.S. § 6, 1999: Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 135 § 17, 1962)  
6.36.110 - Animal use permit—Application requirements. 
All applications for animal use permits shall be made in writing at the office of the animal control administrator or authorized agent and made on forms provided by the city and shall contain the following: 
A.  Name and address of applicant; 
B.  Location of subject matter involved; 
C.  Proprietary interest or official status of the applicant; 
D.  Reason for permit and type and number of animals; 
E.  A statement that the applicant will observe the provisions of this chapter, and will, within a reasonable time, not to exceed ninety days, make any and all improvements and changes in construction that are required by law; 
F.  Such other information as may be required by the respective provisions of this chapter; 
G.  All applications shall be signed by the applicant. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 135 § 15, 1962)  
6.36.120 - Animal use permits—Investigation. 
Upon receipt of the application for an animal use permit, the animal control administrator or authorized agent shall make or cause to be made, an inspection of the premises. If the provisions of this chapter and all other pertinent laws of the state and of the city have been complied with, the inspector shall certify that fact to the animal control administrator or authorized agent who shall issue the applicant an animal use permit in accordance with the provisions, terms and conditions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 135 § 16, 1962)  
6.36.130 - Animal use permits—Nontransferable—Temporary permits. 
A.  No animal use permit issued under this chapter shall be transferable or assignable, except as provided in Section 6.36.140 of this chapter. 
B.  Temporary animal use permits for a period of one year or less may be issued without payment of any fee. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 135 § 18, 1962)  
6.36.140 - Animal use permit—Transferability. 
A.  Where the owner of an existing poultry or rabbit ranch in a residential or commercial zone desires to transfer his permit to operate such ranch to another operator either because of the sale, lease, exchange or transfer of the property under his jurisdiction, the application for transfer shall be filed with the animal control administrator or authorized agent who shall forthwith forward such application to the planning commission for a hearing to determine whether such transfer or continued use will be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city, or the inhabitants of the immediate area. Such hearing shall be conducted in a similar manner as set forth in the zoning code of the city, relating to a conditional use permit. 
B.  If the planning commission, after due hearing and deliberation, decides that continuation of such land use is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city, or the inhabitants of the immediate area, they shall forthwith deny the transfer. 
C.  If the area is determined to be fundamentally rural in character, with only sparse residential development within three hundred feet of the buildings or structures or installation in which such animals are kept, harbored or maintained, and the continued use will not be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the inhabitants of the area, then the planning commission shall approve such transfer. With the planning commission's approval, the animal control administrator or authorized agent shall be instructed to issue a permit therefor, after the permit fee, as set forth in Section 6.36.100 of this chapter, has been paid. The authorization to continue operation of the poultry or rabbit ranch shall be for a maximum period of five years, and can be renewed only after a public hearing as set forth in this section. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 135 § 13, 1962)  
6.36.150 - Animal use permits—Termination, suspension or revocation. 
A.  Animal use permits shall remain in effect and be valid until suspended or revoked. All such permits revoked under the limitations imposed in this chapter must be renewed by application therefor, as required in the first instance, unless otherwise provided in this chapter. All such permits expire and terminate upon the holder thereof going out of business, moving to another place of business, selling, renting or otherwise releasing control of the business or premises for which the permit was issued, except as provided in Section 6.36.140 of this chapter. 
B.  At the time of the suspension of such animal use permit by the animal control administrator or authorized agent, he shall notify the holder thereof of the time and place when such permittee may appear before the city council to show cause why his animal use permit should not be revoked. The permittee shall have at least seven days' notice of such hearing which shall thereafter be held on the next regular meeting of the city council. 
C.  At the time set for the hearing, the city council shall hear the reasons of the animal control administrator or authorized agent for suspending such an animal permit and, also, any evidence which the permittee desires to give rebutting same. The only issue to be decided by the city council is whether or not there was a violation of law. The city council may adjourn the hearing to a future date, continue suspension of such permit for such period of time as it may deem necessary, revoke such permit, or dismiss the proceedings. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 135 § 19, 1962)  
6.36.160 - Poultry or rabbit ranches—Location restrictions—Exceptions. 
It is unlawful for any person to construct, establish, conduct or maintain any poultry or rabbit ranch in any residential and/or commercial zones of the city. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 135 § 9, 1962)  
6.36.170 - Poultry or rabbit restrictions in noncommercial areas. 
It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain or cause, or permit to be kept or maintained, any poultry or rabbits in any residential or commercial district, except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and the following regulations: 
A.  Location. All poultry and rabbits shall be kept in the rear yard of any premises as defined in this chapter. No poultry or rabbit shall be kept within twenty-five feet of any traveled street, except an alley. 
B.  Distance From Certain Buildings. No poultry or rabbit shall be kept within one hundred feet of any commercial establishment where food products are kept, stored, manufactured or processed, or any school, church or hospital, or within twenty feet of any residence or dwelling, or building used for the habitation of human beings. 
C.  Side and Rear Yards. All poultry and rabbits shall be kept, harbored or maintained not less than five feet from all lateral and rear property lines, unless there is a solid fence, solid side of a structure, or a wall not less than five feet in height between such poultry or rabbits and the adjoining property, except where property line abuts upon an alley, then the distance requirement may be dispensed with. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 135 § 22, 1962)  
6.36.175 - Keeping of livestock for private uses in residential zoning districts and on open space properties with a private residence. 
Livestock may be kept in residential zoning districts and on open space properties with a private residence, subject to the issuance of a residential private livestock permit, which shall be issued by the community development department subject to the following standard conditions: 
A.  Livestock may only be kept for private uses. 
B.  A maximum of two adult large livestock animals (horses, cows, mules) and their immature offspring; and a maximum of four adult small livestock animals (sheep, goats, llamas) may be kept per the first forty thousand square feet of lot area. For each additional twenty thousand square feet of lot area, two additional adult small livestock animals and immature offspring may be kept; and for each additional forty thousand square feet of lot area, one additional adult large livestock animal and immature offspring may be kept. 
C.  All livestock shall be securely enclosed in a corral sufficient to keep them contained. The proposed location of the corral shall be indicated on a site plan by the applicant. The corral location shall be subject to approval by the community development department in conjunction with issuance of the residential private livestock permit. The department shall notify the applicant and adjacent property owners of the proposed permit by mail at least ten days prior to the decision of the department, in order to receive input. The approved location of the corral shall be based on criteria relevant to the application, including but not limited to type and size of animals, existing land use and structures on site, adjacent land uses and structures, possibility of noise and odor impacts on neighbors, topography, relationship to streets and alleys, applicable fence location and height regulations, and protection of fences between the property and adjacent lots. 
D.  Appeals of the decision of the community development department shall be filed within ten days, and appeals shall be considered by the planning commission at a noticed public hearing. Appeals of the decision of the planning commission shall be filed within ten days, and appeals shall be considered by the city council at a noticed public hearing. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. 1721 N.S. Exh. A (part), 2005)  
6.36.180 - Livestock restrictions. 
It is unlawful for any person to construct, establish, conduct or maintain or cause to be constructed, established or maintained, or engage in, except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, any dairy, stockyard or stock corral, cattle ranch, or public stable, in any residential and/or commercial zone within the city. Where an existing dairy, stockyard, stock corral or public stable is presently in operation, then such use shall be allowed to continue as a nonconforming use. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 135 § 10, 1962)  
6.36.190 - Enlargement of existing facilities—Exceptions. 
Subject to all other provisions of this chapter, no buildings, structures, hutches or pens, used in connection with any rabbit and/or poultry ranch shall be extended or enlarged to any point within fifteen feet of any boundary of any poultry or rabbit ranch, except in the agricultural zone. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 135 § 11, 1962)  
6.36.200 - Reversion of nonconforming use. 
Where any building, structure or premises enjoying a nonconforming use, as set forth in Sections 6.36.160 and 6.36.180 of this chapter is not conducted for such nonconforming use for a continuous period of six months, such use shall automatically revert back to the classification to which it formed an exception, and the animal use permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be canceled. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 135 § 12, 1962)  
6.36.210 - Sanitary requirements. 
It is declared to be a nuisance and it is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or allow to be kept or maintained at or upon any premises, owned, controlled or occupied by him in the city, any enclosure for the use, restraint or confinement of any livestock, poultry, fowl, rabbit, or household pet, any yard, coop, aviary, building, structure, pasture, pen, hutch, loft, kennel or enclosure which is in a foul, obnoxious or filthy condition that is or may become detrimental to public health, comfort or safety. All places where livestock, rabbits, poultry, or household pets are kept shall be maintained and kept in a sanitary condition, and shall be cleaned as often as it is necessary to avoid being a nuisance. 
(Ord. 1443 N.S. § 7, 1999: Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 135 § 23, 1962)  
6.36.220 - Manure storage. 
Manure shall not be stored within the respective distances specified in Section 6.36.170 of this chapter, except that nothing in this section shall apply to manure which is spread about and mixed with and cultivated in the ground around plants, vines, vegetables, bushes, shrubs, trees or lawn. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 135 § 20, 1962)  
6.36.230 - Maintenance of premises—Fly and odor control. 
It is declared to be a nuisance and it is unlawful for any person to allow manure from animals, rabbits or poultry, which has become damp or moist, or is likely to create any foul or obnoxious odors, or the breeding of flies, to accumulate on any premises for a period longer than a maximum of seven days. However, nothing in this section shall prohibit the health officer from approving an alternate plan for fly and odor control. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 135 § 21, 1962)  
6.36.240 - Wild animals—Permit required. 
A.  No person shall have, keep or maintain, or have in his possession or control, any elephant, bear, hippopotamus, rhinoceros, lion, tiger, leopard, wolf, monkey or any poisonous reptile of any kind, or any dangerous or carnivorous wild animal or reptile without first applying to and receiving from the chief of police or animal control administrator a permit to do so. 
B.  The administrator is invested with the authority to issue permits for the keeping or maintaining of any of the animals enumerated and described in the subsection A of this section to any person when, in his opinion, any such animal may be kept or maintained without menacing the safety of any person or property; provided, however, that he may require any such animal to be properly caged or tethered, and may make additional rules and regulations regulating the keeping or maintaining of any such animals, and may revoke any such permit for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of any of the rules or regulations, or when, in his opinion, the safety of any person or property is menaced by the keeping of any such animals. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 135 § 4, 1962)  
6.36.270 - Keeping of swine or bees prohibited—Exceptions. 
It is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or permit to be maintained any swine or bees on any premises within the city, except within those premises which have been zoned for agricultural use. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 135 § 5, 1962)  
6.36.280 - Operation without permit prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to commence, conduct, carry on, transact, engage in, run, operate or maintain or cause, permit or allow another person to carry on any endeavor wherein sanitation and the preservation of public health are involved, and an animal use permit or a residential private livestock permit is required by this chapter or the laws of the state, without first applying for and securing an animal use permit or a residential private livestock permit. 
(Ord. 1721 N.S. § 2, Exh. A (part), 2005: Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 135 § 24, 1962) 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 23, 5-2-2018)  
6.36.290 - Inspection and right of entry. 
It shall be the duty of the health officer, his deputies, agents or employees, animal control administrator or authorized agent, or any police or peace officer, to enter upon or in any premises, building, lot, yard or enclosure for the purpose of inspecting such premises, to ascertain if any nuisance named in this chapter exists, or if such officer or officers has reason to believe any such nuisance shall exist and whenever a nuisance shall be found to exist in the opinion of the health officer, his deputies, or any police or peace officer, to notify in writing any person or persons owning or having control of or acting as agent for, leasing or occupying such premises, house or other place, to abate or remove such nuisance within a reasonable time to be stated in such notice. 
(Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), 1995: Ord. 135 § 25, 1962)  
6.36.300 - Violation. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter shall, for each and every violation thereof, and for each and every day or fractional part thereof during which such violation shall continue, be liable and shall have his or her permit revoked. 
B.  Upon the failure, neglect, or refusal of any owner, occupant, agent, or other person having control of such house, premises, or other place to comply with the notice given under Section 6.36.290 of this chapter, the animal control administrator or authorized agent, his or her deputies or agents, any police or peace officer, or the city attorney may abate such nuisance. The owner, agent, occupant, or other person having control of such house or place, in addition to the penalties provided by this chapter, shall be liable to the city for the cost of such abatement, including reasonable attorney's fees to be recovered in a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction. If no person can be found upon whom to serve such notice, the city clerk, his or her deputies or agents, any police or peace officer, or the city attorney, duly authorized or empowered for the enforcement of this chapter, shall proceed to abate such nuisance at the expense of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 23, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 23, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 6.36.300 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 6.36.300 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 135, § 26, adopted in 1962; Ord. 1192 N.S., § 7, adopted in 1994; Ord. 1209 N.S. (part), adopted in 1995; Ord 1320 N.S., § 6, adopted in 1997; and Ord. 1443 N.S., § 10, adopted in 1999.  
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY  
Chapter 8.04 - RESTAURANTS AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
8.04.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and its provisions are to be liberally construed to obtain the beneficial purposes thereof. 
(Ord. 74 § 16, 1957)  
8.04.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context indicates otherwise, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  "Food" means and includes all articles used for food, drink, confectionery or condiment, whether simple or compound, and all substances and ingredients used in the preparation thereof. 
B.  "Food establishment" means and includes any public or private market, shop, store, delicatessen, candy factory, storehouse, warehouse, cold storage plant or other plant, or other place, not a public eating or drinking establishment in or about which any food, foodstuffs or provisions are kept, held, sold, prepared or compounded or offered for sale for human consumption. Such establishments shall specifically include, but shall not be restricted to, grocery stores and warehouses; candy and confectioners' plants or stores; bakeries; bottling works; food and condiment packers, fruit and vegetable stands; markets or other premises where meat or meat food products, sausage, fish, dressed poultry, rabbit or game are kept, stored, handled, manufactured or offered for sale; ice stations; all food processing or cannery plants of any type. 
C.  "Health officer" means the county health officer, his assistants or authorized deputies acting as the health officer of the city. 
D.  "Restaurant" means any coffee shop, cafeteria, short-order cafe, luncheonette, tavern, bar, sandwich stand, soda fountain, public school lunchroom or cafeteria, labor and construction camp kitchens and dining rooms, public boardinghouse, club and any other eating or drinking establishment, catering services, barbecue pits in which food, or drink is prepared on the premises for sale or distribution elsewhere. The term "restaurant," as used in this chapter also includes all cafeterias or restaurants serving commercial establishments as part of the organization and serving the public, whether as employees or visitors. 
E.  "Utensils" means and includes kitchenware, tableware, glassware, cutlery, containers, machinery, implements, receptacles used in processing, storage, distribution or serving of food or drink. 
(Ord. 74 § 1, 1957)  
8.04.030 - Permits—Required before operation. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate or conduct a restaurant or food establishment or to sell, offer for sale, distribute or have in possession for sale or distribution any food or drink intended for human consumption of the city, state, unless possessing a permit to do so from the health officer and paying the permit fee required to be paid by this chapter. No permit shall be required of any food processing, cannery or other food establishment licensed by the State Department of Health, by the Bureau of Meat Inspection of the State Department of Agriculture, or by the Meat Inspection Division of the United States Department of Agriculture. 
(Ord. 74 § 2, 1957)  
8.04.040 - Permit—Application—Investigation. 
Application for such permit shall be made in writing to the health officer. The health officer shall, upon receipt of such application, make or cause to be made, an examination of the premises for which such permit is requested. If, upon examination, the health officer, his assistant or his duly authorized representative, shall find such premises and the equipment therein to be in accordance with the laws of the state, the requirements of this chapter and the rules and regulations of the health officer of the city, and not otherwise, the health officer shall issue a revocable permit for the conduct of such business. Such permit shall be issued annually for the calendar year and shall not be transferable. Renewal of permits shall be applied for and acted upon in the same manner. 
(Ord. 74 § 3, 1957)  
8.04.050 - Permits—Fees. 
The permit fee for conducting a restaurant or food establishment shall be ten dollars per annum, and shall be payable in advance to the health officer upon the first day of January of each year. The permit fee for any portion of the year shall be ten dollars. 
(Ord. 74 § 4, 1957)  
8.04.060 - Operating without permit unlawful. 
The health officer is empowered to deny or withhold a permit for which an application has been made, if after investigation he finds that the building, premises, equipment, apparatus or reasonable facilities for the establishing, maintaining, conducting or operating the business or institution for which a permit is requested, is or are insufficient, unfit or incapable of being used, maintained or established to comply with this or any other ordinance of the city, or the rules and regulations of the health officer or laws of the state. If any such permit is denied, suspended or revoked by the health officer, it is unlawful during the period of such denial, revocation or suspension for any person to sell or traffic in any food or drink products in the city at such establishment. 
(Ord. 74 § 5, 1957)  
8.04.070 - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
The health officer may suspend or revoke any permit authorized by the ordinance whenever he finds that the holder of such a permit fails or refuses to comply with the laws of the state, this chapter or any rules and regulations of the health officer. 
(Ord. 74 § 6, 1957)  
8.04.080 - Notification of change of ownership. 
Permits for any restaurant or food establishment within the city, shall not be transferable. Every person, who sells, exchanges, gives away, abandons or discontinues any such restaurant or food establishment within the city, and every person who purchases or otherwise acquires any such restaurant or food establishment within the city, shall immediately notify the health officer, his assistant or his duly authorized representative as to the fact thereof. 
(Ord. 74 § 7, 1957)  
8.04.090 - Authority to establish additional regulations. 
The health officer when authorized by the city council shall make such additional rules and regulations as may be necessary to secure the propersanitation of all restaurants or food establishments and for the proper and orderly administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. 74 § 8, 1957)  
8.04.100 - Possession prima facie evidence of intent to sell. 
The presence, in or about the place of business of any person dealing in food, or in or about any vehicle used by any such person for the delivery of the same, of any food, shall be prima facie evidence of intent on the part of such person to sell the same and of the fact that he is holding or offering the same for sale. 
(Ord. 74 § 9, 1957)  
8.04.110 - Water supply requirements. 
Every restaurant shall be provided with hot and cold running water under pressure and the same shall be accessible to all rooms in which food is prepared or utensils are washed. The water supply shall be adequate and of the safe, sanitary quality. Hot and cold running water need not be provided if single service utensils are used exclusively. 
(Ord. 74 § 11, 1957)  
8.04.120 - Toilet facility specifications. 
A.  Every restaurant shall be provided with adequate and conveniently located toilet facilities on the premises for its employees or operators. There shall be a separate toilet room for each sex. 
B.  Every food establishment shall be provided with adequate and conveniently located toilet facilities on the premises for its employees or operators. Where both sexes are employed there shall be a separate toilet room for each sex. 
C.  Toilet rooms in restaurants and food establishments shall be not less than eighteen square feet in area and shall not open into any room or area in which food, drinks or utensils are handled or stored. The doors of all toilet rooms and ante rooms shall be self-closing. Toilet rooms shall be kept in a clean condition and in good repair, well lighted and ventilated to the outside air and effectively screened against insects and free from rodents. Floors shall be of cement, tile laid in cement, vitrified brick or other nonabsorbent material. All sewer drains shall be connected to an approved sewage disposal system, and shall be properly trapped. No toilet room or ante room shall be used for the storage of garments, food products or utensils. 
(Ord. 74 § 12, 1957)  
8.04.130 - Handwashing facility specifications. 
Adequate and convenient handwashing facilities shall be provided within or adjacent to toilet rooms, including running water, soap and approved sanitary towels, in all restaurants and food establishments. The use of a common towel is prohibited. No employee or owner shall resume work in a restaurant or food establishment after visiting the toilet without first washing his hands, and legible signs shall be posted in each toilet room directing to this requirement. 
(Ord. 74 § 13, 1957)  
8.04.140 - Meat products—State statutes adopted. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, or agent or employee of any person, firm or corporation, to sell, offer for sale, distribute or have in possession for sale or distribution in the city, any sausage or other meat food product unless the same has been manufactured or prepared in accordance with the laws of the state. 
(Ord. 74 § 15, 1957)  
8.04.150 - Destruction of unwholesome food. 
The health officer, his assistant and his duly authorized representatives, are authorized and directed to seize and destroy or denaturize any tainted, diseased, decayed or partially decayed or unwholesome meat, fish, shellfish, fowl, fruits, vegetables or other unwholesome food found within the city. 
(Ord. 74 § 10, 1957)  
8.04.160 - Unstamped meat prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, offer for sale, distribute or have in possession for sale or distribution in the city, the flesh of any cattle, horse, sheep, lamb, swine or goat, unless the same bears on each primal part thereof the "Inspected and Passed" stamp of an establishment operating under federal inspection, state inspection or approved municipal inspection. 
(Ord. 74 § 14, 1957)  
8.04.170 - Violation. 
It is unlawful and a willful violation for any person, firm, corporation, or agent or employee of any person, firm, or corporation to violate any provision of this chapter or any rules and regulations made under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 24, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 24, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 8.04.170 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8.04.170 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 74, § 17, adopted in 1957; and Ord. 1192 N.S., § 8, adopted in 1994.  
Chapter 8.08 - MOBILE HOME AND TRAILER PARKS 
 
8.08.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish standards for the establishment and operation of mobile home parks to provide occupants of mobile homes with a suitable living environment, and to provide minimum protection for the public health, welfare and safety of other persons residing in the same neighborhood. The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed so as to give full effect to the accomplishment of the forgoing. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 1, 1961)  
8.08.020 - Short title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter may be cited and known as "The Mobile Home Ordinance." 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 2, 1961)  
8.08.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  "Awning" means any shade structure installed, constructed, erected or used adjoining a mobile home, excluding window awnings. 
B.  "Building" means any building or structure containing public toilets, baths, laundries or sanitary facilities or storage facilities constructed for the exclusive use of the occupants of a mobile home park. 
C.  "Building permit" means a written authorization from the building inspector of the city authorizing the initial construction or enlargement of a mobile home park, and approving the plans submitted by the applicant setting forth the type and location of all buildings, roadways, sanitation and drainage facilities in the proposed mobile home park. 
D.  "Cabana" means any portable, demountable or permanent enclosure, room, building or structure to be used for living purposes constructed, erected or placed on any mobile home site within ten feet of any mobile home. 
E.  "Carport" means any awning or shade structure, the sides of which are less than fifty percent enclosed. 
F.  "Front of mobile home or trailer" means the furthest forward projection of the towing apparatus. 
G.  "License fee" means the fee required to be paid pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.04.420, entitled "auto trailer courts" of Chapter 5.04 of this code, which is the general licensing ordinance, and any amendments to such section hereinafter made. 
H.  "License or license to operate" means a written authorization issued by the city clerk authorizing the applicant to engage in the business of renting trailer spaces to the public; a license shall not be issued until all improvements required to be made by the building permit have been constructed and installed and the applicable license fee has been paid. 
I.  "Liquefied petroleum gas" means petroleum hydrocarbon or mixtures thereof in liquefied or gaseous state, having a vapor pressure in excess of twenty-six pounds per square inch at a temperature of one hundred degrees Fahrenheit. The symbol therefor in this chapter shall be LPG. 
J.  "Mobile home" or "trailer" means any camp-car, trailer, trailer coach or other vehicle with or without motor power constructed to travel on public thoroughfares and designed, constructed or used for human habitation. "Mobile home" is synonymous with the word "trailer." 
1.  "Expandable mobile home or trailer" means a mobile home or trailer wider than ten feet; 
2.  "Dependent mobile home or trailer" means a mobile home or trailer not equipped with a toilet for sewage disposal. 
3.  "Independent mobile home or trailer" means a mobile home or trailer equipped with a toilet for sewage disposal. 
K.  "Mobile home or trailer site" means any portion of a mobile home or trailer park designated and designed for the occupancy of a trailer coach, including any area that is set aside or used for automobile parking, carport, storage, awning, cabana, ramada or other structure. 
L.  "Mobile home park" or "trailer park" means any place, area or tract of land offered to the public for the accommodation of any trailer or any place, area or tract of land used for the accommodation of two or more trailers, whether or not offered to the public for such use, but excluding any place, area or tract of land used for the accommodation of two or more trailers for the purpose of their sale only. 
M.  "Permit to construct" has the same meaning as "building permit," as defined in this section. 
N.  "Permit to operate" has the same meaning as "license to operate," as defined in this section. 
O.  "Ramada" means any roof, or shade structure installed, erected or used above a trailer coach and site or any portion thereof. 
P.  "Site line" means the exterior boundaries of a mobile home or trailer site. 
Q.  "Structure" means anything which is built, constructed or erected in some definite manner, excluding mobile homes or trailers. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 3, 1961)  
8.08.040 - Compliance with zoning provisions and state statutes. 
Mobile home parks may be established and maintained in such districts as permitted by the zoning ordinance of the city, and subject to the regulations of this chapter and any rules and regulations which may be formulated from time to time by the health officer and the laws of the state. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 6, 1961)  
8.08.050 - Trailers restricted to parks. 
All trailers, when occupied or used for living or sleeping purposes, shall be kept within approved mobile home parks or trailer parks; provided, however, that a trailer may be so used or occupied for a period not exceeding forty-eight hours upon obtaining the prior consent of the chief of police or of his deputy. This period may be extended for three additional weeks or any fraction thereof only upon the prior consent of the city council. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 4, 1961)  
8.08.060 - License required. 
It is unlawful for any person to establish, maintain or operate or cause to be established, maintained or operated any trailer park or mobile home park in the city except upon obtaining a license therefor pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 5, 1961)  
8.08.070 - Building permit—Application—Contents required. 
Every applicant for a permit to maintain a trailer park shall file with the planning commission a verified application in duplicate containing the following information: 
A.  Name and address of the trailer park or mobile home park operator or applicant; 
B.  Name and address of the owner of the property on which trailer park or mobile home park is, or is proposed to be, located; 
C.  Proposed name of the trailer park or mobile home park, and the total number of trailer spaces proposed; 
D.  Legal description of the property proposed for the mobile home or trailer park site, and specify all deed or lease restrictions; 
E.  State the source of water supply and the type of sewage disposal proposed. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 7(a), 1961)  
8.08.080 - Building permit—Plot plan. 
A.  In addition to the verified application, each application shall submit to the planning commission eight copies of a plot plan with the following information shown thereon: 
1.  The plot plan shall be to scale at a scale no smaller than one inch equals fifty feet up to ten acres, and thereafter, one inch equals one hundred feet showing the exterior boundaries of the property for the proposed trailer park; 
2.  The locations, names and widths of all public streets in the vicinity of the proposed park; 
3.  The property identifications and names of owners of properties within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of such park; 
4.  The location and size of all sewer, water and storm drain facilities adjoining the proposed park; 
5.  Grading plan showing existing topography and proposed grading; 
6.  Location, width and flow direction of all water courses; 
7.  Existing buildings or structures and existing uses of property; 
8.  Setback or plan lines on existing streets; 
9.  Improvements to be made to public streets or ways; 
10.  The location, width and type of construction of all mobile home or trailer park roadways and walkways; 
11.  All trailer sites, together with scaled sizes of such spaces; 
12.  Plans and locations of all park buildings; 
13.  Type of building construction, together with framing plan and elevation; 
14.  Complete electrical plans; 
15.  Unpaved areas which are to be landscaped and planting plans; 
16.  Fence location, if any, and detail of construction and materials; 
17.  All field plumbing, showing drainage system pipe sizes and give other plumbing details as may be required by the city building inspector; 
18.  Stormwater disposal facilities; 
19.  Fire hydrants, if any, locations and size of outlet connections; 
20.  Refuse and garbage disposal areas and facilities; 
21.  Specific locations for parking trailers offered for sale. 
B.  The planning commission shall refer one copy of the plot plan for each of the following city officers: Health officer, city engineer, superintendent of public works and building inspector, who shall review the same to determine that the plan and all improvements shown thereon proposed to be constructed meet all the requirements of this chapter and other applicable city rules and regulations with respect to buildings, roadways, walkways, drainage, water supply, sewerage disposal system and similar facilities. Each officer shall make a written report to the planning commission within fifteen days from the date of referral to him. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 7(b) and (c), 1961)  
8.08.090 - Application—Public hearing. 
Upon receipt of the reports referred to in Section 8.08.080(B) of this chapter, the planning commission shall at an open and public hearing determine whether the proposed mobile home park or trailer park will be in full conformity with this chapter. The planning commission need not give notice of such public hearing, but may do so by publishing a notice giving the time and place thereof in a newspaper published in the city which notice shall be published at least seven days before the date of such hearing, and also causing the same notice to be posted at a prominent place near the entrance to the proposed trailer park site, with the following letters not less than two inches in height above the notice: "Proposed Automobile Trailer Park Site." At the conclusion of the hearing, which may be continued from time to time, the planning commission shall make a report of its findings and recommendations with respect to the proposed trailer park to the city council. The report may approve the plot plan without conditions, approve the plot plan with changes and conditions, or disapprove the plot plan. Such approval may specify such additional conditions as are necessary to insure that the operation of the mobile home or trailer park will not adversely affect the character of the neighborhood in which the park is located, and may require such recreation or other special purpose areas as it may deem necessary. If a plan is disapproved, the commission shall state the reasons therefor and in what instances the plan fails to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 8, 1961)  
8.08.100 - Application—Final hearing by council. 
Upon receiving the report of the planning commission referred to in Section 8.08.090 of this chapter, the city council shall consider this report at an open and public hearing as soon as feasible and make a final decision thereon. The city council must make a finding that the establishment of a mobile home or trailer park will or will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood. The council may modify the report and conditions established by the planning commission in any manner that it deems fit in accordance with applicable laws. If the council approves the plot plan and application, then a building permit to construct a mobile home or trailer park shall be issued by the city building inspector. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 9, 1961)  
8.08.110 - Application—Fee. 
The application fee for a permit to construct a mobile home park or trailer park shall be twenty-five dollars, payable at the time of the filing of the application. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 10, 1961)  
8.08.120 - Permit transferability. 
Any permit issued for a mobile home or trailer park may be transferred upon the written application of the holder of the permit to the planning commission with the payment of a ten-dollar transaction fee and with the consent of the latter endorsed thereon. Any permit issued as provided in this chapter shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the office of the trailer park or mobile home park. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 11, 1961)  
8.08.130 - Enlargement of existing parks—Application requirements. 
A.  The provisions of Section 8.08.070 shall apply to all applications to enlarge, change or in any way modify any mobile home or trailer park existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; provided, however, that in addition such application shall be accompanied by plans showing the existing park, the location of trailer sites, roadways, walkways, sanitation facilities, sewer facilities and drainage facilities situated on such existing park. 
B.  No permit to enlarge such existing park shall be granted unless or until such park shall meet all the requirements of this chapter excluding the requirement for the minimum park size as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 12, 1961)  
8.08.140 - License to operate—Term. 
A.  Upon completion of a mobile home park or trailer park pursuant to the building permit, the owner, operator or person intended to operate the same shall file an application for a license to operate with the city clerk on the form prescribed by him. 
B.  Upon receipt of the application the city clerk shall refer it to the superintendent of public works, building inspector and the health officer who shall inspect the park to determine if all of the improvements required to be made pursuant to the permit to construct have been constructed and installed, and that the park conforms to all of the requirements of this chapter, and upon approval thereof by the superintendent of public works, building inspector and the health officer the city clerk shall thereupon issue a license to operate. 
C.  The license to operate shall be for the term of two years and shall be renewed thereafter upon application and approval by the health officer that the park conforms to all of the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 13, 1961)  
8.08.150 - License to operate—Revocation or suspension. 
Any license to operate a mobile home or trailer park granted under this chapter may be revoked or suspended for fraud or deceit by the applicant in obtaining a license or for wilful violation of any provision of this chapter, or of a condition or limitation imposed by the planning commission or the city council in granting the application to establish the trailer park. The procedure for suspending or revoking a license shall be as set forth in Sections 14 and 15 of Ordinance No. 65, New Series of the city, entitled "Industrial Waste Ordinance," except that where the words "city engineer" are used in said sections the words "city health officer" shall be substituted. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 14, 1961)  
8.08.160 - Adjustments and exceptions. 
The city council retains the right to grant adjustments and exceptions to the provisions of this chapter in order to vary or modify the strict application thereof in cases in which there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of such strict application. Application for any such adjustment or exception shall be made to the city council in the form of a verified application by the owner or operator of the mobile home park. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 37, 1961)  
8.08.170 - Trailer site areas and setbacks. 
This section shall apply to all mobile home parks and trailer parks hereafter constructed and to all major changes or additions to existing parks: 
A.  Site Area. The minimum building site area for mobile home parks or trailer parks shall be three acres; 
B.  Trailer Site. 
1.  Each trailer site in a mobile home park or trailer park shall have an area of not less than one thousand two hundred square feet. Minimum width of trailer site facing onto a park roadway shall be twenty-five feet. 
2.  Each trailer site along the exterior line of a mobile home or trailer park shall be so designed that any part of any trailer shall be a minimum of five feet from the exterior boundary of the park and a minimum of twenty feet from any public street or alley. 
3.  No structure trailer shall be located so as to be closer than five feet to the dividing line within the space allotted except: 
a.  The front of a mobile home or trailer may be adjacent to a site line on a park roadway; 
b.  An unenclosed carport may be adjacent to a side site line; 
c.  A structure designed exclusively for storage and serving more than one site may be on or over a site line; 
4.  Such space shall be increased to six feet in the case of a two story trailer. 
5.  No more than seventy-five percent of a mobile home or trailer site shall be covered by a mobile home or trailer, buildings or other structures, and at least three hundred square feet of a site shall be free of all structures and coverage. 
6.  Boundaries of each site shall be permanently delineated. 
7.  Areas designed for the location of a mobile home shall be paved. 
C.  Parking. Provisions shall be made for parking two automobiles per site at a paved location other than on park roadways. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 15, 1961)  
8.08.180 - Minimum space and occupancy requirements. 
A.  To prevent overcrowding there shall be provided a minimum of forty-eight square feet in each room used as a bedroom for the first two occupants and thirty-two square feet additional for each additional occupant. 
B.  The living room if used as a bedroom shall be separated from the kitchen area by a full door or partition. 
C.  Each room used for a bedroom shall have at least an area equal to one-eighth of the floor area as window space. At least fifty percent of the windows shall be of a type that will open in order to provide adequate ventilation. 
D.  Doors from the toilet rooms shall not open directly into the kitchen area. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 32, 1961)  
8.08.190 - Type and use of mobile homes—Restrictions. 
It is unlawful for any person in a mobile home park to cause or permit to be used for occupancy: 
A.  Any mobile home from which any tire or wheel has been removed therefrom, except for the purpose of making temporary repairs or placing it in dead storage; 
B.  Any mobile home to which is attached any rigid water, gas or sewer pipes; provided, however, that metal tubing not to exceed one-half inch inside diameter may be used for water and gas; 
C.  Any mobile home which is permanently attached with underpinning or foundation to the ground; 
D.  Any mobile home which does not conform to the requirements of the Vehicle Code of the state. 
E.  Any mobile home which is structurally unsound and does not protect its habitants against the elements; 
F.  Any mobile home with a water pipe outlet which is not connected to the park sanitary sewage system; 
G.  Any mobile home which does not carry a current yearly license in accordance with the current registration requirements of the state; 
H.  Any mobile home site not occupied by a mobile home; 
I.  Any mobile home site on which is located more than one mobile home. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 30, 1961)  
8.08.200 - Grading and drainage—Maintenance and operation. 
An area or tract of land upon which a mobile home park or trailer park is maintained or operated shall be adequately graded and drained, so as to prevent standing water or muddy conditions. 
A.  The park shall be so drained as to prevent dumping stormwater or possible septic effluent upon adjoining property. 
B.  Roadways and entrances to all buildings used in common by occupants of the trailer park or mobile home park shall be paved or surfaced to city standards to keep them free of mud and water. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 19, 1961)  
8.08.210 - Street improvements and dedications. 
The planning commission may require dedication of certain street rights-of-way to the city. The commission may require streets which front on and provide ingress or egress to a mobile home park to be fully improved, or the improvements may be as prescribed by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 20, 1961)  
8.08.220 - Walkways and roadways. 
Paved walkways at least three feet wide shall be constructed to serve each site and each building, utility building and sanitation facility. Park roadways shall be paved and give access to each trailer site and shall have the following minimum widths: 
A.  Roadways serving sites on both sides thereof, thirty-two feet; 
B.  Roadways serving sites on one side only, twenty-four feet; 
C.  Roadways upon which parking of automobiles is prohibited, twenty feet. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 16, 1961)  
8.08.230 - Landscaping and fencing. 
A.  All areas of a mobile home park or trailer park not occupied by paved roadways or pathways, and not otherwise occupied by park facilities, shall be landscaped and maintained. Native and ornamental trees with a height of twenty feet or greater shall be retained unless their removal is specifically allowed by the planning commission. 
B.  The planning commission may require that the outer boundaries of the mobile home park be enclosed on all sides by a substantial fence, a hedge or similar border of a design approved by it. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 17, 1961)  
8.08.240 - Lighting requirements. 
In every mobile home park or trailer park there shall be installed and kept burning from sunset to sunrise sufficient artificial light to adequately illuminate every building containing public toilets and public showers, and any other area which the planning commission may deem necessary. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 21, 1961)  
8.08.250 - Fire protection equipment. 
Fire hydrants and fire protection equipment shall be provided as required and approved by the fire chief and shall conform to local ordinances and applicable state laws. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 18, 1961)  
8.08.260 - Liquefied petroleum gases. 
Liquefied petroleum gases shall be handled and used in accordance with applicable state laws. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 35, 1961)  
8.08.270 - Cabanas and ramadas. 
The laws and regulations pertaining to cabanas and ramadas established pursuant to laws of the state, as amended from time to time, shall govern the construction and maintenance of cabanas and ramadas in the city. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 36, 1961)  
8.08.280 - Sanitation facilities. 
The health officer may formulate and enforce rules and regulations which are consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter. The health officer is empowered to formulate from time to time and to enforce any rules and regulations that such officer may deem advisable bearing on any matters of sanitation or housing governing the operation of trailer parks or mobile home parks. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 22, 1961)  
8.08.290 - Bath and toilet facilities. 
A.  Public toilets, baths and lavatories shall be installed and maintained for each sex in accordance with the following ratio of trailer sizes: 
Sites 	Toilets 	Baths 	Lavatories 
2—30 	3 	2 	2 
31—70 	3 	3 	3 
 
One additional toilet and one additional bath shall be provided for each sex for each fifty additional sites or fractional part thereof in excess of seventy-one sites. 
B.  All toilet facilities for dependent trailers shall not be farther than two hundred feet from each trailer site. 
C.  Each toilet shall be for the exclusive use of the occupants of the trailer sites in the trailer park or mobile home park. 
D.  In every mobile home park or trailer park, water closets for men shall be distinctly marked "Men" and water closets for women shall be distinctly marked "Women." 
E.  In every mobile home park or trailer park shower baths or other bathing facilities with hot and cold running water shall be installed in separate compartments. Every compartment shall be provided with a self-closing door or otherwise equipped with a waterproof draw curtain. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 24, 1961)  
8.08.300 - Laundry and service buildings. 
There shall be constructed in every mobile home park the following service facilities: 
A.  A permanent building or compartment in a building for a laundry use, with not less than two laundry trays to be supplied with hot and cold running water for each three acres or major fraction thereof. 
B.  Flush toilets, in separate compartments for each sex shall be provided, necessary to conform to this chapter, for dependent and independent trailers respectively. 
C.  The same number of washbasins, equipped with hot and cold running water, as the required number of toilets, shall be provided and maintained in a sanitary condition within both the female and male divisions of the service building. 
D.  The same number of baths or showers, for each sex, as toilets required, shall be installed in each service building, or division of it. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 23, 1961)  
8.08.310 - Disposal of garbage and refuse. 
Acceptable means for the disposal of garbage, refuse and other waste matter shall be provided. 
A.  If specific disposal areas are provided, they shall be enclosed and roofed and situated no more than two hundred feet from any site to be served thereby. 
B.  One or more metal garbage cans of the minimum capacity of thirty gallons with tight-fitting covers shall be provided for every two mobile homes or fraction thereof. 
C.  All areas of the park shall be kept free and clear from the accumulation of refuse, garbage, rubbish or other debris. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 25, 1961)  
8.08.320 - Keeping of animals. 
The keeping of any barn yard animal, including poultry, is prohibited in any mobile home park. Dogs shall not be permitted to run at-large. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 28, 1961)  
8.08.330 - Wastewater under trailer. 
A.  Wastewater or material from sinks or other plumbing fixtures shall not be deposited upon the surface of the ground, and all such fixtures must be connected to a sewer system. 
B.  The space beneath each mobile home or trailer shall be kept clear of refuse and rubbish and shall not be used for storage. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 26, 1961)  
8.08.340 - Park operator register. 
Every person who owns or operates a mobile home park shall keep a register in which shall be entered: 
A.  The name and address of each guest who is the owner or operator of an automobile or mobile home, and the name and address of each member of his party for which space is rented. 
B.  The make, type and license number of the automobile, and mobile home, if any, and the state in which such vehicle or vehicles is or are registered and the year of registration. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 27, 1961)  
8.08.350 - Caretaker requirements—Enforcement authority. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate or maintain, or cause or permit to be operated or maintained, any mobile home park, unless there is a caretaker in the park at all times. The caretaker shall enforce all parts of this chapter governing the operation and maintenance of mobile home parks. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 29, 1961)  
8.08.360 - Burning prohibited. 
The burning of trash, garbage and refuse is prohibited in all mobile homes or trailer parks. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 34, 1961)  
8.08.370 - Tent camping prohibited. 
Camping in tents is prohibited in all mobile home parks. 
(Ord. 127 N.S. § 33, 1961)  
8.08.380 - Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 25, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 25, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 8.08.380 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8.08.380 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 127 N.S., § 39, adopted in 1961; and Ord. 1192 N.S., § 9, adopted in 1994.  
Chapter 8.16 - LITTER 
 
8.16.010 - Short title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Morgan Hill Anti-Litter Ordinance." 
(Ord. 105 N.S. § 1, 1959)  
8.16.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as set forth in this section. When not inconsistent with the text, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
A.  "Aircraft" means any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The term "aircraft" means and includes helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons. 
B.  "Authorized private receptacle" means a litter storage and collection receptacle as required and authorized in the city garbage collection ordinance. 
C.  "City" means the city of Morgan Hill, California. 
D.  "Commercial handbill" means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature: 
1.  Which advertises for sale any merchandise, products, commodity or thing; or 
2.  Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or 
3.  Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this chapter shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided, that nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of the state, or under any ordinance of the city; or 
4.  Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
E.  "Garbage" means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
F.  "Litter" means garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined in this section and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as prohibited in this chapter, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
G.  "Newspaper" means any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, means and includes any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public. 
H.  "Noncommercial handbill" means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper. 
I.  "Park" means a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
J.  "Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
K.  "Private property" means any dwelling, house, premises, building or other structure, designed to be used either wholly or in part for private residential, commercial, industrial or open space purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
L.  "Public place" means any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings. 
M.  "Refuse" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes. 
N.  "Rubbish" means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
O.  "Vehicle" means every device in, upon or by which any person shall or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. 1306 N.S. § 1, 1996; Ord. 105 N.S. § 2, 1959)  
8.16.030 - Provisions alternative to state statutes. 
The provisions and procedures of this chapter are an alternative to the procedures set forth in Chapter 13, Part 2, Division 3, Title 4 of the California Government Code. 
(Ord. 105 N.S. § 22, 1959)  
8.16.040 - Maintenance of private premises. 
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
(Ord. 105 N.S. § 19, 1959)  
8.16.050 - Littering on occupied private property unlawful. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. 
(Ord. 105 N.S. § 18, 1959)  
8.16.060 - Littering on public places. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the city except in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles for collection, or in official city dumps. No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any city owned receptacle located in a public place the garbage or litter which was accumulated in the residence or place of business occupied by such person. 
(Ord. 105 N.S. § 3, 1959)  
8.16.070 - Placement of litter in receptacles—Prevention of scattering. 
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Ord. 105 N.S. § 4, 1959)  
8.16.080 - Maintenance of owners or occupants of businesses. 
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter. 
(Ord. 105 N.S. § 6, 1959)  
8.16.090 - Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited. 
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
(Ord. 105 N.S. § 5, 1959)  
8.16.100 - Littering on vacant lots unlawful. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city whether owned by such person or not. 
(Ord. 105 N.S. § 20, 1959)  
8.16.110 - Litter thrown by persons in vehicles prohibited. 
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon private property. 
(Ord. 105 N.S. § 7, 1959)  
8.16.120 - Truck loads causing litter. 
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. 
(Ord. 105 N.S. § 8, 1959)  
8.16.130 - Litter in parks. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except in public receptacles and in such manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 105 N.S. § 9, 1959)  
8.16.140 - Litter in lakes and fountains. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city. 
(Ord. 105 N.S. § 10, 1959)  
8.16.150 - Posting notices prohibited. 
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamp post, public utility pole or shade tree, or upon any public structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law. 
(Ord. 105 N.S. § 17, 1959)  
8.16.160 - Distribution of handbills—Inhabited private premises—Exceptions. 
A.  No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handling or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private premises; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, as provided in this chapter, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. 
B.  Exemption for Mail and Newspapers. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers, as defined in this chapter, except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Ord. 105 N.S. § 15, 1959)  
8.16.170 - Distribution of handbills—Respecting property owners' rights. 
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on such premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisements" or any similar notice, indicating in any matter that the occupants of such premises do not desire to be molested, or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises. 
(Ord. 105 N.S. § 14, 1959)  
8.16.180 - Distribution of handbills—Uninhabited private premises. 
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. 
(Ord. 105 N.S. § 13, 1959)  
8.16.190 - Distribution of handbills—Public places. 
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city, nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. 
(Ord. 105 N.S. § 11, 1959)  
8.16.200 - Distribution of handbills—On vehicles. 
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall be unlawful, in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it. 
(Ord. 105 N.S. § 12, 1959)  
8.16.210 - Dropping litter from aircraft. 
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the city any litter, handbill or any other object. 
(Ord. 105 N.S. § 16, 1959)  
8.16.220 - Enforcement authority. 
All police officers, the health officer and his duly appointed deputies, and the fire chief of the city are empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to issue citations or make arrests for violations thereof. 
(Ord. 105 N.S. § 21, 1959)  
8.16.230 - Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 26, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 26, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 8.16.230 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8.16.230 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 105 N.S., § 23, adopted in 1959; and Ord. 1192 N.S., § 11, adopted in 1994.  
Chapter 8.20 - WEED ABATEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2268 N.S., § 3, adopted Feb. 21, 2018, amended Ch. 8.20 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 8.20, §§ 8.20.010—8.20.120, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2178 N.S., § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 2015. 
 
8.20.010 - Weeds defined. 
"Weeds," as used in this chapter, means all weeds growing upon streets, alleys, sidewalks or private property in the city and includes any of the following: 
A.  Weeds which bear or may bear seeds of a downy or wingy nature; 
B.  Weeds and indigenous grasses which may attain such large growth as to become, when dry, a fire menace to adjacent improved property; 
C.  Weeds which are otherwise noxious or dangerous; 
D.  Poison oak and poison ivy when the conditions of growth are such as to constitute a menace to the public health; 
E.  Accumulation of garden refuse, cuttings and other combustible trash. 
(Ord. No. 2268 N.S., § 3, 2-21-2018)  
8.20.020 - Duty to remove. 
Every property owner shall remove or destroy such weeds from his/her property, and in the abutting half of any street or alley between the lot lines as extended. No owner, agent, lessee or other person occupying or having charge or control of any building, lot or premises within the city shall permit weeds to remain upon the premises, or public sidewalks or streets or alleys between such premises and the centerline of any public street or alley. 
(Ord. No. 2268 N.S., § 3, 2-21-2018)  
8.20.030 - Council resolution declaring nuisance. 
Whenever any such weeds are growing upon any private property or properties or in any street or alley within the city, the city council shall pass a resolution listing those properties with weeds thereon, and the owners thereof, declaring this condition to be a nuisance and ordering the chief of the fire department or designee, who may be a contracted program administrator, to give notice of the passage of such resolution by posting and publication in the manner and for the time set forth in this chapter, and stating therein that, unless such nuisance is abated without delay by the destruction or removal of such weeds, the work of abating such nuisance will be done by city authorities or by a contractor or subcontractor employed to do so by the city; and the expense thereof assessed upon the lots and lands from which, and/or in the front and rear of which, such weeds shall have been destroyed or removed. Such resolution shall fix the time and place for hearing any objections to the proposed destruction or removal of such weeds. 
(Ord. No. 2268 N.S., § 3, 2-21-2018)  
8.20.040 - Notice to destroy weeds—Form. 
The notice shall be in substantially the following form: 
Notice to Destroy Weeds 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on ___, pursuant to the provisions of Section 8.20.030 of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code ("MHMC"), the City Council of the City of Morgan Hill ("City") passed a resolution declaring that all weeds growing upon any private property or in any public street or alley, as defined in MHMC Section 8.20.010, constitutes a public nuisance, which nuisance must be abated by the destruction or removal thereof. 
NOTICE IS FURTHER GIVEN that property owners shall, without delay, remove all such weeds from their property, and the abutting half of the street in front and alleys, if any, behind such property, and between the lot lines thereof as extended, or such weeds will be destroyed or removed and such nuisance abated by City authorities or the City's contracted administrator, in which case the cost of such destruction or removal will be assessed upon the lots and lands from which, or from the front or rear of which, such weeds shall have been destroyed or removed; and such cost will constitute a lien upon such lots or lands until paid, and will be collected upon the next tax roll upon which general municipal taxes are collected. All property owners having any objections to the proposed destruction or removal of such weeds are hereby notified to attend a meeting of the City Council of the City, to be held in the Council Chambers located at 17555 Peak Avenue, Morgan Hill on ___, at ___ A./P.M., when and where their objections will be heard and given due consideration. 
Dated this ___ day of ___, 20___. 
_______ 
Chief of Fire Department 
City of Morgan Hill 
(Ord. No. 2268 N.S., § 3, 2-21-2018)  
8.20.050 - Order to abate nuisance. 
The council shall by resolution order the chief of the fire department or designee to abate such nuisance, or cause the same to be abated, by having the weeds referred to, destroyed or removed by cutting, digging, chemical spraying or any other method as may be determined by the chief of the fire department or designee. The chief of the fire department and his/her deputies, assistants, employees, contracting agents, or other representatives are expressly authorized to enter upon private property for that purpose. Any property owner shall have the right to destroy or remove such weeds himself/herself or have the same destroyed or removed at his/her own expense; provided, that such weeds shall have been removed prior to the arrival of the chief of the fire department or his/her authorized representatives to inspect for or remove them. 
(Ord. No. 2268 N.S., § 3, 2-21-2018)  
8.20.060 - Account and report of cost. 
The chief of the fire department or his/her designee shall keep an account of the cost of abating such nuisance and embody such account in a report and assessment list to the city. Such report shall refer to each separate lot or parcel of land by description sufficient to identify such lot or parcel, together with the expense proposed to be assessed against each separate lot or parcel of land. The expense shall include any additional charges necessary to pay for the costs of administering the program. 
(Ord. No. 2268 N.S., § 3, 2-21-2018)  
8.20.070 - Posting and publishing notice of report. 
The city clerk shall post copies of such report and assessment list on the bulletin board located at the Council Chamber at 17555 Peak Avenue, Morgan Hill, together with the notice of the posting thereof, and of the time and place when and where it will be submitted to the administrative hearing officer for hearing and confirmation, notifying property owners that they may appear at such time and place and object to any matter contained therein. A like notice shall also be published twice in a newspaper of general circulation, published, and circulated within the city. The posting and first publication of such notice shall be made and completed at least ten days before the time such report shall have been submitted to the administrative hearing officer. The notice, as so posted and published, shall be substantially in the following form: 
Notice of Hearing on Report and Assessment for Weed Abatement 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on ___, the chief of the fire department of the City of Morgan Hill ("City"), filed with the City a report and assessment on abatement of hazardous vegetation within the City, copies of which are posted on the bulletin board in the front office of the Council Chambers at 17555 Peak Avenue, Morgan Hill, California. 
NOTICE IS FURTHER GIVEN that on ___, at the hour of ___ A./P.M., in the ___ located at ___ said report and assessment list shall be presented to the Administrative Hearing Officer for consideration and confirmation, and that any and all persons interested, having any objections to said report and assessment list, or to any matter or thing contained herein, may appear at said time and place and be heard. 
Dated this ___ day of ___, 20___. 
_______ 
City Clerk 
City of Morgan Hill 
(Ord. No. 2268 N.S., § 3, 2-21-2018)  
8.20.080 - Notification of property owner. 
A.  In addition to the posting and publication required by Section 8.20.070 of this chapter, an additional notice entitled "Notice to Destroy Weeds" in words not less than one inch in height shall be conspicuously posted in front of the property on which or in front of which the nuisance exists, or if the property has no frontage upon any street or highway, then upon the portion of the property nearest to the street or public right-of-way, and most likely to give actual notice to the owner. Beneath the words "Notice to Destroy Weeds" shall be a reference in smaller print to the resolution passed pursuant to Section 8.20.030 of this chapter. 
B.  As an alternate to actual posting of the property as set forth in subsection A of this section, the chief of the fire department or designee may mail by first-class mail, a copy of the notice provided for in Section 8.20.070 of this chapter, to the property owner on whose property the nuisance exists. "Property owner" means the person or persons to whom the land in question is assessed in the last equalized county assessment roll available on the date of the resolution of the city council was passed pursuant to Section 8.20.030 of this chapter. The posting or mailing shall be done ten days before the hearing date before the city council. Service by mail shall be deemed complete at the time of deposit in the U.S. mail. 
C.  In circumstances where no valid mailing address can be located, a copy of the notice provided for in Section 8.20.070 of this chapter shall be posted on the property in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such property. In addition, the " the notice provided for in Section 8.20.070 of this chapter shall be mailed by certified mail with return receipt requested to the last known address of the owner and current occupant of the property (if such can be ascertained). 
D.  The failure of the property owner to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of the proceedings under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2268 N.S., § 3, 2-21-2018)  
8.20.090 - Owner to notify city of improvements. 
A.  The owner, agent, lessee or other person occupying or having charge or control of any building, lot or premises within the city who permits weeds to remain on the premises in violation of Section 8.20.020 of this chapter, shall give written notice to the fire chief or his/her identified designee of any improvements which have been placed on the premises. The notice shall include all subsurface improvements, together with all surface improvements for which a building permit has not been issued, including, but not necessarily limited to, boundary and survey markers, pipes and accessories, crops, and plantings. 
B.  The notice of improvement shall be submitted each year not later than thirty days subsequent to the time set forth the hearing, pursuant to Section 8.20.040 of this chapter, by the owner, agent, lessee or other person occupying or having charge or control of any building, lot or premises. 
C.  The failure to give such notice shall constitute a waiver of any right for damages resulting from injury to such improvements resulting from the acts of the city and its authorized representative who enters upon such property to remove or destroy weeds. This section shall not be construed to subject the city or its representatives to any liability where none should exist, in the absence of these provisions. 
(Ord. No. 2268 N.S., § 3, 2-21-2018)  
8.20.100 - Hearing and confirmation. 
A.  At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering such report, the administrative hearing officer shall hear the same together with any objections which may be raised by any of the property owners liable to be assessed for the work of abating such nuisance, and the chief of fire department or his/her designee shall attend such meeting with his/her record thereof, and upon such hearing, the administrative hearing officer may make such modifications in the proposed assessment therefor as he/she may deem necessary, after which such report and assessment list shall be confirmed 
B.  The amount of the cost of abating such nuisance upon, or in the front or rear of, the various lots or parcels of land respectively referred to in such report, shall constitute special assessments against such respective lots or parcels of land, and after thus made and confirmed, shall constitute a lien on such property for the amount of such assessments, until paid. 
(Ord. No. 2268 N.S., § 3, 2-21-2018)  
8.20.110 - Collection of assessment. 
A.  The director of finance or designee shall cause the amount of the assessment to be entered on the city assessment roll opposite the description of the particular property, and the amount shall be collected together with all other taxes thereon upon the property. Thereafter, such amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as general city taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and interest, and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provide for city taxes. All laws and ordinances applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of city taxes are made applicable to such special assessment. 
B.  The property owner has the option, if he/she so desires of paying the assessment directly to the collector's office before the entry on the assessment roll. 
(Ord. No. 2268 N.S., § 3, 2-21-2018)  
8.20.120 - Weed Abatement Program. 
Upon passage of the resolution by city council under Section 8.20.030 of this chapter, the property owner shall be placed into the city's weed abatement program. Once in the weed abatement program, a property owner is only removed from the program once one of the following conditions occurs: 1) the property is determined, during an inspection, to be free of weeds as defined in this chapter for three consecutive years, 2) the property is developed or landscaped to remove the threat of weeds as defined by this chapter, or 3) the city council determines, at a public hearing confirming the properties to be included in the program as held in conformance with Section 8.20.070, that the property owner should be removed from the program. 
(Ord. No. 2268 N.S., § 3, 2-21-2018)  
Chapter 8.22 - ABANDONED AND WRECKED MOTOR VEHICLES 
 
8.22.010 - Nuisance declared. 
The presence of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof, on private property or public property, not including highways, except as expressly permitted in this chapter, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 757 § 1 (IV-15-1.01), 1986)  
8.22.020 - Definitions. 
The following words shall have the following meanings for purposes of this chapter: 
1.  "Highway" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for the purpose of vehicular traffic. "Highways" includes streets. 
2.  "Owner of land" means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
3.  "Owner of vehicle" means the last registered owner and legal owner of record. 
4.  "Public property" means and includes any real property used or dedicated for any public purpose but does not include "highways." 
5.  "Streets" means and includes public streets, avenues, roads, highways, squares, lanes, alleys, courts or places. 
6.  "Vehicle" means any device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. 757 § 1 (IV-15-2.01), 1986)  
8.22.030 - Storage prohibited—Exceptions. 
No person shall park, store, leave or allow or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any vehicle or parts thereof which is in a wrecked, dismantled, inoperative or abandoned condition upon any private or public property within the city. This prohibition shall not apply to: 
A.  A vehicle or parts thereof which is completely enclosed within a building or obscured behind a solid fence in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
B.  A vehicle or parts thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantled, licensed vehicle dealer or junk or wrecking yard; provided, however, that this exception shall not authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under any other provisions of law. 
(Ord. 757 § 1 (IV-15-3.01(part)), 1986)  
8.22.040 - Administration—Authority to enter upon private property. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the chief of police. In the enforcement of this chapter, the chief or his designate may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or to obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause to be removed a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall also be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of any vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 757 § 1 (IV-15-4.01), 1986)  
8.22.050 - Administrative costs. 
The city council shall from time to time determine and set by resolution an amount to be assessed for administrative costs incurred in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter in addition to the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or parts thereof under this chapter. The cost of administration may be set as a fixed sum per removal or as a percentage of the actual cost of removal. 
(Ord. 757 § 1 (IV-15-5.01), 1986)  
8.22.060 - Abatement and removal notices and order. 
Upon determining the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the city, the chief of police shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedures prescribed below: 
A.  A notice and order to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance shall be sent by registered mail to the owner of the land, and to the owner of the vehicle if known or accountable. The notice shall be in substantially the following form and shall be sent ten days in advance of any further abatement action: 
NOTICE AND ORDER TO ABATE NUISANCE 
(Landowner) 
 As owner shown on the most recent assessment roll of the land located at ________, you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 8.22 of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code, has determined that there exists upon said land an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, registered to ___________ or persons unknown, license number _______ which such vehicle and/or parts constitute a public nuisance. 
 You are hereby ordered to abate said nuisance by removing said vehicle (or parts) within ten (10) days from the date of mailing of this notice. Upon failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the City. The costs thereof, together with administrative costs will be assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or parts) is located. 
 As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or parts) is located, you may, within ten (10) days after the mailing of this notice, request a hearing. If such request is not received by the Chief of Police within such ten (10) day period, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or parts) and to assess the costs as aforesaid without a hearing. 
 You may submit a sworn written statement within the ten (10) day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or parts) on said land, listing your reasons. Such statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing. Your presence is not required. You may appear in person or instead, you may present a sworn written statement as described. 
Notice Mailed:  _____
(Date) 	_____
Chief of Police 
 
NOTICE AND ORDER TO ABATE NUISANCE 
(Vehicle Owner) 
 As the last registered legal owner of record of ___________ (vehicle), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Chapter 8.22 of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code has determined that said vehicle (or parts) exist as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle and constitute a public nuisance. 
 You are ordered to abate said nuisance by removing said vehicle (or parts) within ten (10) days of the date of mailing this notice. You may, within ten (10) days after mailing of this notice, request a hearing. If no request is received by the Chief of Police within such ten (10) day period, the Chief shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or parts) and to assess the costs as aforesaid without a hearing. 
Notice Mailed:  _____
(Date) 	_____
Chief of Police 
 
(Ord. 757 § 1 (IV-15-6.01), 1986)  
8.22.070 - Public hearing. 
A.  Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or of the land upon which it is located received by the chief of police within ten days after the mailing of notice and order, a public hearing shall be held by the chief of police or designee regarding abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof and the assessment of the administrative cost and costs of removal against the property on which the vehicle (or parts) is located. 
B.  If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such ten-day period, said statement shall be construed as request for a hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that the identification numbers are not available to determine the ownership. If a request for hearing is not received within said ten days after the mailing of the notice, the city shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a hearing. 
C.  All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the chief of police or designee who shall hear all facts and testimony he deems pertinent. Said facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts and the circumstances concerning its location on the real property. The chief of police shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial. 
D.  The chief of police may impose such conditions and take such other actions as he deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter, and may delay the time for removal of the vehicle (or parts) if, in his opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the hearing, the chief of police or designee may find that the vehicle (or parts) have been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or are inoperative and may order the same removed from the real property as a public nuisance and dispose of it or them as hereafter provided and determine the administrative cost and the cost of the removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle (or parts) and the correct identification number and a license number of the vehicle, if available. 
E.  If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the property without the consent of the owner of the land and that he has not acquiesced in its presence, the costs of the administration or removal of the vehicle (or parts) shall not be assessed against the property owner. 
F.  If the landowner submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land but does not appear, or if any interested party makes a written presentation but does not appear at the hearing, he shall be notified in writing of the decision. 
(Ord. 757 § 1 (IV-15-7.01), 1986)  
8.22.080 - Removal—Notice—Transmittal of registration. 
Five days after the adoption of an order declaring the vehicle (or parts) to be a public nuisance, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or an automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has been removed, under the provisions of this chapter, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable. Within five days after the date of the removal of the vehicle (or parts), notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle (or parts) removed. At the same time, there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. 
(Ord. 757 § 1 (IV-15-8.01), 1986)  
8.22.090 - Assessment and collection of costs. 
If the costs of administration of this chapter and cost of the removal charged against the landowner pursuant to this chapter are not paid within thirty days of the date of the order, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code or as amended, and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. Said assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. 
(Ord. 757 § 1 (IV-15-9.01), 1986)  
8.22.100 - Abatement. 
It is unlawful for any person to abandon, park, store or leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing or leaving of any licensed or unlicensed vehicle (or parts thereof) which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition upon any real property not including highways within the city for a period in excess of three days unless such vehicle (or parts) is completely enclosed within a building or secured by a sight-proof fence in a lawful manner not plainly visible from the street or other real property or unless such a vehicle is stored or parked in a lawful manner on real property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, licensed junkyard or other similar duly licensed business conducted pursuant to the law and such parking or storing of vehicles or parts is necessary to the operation of that business. 
(Ord. 757 § 1 (IV-15-10.01), 1986)  
8.22.110 - Failure to remove. 
It is unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to remove any abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts or to refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 757 § 1 (IV-15-11.01), 1986)  
8.22.120 - Interference with abatement unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or refuse admittance to any person authorized by this chapter to enter upon real property for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 757 § 1 (IV-15-12.01), 1986)  
8.22.130 - Provisions not exclusive. 
This chapter is not intended to be the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. Rather, it is intended to supplement and be in addition to other regulations, codes, statutes and ordinances theretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 757 § 1 (IV-15-3.01(part)), 1986)  
8.22.140 - Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 27, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 27, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 8.22.140 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8.22.140 pertained to penalty and derived from Ord. 757, § 1(IV-15-13.01), adopted in 1986.  
Chapter 8.24 - JUNKYARDS AND AUTO WRECKERS 
 
8.24.010 - Fences required—Specifications. 
All persons, firms, corporations or associations within the city, dealing in buying, selling or dispensing junk or wrecking, selling and/or storing old automobiles and automobile parts, and storing their products in lots in open spaces shall, upon the final adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, erect, keep and maintain solid board fences entirely surrounding the junk and/or wrecked cars, and/or wrecked auto parts. The fence shall be not less than six feet in height. 
(Ord. 37 § 1, 1949)  
8.24.020 - Storage of vehicles not to extend above fence. 
No person, firm, corporation or association maintaining and operating a junkyard or a wrecked car lot, shall pile, stack or store the junk or wrecked cars or wrecked auto parts in such a manner as to permit the junk, wrecked cars or wrecked auto parts to extend above the top of the fence. 
(Ord. 37 § 2, 1949)  
8.24.030 - Violation. 
It is unlawful to violate any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 28, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 28, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 8.24.030 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8.24.030 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 37, § 3, adopted in 1949; Ord. 1192 N.S., § 12, adopted in 1994; and Ord. 1320 N.S., § 7, adopted in 1997.  
Chapter 8.28 - NOISE 
 
8.28.010 - Council findings and declarations. 
The city council finds and declares as follows: 
A.  That the making, creation or maintenance of loud, unnecessary, unnatural or unusual noises which are prolonged, unusual and unnatural in their time, place and use affect and are a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the residents of the city; and 
B.  That the necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions set forth in this chapter is declared as a matter of legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the provisions of this chapter are in pursuance of, and for the purpose of, securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity and the peace and quiet of the city and its inhabitants. 
(Ord. 328 N.S. § A (part), 1972)  
8.28.020 - Unlawful behavior defined. 
It is unlawful for any person to make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, disturbing, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, health, repose, peace, or safety of another person within the city. 
(Ord. 328 N.S. § A (part), 1972) 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 29, 5-2-2018)  
8.28.030 - Police and fire sirens exempted from chapter provisions. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the proper use of a siren or other alarm by a police, fire or authorized emergency vehicle as defined in the California Vehicle Code. Likewise, any stationary fire alarm operated by the fire department of the city is exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 328 N.S. § A (part), 1972)  
8.28.040 - Enumeration of unlawful noises. 
Unlawful noises include: 
A.  Animals and Birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long-continued noise, disturbs the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity; 
B.  Auto Body Repairs. 
1.  The repairing of any auto body, or part thereof, except within a completely enclosed building and the noises therefrom are reasonably confined to such building, and 
2.  The repairing of any auto body, or part thereof, between the hours of eight p.m. and seven a.m., which shall be deemed a violation of the provisions of this section; 
C.  Blowers, Fans, and Combustion Engines. The operation of any noise-creating blower, power fan or internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device to deaden such noise; 
D.  1.  Construction activities as limited below. "Construction activities" are defined as including but not limited to excavation, grading, paving, demolition, construction, alteration or repair of any building, site, street or highway, delivery or removal of construction material to a site, or movement of construction materials on a site. Construction activities are prohibited other than between the hours of seven a.m. and eight p.m., Monday through Friday and between the hours of nine a.m. to six p.m. on Saturday. Construction activities may not occur on Sundays or federal holidays. No third person, including but not limited to landowners, construction company owners, contractors, subcontractors, or employers, shall permit or allow any person working on construction activities which are under their ownership, control or direction to violate this provision. Construction activities may occur in the following cases without violation of this provision: 
a.  In the event of urgent necessity in the interests of the public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the chief building official, which permit may be granted for a period of not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. 
b.  If the chief building official determines that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the construction activities between the hours of eight p.m. and seven a.m., and that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, the chief building official may grant permission for such work to be done between the hours of eight p.m. and seven a.m. upon an application being made at the time the permit for the work is issued or during the progress of the work. 
c.  The city council finds that construction by the resident of a single residence does not have the same magnitude or frequency of noise impacts as a larger construction project. Therefore, the resident of a single residence may perform construction activities on that home during the hours in this subsection, as well as on Sundays and federal holidays from nine a.m. to six p.m., provided that such activities are limited to the improvement or maintenance undertaken by the resident on a personal basis. 
d.  Public work projects are exempt from this section and the public works director shall determine the hours of construction for public works projects. 
e.  Until November 30, 1998, construction activities shall be permitted between the hours of ten a.m. to six p.m. on Sundays, subject to the following conditions. No power-driven vehicles, equipment or tools may be used during construction activities, except on the interior of a building or other structure which is enclosed by exterior siding (including windows and doors) and roofing, and which windows and doors are closed during construction activities. Construction activities must be situated at least one hundred fifty feet from the nearest occupied dwelling. No delivery or removal of construction material to a site, or movement of construction materials on a site, is permitted. No activity, including but not limited to the playing of radios, tape players, compact disc players or other devices, which creates a loud or unusual noise which offends, disturbs or harasses the peace and quiet of the persons of ordinary sensibilities beyond the confines of the property from which the sound emanates is allowed. 
2.  If it is determined necessary in order to ensure compliance with this section, the chief building official may require fences, gates or other barriers prohibiting access to a construction site by construction crews during hours in which construction is prohibited by this subsection. The project manager of each project shall be responsible for ensuring the fences, gates or barriers are locked and/or in place during hours in which no construction is allowed. This subsection shall apply to construction sites other than public works projects or single dwelling units which are not a part of larger projects. 
E.  Defective or Loaded Vehicles. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise; 
F.  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom; 
G.  Loading or Unloading Vehicles and Opening Boxes. The creation of loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers; 
H.  Loudspeakers, Amplifiers and Similar Advertising Devices. The using or operating or permitting to be played, used or operated, of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure; 
I.  Noises Adjacent to Schools, Courts, Churches and Hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same is in use or adjacent to any hospital, which noise unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital; provided, conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the street is adjacent to a school, hospital or court; 
J.  Pile Drivers, Hammers and Similar Equipment. The operation, between the hours of eight p.m. and seven a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise; 
K.  Radios, Phonographs, Musical Instruments and Similar Devices. 
1.  The using or operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated, of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighborhood inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto, and 
2.  The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of eleven p.m. and seven a.m. in such manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which such device is located which shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of the provisions of this section; 
L.  Shouting by Hawkers and Peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood; 
M.  Steam Whistles. The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon the request of proper city authorities; 
N.  Vehicle Horns and Signaling Devices. 
1.  The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar or other vehicle on any street or public place of the city except as a danger warning, 
2.  The creation, by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound, 
3.  The sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time, 
4.  The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity, 
5.  The use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust, and 
6.  The use of any such signaling device when traffic is delayed for any reason. 
(Ord. 1405 N.S. § 1, 1998; Ord. 1196 N.S. § 4 Exh. A, 1994; Ord. 328 N.S. § A (part), 1972) 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 29, 5-2-2018)  
8.28.050 - Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 29, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 29, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 8.28.050 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8.28.050 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 328 N.S., § A(part), adopted in 1972; Ord. 1192 N.S., § 13, adopted in 1994; and Ord. 1320 N.S., § 8, adopted in 1997.  
Chapter 8.32 - FIREWORKS 
 
8.32.010 - Sale or possession of fireworks—Prohibited. 
Commencing March 1, 1977, it is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to possess, store, sell or offer to sell at wholesale or retail any fireworks within the city limits. 
(Ord. 442 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
8.32.020 - Public display authorized when. 
The city council may authorize a special public display of fireworks under the supervision of the fire chief. 
(Ord. 442 N.S. § A (part), 1977)  
8.32.030 - Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to violate this chapter or any provision thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 30, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 30, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 8.32.030 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8.32.030 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 442 N.S., § A(part), adopted in 1977; and Ord. 1192 N.S., § 14, adopted in 1994.  
Chapter 8.40 - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS STORAGE  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
8.40.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is the protection of health, life, resources and property through prevention and control of unauthorized discharges of hazardous materials. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  "Abandoned," when referring to a storage facility, means out of service and not safeguarded in compliance with this chapter. 
B.  "Facility" means a building or buildings, appurtenant structures and surrounding land area used by a single location or site. 
C.  "Hazard class" means Explosives A, Explosives B, Explosives C, blasting agents, flammable liquids, combustible liquids, flammable solids, oxidizers, organic peroxides, corrosive materials, flammable gases, nonflammable gases, Poisons A, Poisons B, irritating materials, etiologic agents, radioactive materials, other regulated materials (ORM) A, B, C, D and E. For purposes of this chapter, the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) definitions in 49 CFR Part 173, as amended shall be utilized; however, whenever the definitions in 49 CFR Part 173 refer to transportation or hazards associated with transportation, they shall be deemed to refer to storage or other regulated activity under this chapter. 
D.  "Hazardous material" means any material which is subject to regulation pursuant to Article IV of this chapter. A mixture shall be deemed to be a hazardous material if it either is a waste and contains any material regulated pursuant to Article IV of this chapter, or is a nonwaste and contains one percent by volume or more of any material regulated pursuant to Article IV of this chapter. 
E.  "Officer" means the employee assigned by the city to administer the provisions of this chapter or any designee of such employee. 
F.  "Permit" means any hazardous materials storage permit issued pursuant to this chapter, as well as any additional approvals thereto. 
G.  "Permit quantity limit" means the maximum amount of hazardous material that can be stored in a storage facility. Separate permit quantity limits will be set for each storage facility for which a permit is obtained in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
H.  "Permittee" means any person, firm or corporation to whom a permit is issued pursuant to this chapter and any authorized representative, agent or designee of such person, firm or corporation. 
I.  "Pipes" means pipeline systems which are used in connection with the storage of hazardous materials exclusively within the confines of a facility and which are not intended to transport hazardous materials in interstate or intrastate commerce or to transfer hazardous materials in bulk to or from a marine vessel. 
J.  "Primary containment" means the first level of containment, i.e., the inside portion of that container which comes into immediate contact on its inner surface with the hazardous material being contained. 
K.  "Product-tight" means impervious to the hazardous material which is contained, or is to be contained, so as to prevent the seepage of the hazardous material from the primary containment. To be product-tight, the container shall be made of a material that is not subject to physical or chemical deterioration by the hazardous material being contained. 
L.  "Secondary containment" means the level of containment external to and separate from the primary containment. 
M.  "Single-walled" means construction with walls made of but one thickness of material. Laminated, coated or clad materials shall be considered as single-walled. 
N.  "Storage facility" means any one combination of tanks, sumps, wet floors, waste treatment facilities, pipes, vaults, portable or fixed containers, equipment, building, structure, installation, site, area, appurtenant structure, or surrounding land area where hazardous materials are stored, used, dispensed, handled, placed, maintained or located. 
O.  "Sump" means a pit or well in which liquids collect. 
P.  "Unauthorized discharge" means any release or emission of any hazardous material which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, unless such release is in accordance with the release regulations of the Bay Area Air Quality Management District and California Air Resources Board, with a national pollutant discharge elimination system permit, with waste discharge requirements established by the regional water quality board pursuant to the Porter Cologne Water Quality Act, or with local sewer pretreatment requirements for publicly owned treatment works.* 
Q.  "Wet floor" means a floor which is used to routinely collect, contain or maintain standing liquids or to transmit standing liquids on a more or less continuous basis. 
R.  "Vadose zone" or "unsaturated zone" means those underlying strata that are above the water table. 
(Ord. 1082 N.S. § 1, 1992; Ord. 849 N.S. § 1, 1987; Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983) 
* Controlling agencies may differ for different local jurisdictions.  
8.40.030 - General obligation—Safety and care. 
No person, firm or corporation, without due regard to intent or negligence, shall cause, suffer or permit the storage or use of hazardous materials: 
1.  In a manner which violates a provision of this chapter or any other local, federal or state statute, code rule or regulation relating to hazardous materials; or 
2.  In a manner which causes an unauthorized discharge of hazardous materials or poses a significant risk of such unauthorized discharge. 
(Ord. 947 N.S. § 1, 1989: Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.040 - Exemptions from specific requirements—Exception. 
The city shall have discretion to exempt an applicant from any specific requirements of this chapter, other than the requirement for secondary containment in underground storage facilities, except as provided in Section 8.40.520 of this chapter, or to require the applicant to meet additional or modified requirements, where such action would be appropriate and consistent with achieving the general obligation of this chapter for protecting public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.050 - Specific obligations. 
A.  Any person, firm or corporation which stores any material regulated by Section 8.40.460 of this chapter, which is not excluded by Section 8.40.470 of this chapter, shall obtain and keep current a hazardous materials storage permit. 
B.  All such hazardous materials shall be contained in conformity with Article V of this chapter. 
C.  The storage of such hazardous materials shall be in conformance with the approved hazardous materials management plan. 
D.  The city shall apply for, and the officer shall consider and issue where appropriate, a permit, in conformity with this chapter, for the storage of hazardous materials by the city in underground storage tank, as those terms are defined in Chapter 6.7 of Division 20 of the California Health and Safety Code, wherever the city's storage facility may be situated. Any other city, county, district or department, or agency of the state which stores any hazardous substance, in an underground storage tank, as those terms are defined in Chapter 6.7 of Division 20 of the California Health and Safety Code, in the city, without a permit meeting the requirements of said Chapter 6.7 issued by such other local agency, shall obtain and keep current a permit from the city which conforms at a minimum to Sections 25284 and 25284.1 of the Health and Safety Code of the state. 
(Ord. 655 N.S (part), 1983: Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.060 - Duties are discretionary. 
Subject to the limitations of due process, notwithstanding, in any other provision of this chapter whenever the words "shall" or "must" are used in establishing a responsibility or duty of the city, its elected or appointed officers, employees or agents, it is the legislative intent that such words establish a discretionary responsibility or duty requiring the exercise of judgment and discretion. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.070 - Professional assistance for city determinations. 
Whenever the approval or satisfaction of the city may be require in this chapter for a design, monitoring, testing or other technical submittal by an applicant or permittee, the city may, in its discretion, require such applicant or permittee, at such applicant's or permittee's sole cost and expense, to retain a suitably qualified independent engineer, or chemist or other appropriate professional consultant, acceptable to the city, for the purpose of evaluating and rendering a professional opinion respecting the adequacy of such submittal to achieve the purposes of this chapter. The city shall be entitled to rely on such evaluation and/or opinion of such engineer, chemist or professional consultant in making the relevant determinations provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.080 - Guidelines. 
Guidelines approved by the city manager shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk. Such guidelines, in the areas addressed therein, shall serve as an interpretation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.090 - Conflicts with other statutes. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter: 
A.  A storage facility regulated by any state or federal agency will be exempted from any conflicting provision of this chapter. 
B.  If the storage facility is required to have a permit from the Department of Health Services under Health and Safety Code Section 25100 et seq., it shall be exempted from any provision of this chapter which is covered by the regulations adopted under the statute cited in this subsection. 
C.  Whenever the requirements of any provision of this chapter conflict with those of the fire code as adopted by the city, the stricter requirement shall prevail. 
(Ord. 1052 N.S. § 2, 1992; Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.100 - Disclaimer of liability. 
A.  The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. The standards set forth in this chapter are minimal standards and this chapter does not imply that compliance will ensure that there will be no unauthorized discharge of hazardous material. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof for any damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. All persons handling, storing, using, processing and disposing of hazardous materials within the city should be and are advised to determine to their own satisfaction the level of protection in addition to that required by this chapter necessary or desirable to ensure that there is no unauthorized discharge of hazardous materials. 
B.  This chapter is not intended to create any different standard or obligation for the storage of carcinogens than is imposed for the storage of other hazardous materials. Hazardous materials are identified as carcinogens in this chapter for public record purposes only and the identification of a material as a carcinogen shall not require a different or stricter application of the provisions of this chapter, nor notice to any person under any circumstances other than those expressly specified in this chapter, nor shall such identification create any other duty or obligation upon the city different from or additional to those duties or obligations applicable to the storage of other hazardous materials. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.105 - Severability. 
In the event any subsection, sentence, clause or phrase incorporated in this chapter is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the chapter. The city council declares that it would have adopted the ordinance codified in this chapter and each and every section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase not declared invalid or unconstitutional without regard to whether any portion of the ordinance would be subsequently declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 1082 N.S. § 3, 1993)  
Article II. - Compliance Schedule 
 
8.40.110 - Effective date. 
The effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter is September 9, 1983. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.120 - New storage facilities. 
A.  As of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, a hazardous materials storage permit for a facility must be obtained prior to the installation or use of any new storage facility unless a building permit for such new storage facility was issued prior to such date. 
B.  The hazardous material management plan must be filed at the time of application for a hazardous material storage permit. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.130 - Existing storage facilities. 
Any storage facility in existence as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or any storage facility for which a building permit was issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, which does not meet the standards of Article V of this chapter, may be permitted pursuant to this chapter as long as it is providing secondary containment for above-grade hazardous materials. In addition, storage facilities which contain hazardous materials which are liquids or solids at standard temperature and pressure (STP) must be monitored in accordance with a plan approved by the city as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 786 N.S. § 3, 1986: Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
Article III. - Permits and Remedial Actions Against Permits 
 
8.40.140 - Permit—Required. 
Any person, firm or corporation which stores any hazardous material shall obtain and keep current a hazardous materials storage permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. One such permit shall be issued for a single facility. Additional approvals shall be obtained for any storage facility thereafter connected, installed, constructed or repaired as required by Section 8.40.590 of this chapter, substantially modified, replaced, closed or removed, or for any change or addition in hazardous materials stored, not in accordance with the prior approval. 
(Ord. 1082 N.S. § 4, 1992: Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.150 - Permit—Application. 
Application for a new, amended or renewed permit or an additional approval shall be made to the designated officer on the form provided by the city. In addition to the information required by such form, the applicant shall submit the hazardous materials management plan required by Section 8.40.640 of this chapter and construction plans, if any, in conformity with Section 8.40.490 of this chapter. The applicant shall specify the permit quantity limit requested to be permitted for each storage facility. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.160 - Permit—Application—Report to the State Water Resources Control Board. 
A.  The city will require its permit applicants and permittees to fill out, in addition to forms required for the city's own purposes under this chapter, standardized forms based on the application form and annual report form prepared by the State Water Resources Control Board as specified by California Health and Safety Code Section 25283.2, and the city will forward these forms to the State Water Resources Control Board. 
B.  However, where any of the information required on such standardized forms is claimed by the permit applicant or permittee as a trade secret shall leave that portion of the form submitted to city blank, except to indicate the words "trade secret," and the permit applicant or permittee shall thereafter, within ten days of submitting the incomplete form to the city, submit the completed form including the trade secret information directly to the State Water Resources Control Board. The city shall have no obligation to protect as a trade secret, any information which is furnished to it for forwarding to the State Water Resources Control Board on these standardized forms. 
(Ord. 655 N.S. (part), 1983: Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.170 - Permit—Application—Investigation. 
The officer to whom an application for a new or renewed permit is made may make such investigation of the applicant and the proposed facility or activity as such officer deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.180 - Permit—Approval. 
A permit shall not be approved until the issuing officer is satisfied that the storage approved adequately conforms to the provisions of this chapter and the applicant has submitted an executed agreement to reimburse the city for any and all reasonable and necessary costs of abatement of any violation of this chapter for which the applicant is held responsible by a court of competent jurisdiction. Such costs shall constitute a lien upon the applicant's real and/or personal property. 
(Ord. 849 N.S. § 2, 1987: Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.190 - Provisional permit. 
If the officer to whom application has been made finds that the proposal does not completely conform to the provisions of this chapter, the officer may approve a provisional permit, subject to conditions to be imposed by the officer, when such a provisional permit is feasible, does not appear to be detrimental to the public interest and the minimum requirements of Section 25284.1 as appropriate of the Health and Safety Code have been complied with. The applicant must be informed in writing of the reasons why a full-term permit was not issued. 
(Ord. 655 N.S. (part), 1983: Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.200 - Temporary permit. 
A temporary permit for storage may be issued where storage does not exceed thirty days and occurs no more frequently than every six months. The containment standards of Article V of this chapter, the hazardous materials management plan of Article VI of this chapter and the inspection records requirements of Article IX of this chapter may be modified as appropriate under these circumstances for the storage of hazardous materials on a non-regular temporary basis. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.210 - Permit issuance—Contents. 
Upon the approval of a temporary, provisional or full-term permit by the officer and upon the payment of any applicable fee, the officer shall issue and deliver the permit to the applicant. The permit shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name and address of the permittee for purposes of notice and service of process; 
B.  The address of the facility for which the permit is issued; 
C.  Authorization of the storage facility(s) approved under the permit, the permit quantity limit(s) and the approved hazard class or classes for the storage facility(s); 
D.  The date the permit is effective; 
E.  The date of expiration; 
F.  When applicable, a designation that the permit is provisional or temporary; 
G.  Any special conditions of the permit. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.220 - Permit issuance—Recordkeeping. 
The officer shall keep a record of all permits issued and all conditions attached thereto. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.230 - Additional approvals. 
A.  When a request for an additional approval is filed as required by Section 8.40.140 of this article, the procedures set forth in this chapter for an application for a permit shall also apply to an application for an additional approval. Each application for an additional approval shall be accompanied by an appropriate amendment to the HMMP. 
B.  If the additional approval is for closure of a storage facility, the permittee shall apply for approval to close such storage facility not less than thirty days prior to the termination of the storage of hazardous materials at the storage facility. The property owner of the property upon which the storage facility existed or exists is responsible for the closure in the event of the facility being abandoned or when the permittee has not complied with Sections 8.40.140 and 8.40.570 of this chapter, provided however that the permittee/storage facility owner/ operator shall not be released from their original responsibilities by such abandonment or failure to comply. Such closure shall be in accordance with a closure plan which describes procedures for terminating the storage of hazardous materials in each storage facility in a manner that: 
1.  Minimizes the need for further maintenance; and 
2.  Verifies that any threat to public health or safety or to the environment from residual hazardous materials in or from the storage facility is minimized or eliminated. Verification includes, but is not limited to, the analytical results of soil or groundwater samples; and 
3.  Demonstrates that hazardous materials that were stored in the storage facility will be removed, disposed of, neutralized or reused in an appropriate manner. 
The thirty-day period may be waived by the city if there are special circumstances requiring such waiver. 
(Ord. 1082 N.S. § 5, 1992; Ord. 849 N.S. § 3, 1987; Ord. 786 N.S. § 10, 1986; Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.240 - Permits—Term. 
A permit may be issued for a term of five years, excepting provisional permits which may be issued for any period of time up to six months and temporary permits which may be issued for no longer than thirty days. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.250 - Permits—Renewal or extension. 
Every application for the renewal of a permit or extension of a provisional permit shall be made at least thirty days prior to the expiration date of such permit. If a timely application for renewal has been submitted, the permit shall remain in effect until the city has made its determination pursuant to Section 8.40.230 of this article, and any administrative appeal pursuant to Sections 8.40.330 through 8.40.370 of this chapter, has been exhausted. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.260 - Environmental Quality Act compliance determinations. 
The city shall make a determination with regard to any application for a permit, an additional approval, or a renewal, within ninety days from the date that the application has been completed or compliance with the appropriate provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), has been completed, whichever occurs later. This time limit may be further extended by mutual agreement between the city and the applicant. 
(Ord. 655 N.S. (part), 1983: Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.270 - Fees. 
A.  The city shall establish fees sufficient to recover its costs in administering the provisions of this chapter and no application shall be accepted unless and until the fees have been paid. 
B.  All permit fees delinquent for thirty days or more shall be subject to an additional charge to be determined by resolution of the city council which shall be added to the amount of the fee collected. 
(Ord. 1082 N.S. § 6, 1992: Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.280 - Delinquent fees. 
All permit fees delinquent for thirty days or more shall be subject to an additional charge to be determined by the city which shall be added to the amount of the fee collected. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.290 - Refund of fees. 
No refund or rebate of a permit fee shall be allowed by reason of the fact that the permit is denied or the permittee discontinues the activity or use of a facility prior to the expiration of the term or that the permit is suspended or revoked prior to the expiration of the term. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.300 - Transfer of permit. 
The permit may be transferred to new owners of the same business only if the new owners accept responsibility for all obligations under this chapter at the time of the transfer of the business and document such transfer on a form provided by the city within thirty days of the transfer of ownership of the business. The transfer shall be subject to the approval of the city which may require proof that there is no threat to public health or safety or to the environment from residual hazardous materials from or in the storage facility. Proof might include, but is not limited to, the analytical results of soil and/or groundwater samples. 
(Ord. 849 N.S. § 4, 1987: Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.310 - Effective date of permit—Signatures required. 
No permit shall become effective until the permit has been signed and accepted by the permittee. Where the permittee is a company, firm or corporation, the acceptance must be signed by a person having the legal authority to bind the permittee. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.320 - Denial of application. 
If the officer to whom application has been made has cause to deny the application and determines that it would not be feasible or in the public interest to approve a temporary or provisional permit, then the officer shall deny the application. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.330 - Grounds for denial. 
A permit shall be denied if the applicant fails to demonstrate adequate conformity to the provisions of this chapter. In addition, a permit can be denied for any of the grounds upon which the permit would be subject to revocation pursuant to Sections 8.40.380 through 8.40.450 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.340 - Transmittal of decision. 
The decision to deny the application shall be given to the applicant in writing, setting forth the findings upon which the decision is based. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.350 - Appeal to city manager. 
Within thirty days from the date of deposit of the decision in the mail in accordance with Section 8.40.950 of this chapter, the applicant may appeal, in writing, to the city manager, setting forth with particularity the ground or grounds for the appeal. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.360 - Hearing on appeal. 
The city manager shall set a time and place for the hearing on the appeal and shall notify the applicant, in writing, of such date and time, not later than ten working days from the date the appeal was received by the city manager. The hearing shall be conducted within thirty days from the date the appeal was received by the city manager. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.370 - Disposition of appeal. 
After the hearing on the appeal, the city manager may refer the matter back to the originating officer for a new investigation and decision, may affirm the decision of the originating officer, may approve a provisional permit as provided in Section 8.40.190 of this chapter, or may approve the application with or without conditions. The decision of the city manager shall be the final administrative determination and is subject to judicial review. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.380 - Grounds for remedial action. 
A permit may be subjected to remedial action for any of the following causes, arising from the acts or omissions of the permittee, either before or after a permit is issued: 
A.  Fraud, wilful misrepresentation or any wilful inaccurate or false statement in applying for a new or renewed permit; 
B.  Fraud, wilful misrepresentation or any wilful inaccurate or false statement in any report required by this chapter; 
C.  Failure to abate, correct or rectify any noncompliance within the time specified in the notice of noncompliance; 
D.  Failure to correct conditions constituting an unreasonable risk of an unauthorized discharge of hazardous materials within a reasonable time after notice from a governmental entity other than the city; 
E.  Failure to abide by the remedial action imposed by the city. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.390 - Notice of noncompliance. 
Unless the city manager finds that an immediate suspension under Section 8.40.410 of this article is necessary to protect the public health or safety from imminent danger, the officer shall issue a notice of noncompliance: 
A.  For failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter, any permit conditions or any provisions of the hazardous materials management plan; or 
B.  Before instituting remedial action pursuant to subsection D of Section 8.40.380 of this article. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail to the permittee. If the noncompliance is not abated, corrected or rectified within the time specified, remedial action may be taken. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.400 - Notice of hearing. 
Any notice of hearing shall be given to the permittee by the city manager, in writing, setting forth the time and place of the hearing, the ground or grounds upon which the remedial action is based, the pertinent code section or sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be given at least fifteen days prior to the hearing date. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.410 - Suspension prior to hearing. 
Whenever the city manager finds that suspension of a permit prior to a hearing for remedial action is necessary to protect the public health or safety from imminent danger, the city manager may immediately suspend any permit pending the hearing for remedial action. The city manager shall immediately notify the permittee of such suspension by having a written notice of the suspension personally served on the permittee. The permittee shall have the opportunity for a preliminary hearing with regard to such prehearing suspension within three working days of receiving written notice of such suspension. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.420 - Remedial action. 
A.  If the city manager, after the hearing, finds that cause exists for remedial action, the city manager shall impose one or more of the following: 
1.  A warning; 
2.  An order to correct the particular noncompliance specified in the notice issued pursuant to Section 8.40.390 of this article; 
3.  A revocation of the permit for the facility or for a storage facility and approval of a provisional permit; 
4.  Suspension of the permit for the facility or for a storage facility for a specified period not to exceed six months; 
5.  Modification or addition of conditions of the permit; 
6.  Revocation of the permit with no reapplication permitted for a specified period not to exceed five years. 
B.  If the grounds for remedial action are based on subsections C, D and E of Section 8.40.380 of this article, and if such permits are limited to one storage facility, the remedial action taken shall be limited to that storage facility. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.430 - Transmittal of decision. 
Within ten days of the hearing, the city manager shall render a written opinion, stating the findings upon which the decision is based on the action taken, if any. The decision of the city manager shall be the final administrative determination and is subject to judicial review. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.440 - Authority after suspension, revocation or expiration. 
The suspension, revocation or expiration of a permit issued under this chapter shall not prevent any proceedings to investigate such permit, any remedial action against such permittee or any proceeding against such permittee. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.450 - Return of permit. 
In the event that a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter is suspended or revoked, the permittee shall forward it to the issuing officer not later than the end of the third business day after notification of such suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
Article IV. - Materials Regulated 
 
8.40.460 - Designated. 
The materials regulated by this chapter, shall consist of the following: 
A.  Any material listed as a hazardous and/or extremely hazardous waste in Sections 66680 and 66685 of Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations, as amended, whether such material is stored or handled in waste or nonwaste form; or 
B.  Any material which is listed on the list of Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pollutants, 40 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 401.15, as amended; or 
C.  Any material which is classified by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) as either a flammable liquid; a Class II combustible liquid or a Class IIIA combustible liquid; or a Class IIIB combustible liquid which is petroleum based, including crude oil or any fraction thereof; or 
D.  Any material which is listed by the director of the department of industrial relations in Title 8, California Code of Regulations, Section 339, as amended, exclusions specified in this subsection. The exclusions shall apply only to materials which are not otherwise regulated pursuant to this section. These exclusions shall be as follows: 
1.  Materials recognized in the official United States Pharmacopoeia, official Homeopathic National Formulary, or any supplement to any of them if such materials are intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention of disease in man or other animals; hormones; enzymes; and aflatoxins, 
2.  Aluminum salts, asphalt fumes; bis (dimethyl-thiocarbamoyl) disulfide; 4-tert-butyl-2-chloro-phenyl-methylphosphoramidate; camphor; carbon black; 2-chloro-6 (trichloromethyl) pyridine; clopidol; coal tar pitch volatiles; cotton dust; dicyclopentadienyl iron; 3,5-dinitro-o-toluamide; 2,6-di-tert-butyl-p-cresol; glass, fibrous or dust; graphite, iron oxide; iron salts; mica; mineral wool fiber; oil mist; polytetrafluoro-ethylene decomposition products; rosin core solder; silica, soapstone, talc, tantalum oxide; and 4,4'-thiobis (6-tert-buty-m-cresol). 
E.  Any material which has been determined to be hazardous based upon any appraisal or assessment by or on behalf of the party storing this material in compliance with the requirements of the EPA or the California Department of Health Services, or which should have been, but was not, determined to be hazardous due to the deliberate failure of the party storing the material to comply with the requirements of the EPA and/or the department of health services; or 
F.  Any material which has been determined by the party storing it, through testing or other objective means, to be likely to create a significant potential or actual hazard to public health, safety or welfare; 
G.  Any material that, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if released into the workplace or the environment. Hazardous materials include, but are not limited to, hazardous substances, hazardous waste, and any material which a handler or the administering agency has a reasonable basis for believing that it would be injurious to the health and safety of persons or harmful to the environment if released into the workplace or the environment; 
H.  Any substance or material which is listed in subdivision (b) of Section 6382 of the Labor Code, as amended; 
I.  Any material that the manufacturer or producer is required to prepare a material safety data sheet for the substance or product pursuant to the Hazardous Substances Information and Training Act (Chapter 2.5 commencing with Section 6360 of Part I of Division 5 of the Labor Code, as amended) or pursuant to any applicable federal law or regulation. Examples include but are not limited to: 
1.  The Director's List of Hazardous Substances (Title 8 of California Code of Regulations, commencing with Section 339, as amended), 
2.  Title 29 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 1910, Subpart Z, Toxic and Hazardous Substances Occupational Safety and Health Administration, as amended, 
3.  Threshold limit values for Chemical Substances in the Work Environment, by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists, as amended, 
4.  Third Annual Report on Carcinogens, 1983 by the National Toxicology Program, 
5.  Monographs, Volumes 1—34 by the International Agency for Research on Cancer; 
J.  Any substance or material that is a hazardous waste as defined in Sections 25115, 25117 and 25316 of the Health and Safety Code, as amended; 
K.  Any substance listed as a radioactive material in Appendix B of Chapter 1 of Title 10 of the Code of Federal Regulations, maintained and updated by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission; 
L.  Any hazardous material or substance listed in Parts 172 and 173 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as amended; 
M.  Any material with a pH of less than 2 or more than 12.5; 
N.  If it is questionable whether or not a substance is hazardous, it is recommended that the criteria for Identification of Hazardous and Extremely Hazardous Wastes, outlined in Title 22 (commencing with Section 66693) of the California Code of Regulations, as amended, be used to determine if a substance or material is hazardous. 
(Ord. 1082 N.S. § 7, 1992; Ord. 947 N.S. § 2, 1989: Ord. 786 N.S. § 1, 1986; Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.470 - Exclusions. 
This chapter does not apply to the following: 
A.  Certain Elemental Metals. The following elemental metals included within the purview of Section 8.40.460 of this article shall not be considered hazardous materials for the purposes of this chapter unless they are stored in a friable, powdered or finely divided state: Aluminum, beryllium, cadmium, chromium, copper, lead, manganese, molybdenum, nickel, rhodium, silver, tellurium, tin and zinc. Furthermore, tantalum, titanium, tungsten and uranium shall be excluded from regulation under this chapter; 
B.  Retail Products. Hazardous materials when contained solely in a consumer product with a container capacity not to exceed 1.1 gallons on display for direct consumer purchase and use by the general public is exempt from the business plan requirements of this chapter unless the city has found, and has provided notice to the business handling the product, that the handling of certain quantities of the product requires the submission of a business plan, or any portion thereof, in response to public health, safety or environmental concerns; 
C.  Feed. Hazardous materials when contained in a substance intended for use as animal feed; 
D.  Work Station. Hazardous materials located at a work station in a quantity that is used up in eight consecutive hours or one work shift, whichever is less, and where no hazardous waste is produced; 
E.  Exemption. The city shall exempt any material from the requirements of this chapter where it has been demonstrated to the satisfaction of city that the material in the quantity and/or solution stored does not present a significant actual or potential hazard to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. 947 N.S. § 3, 1989: Ord. 786 N.S. § 2, 1986; Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.480 - Underground tanks. 
A.  Notwithstanding Sections 8.40.460 and 8.40.470 of this article and in addition to those materials regulated pursuant to Section 8.40.460 of this article, a permit shall be required for the storage in an underground storage tank as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 25281(r), as amended, or any materials defined as a hazardous substance, in accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 25281(d), as amended. 
B.  This chapter shall be interpreted and enforced to require conformance with all applicable state and/or federal laws or regulations, as amended, regarding underground tanks, piping and all related facilities and any and all associated environmental impacts of such tanks, piping and related facilities. Should any section or provision of this chapter conflict or differ with applicable state and/or federal law, the more restrictive individual stipulation shall apply. 
(Ord. 1005 N.S. § 1, 1990: Ord. 708 N.S. § 1, 1984: Ord. 655 N.S. (part), 1983: Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
Article V. - Containment Standards 
 
8.40.490 - Containment of hazardous materials. 
A.  No person, firm or corporation shall store any hazardous materials regulated by this chapter until a permit or approval has been issued pursuant to this chapter. No permit or approval shall be granted pursuant to this chapter unless a permit applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of city, by the submission of appropriate plans and other information, that the design and construction of the storage facility will result in a suitable manner of storage for the hazardous material or materials to be contained therein. 
B.  All installation, construction, repair or modification, closure and removal shall be to the satisfaction of city. The city shall have the discretion to exempt an applicant from any specific requirement, except that the discretion with regard to underground storage facilities shall be exercised in accordance with subsection D of Section 8.40.520 of this article; or to impose reasonable additional or different requirements in order to better secure the purpose and general obligation of this chapter for protection of public health, safety and welfare. The guidelines approved pursuant to Section 8.40.080 of this chapter shall serve as a interpretation of the provisions of this article addressed in such guidelines. 
(Ord. 655 N.S. (part), 1983: Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.500 - New storage facilities. 
No person, firm or corporation shall construct or install any new storage facility until a permit or approval has been issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.510 - Monitoring capability. 
A.  All new storage facilities intended for the storage of hazardous materials which are liquids or solids at standard temperature and pressure ("STP") shall be designed and constructed with a monitoring system capable of detecting that the hazardous material stored in the primary containment has entered the secondary containment.* Visual inspection of the primary containment is the preferred method; however, other means of monitoring may be required by the city. Where secondary containment may be subject to the intrusion of water, a means of monitoring for such water shall be provided. A method for safely removing water shall also be provided. 
B.  Whenever monitoring devices are provided, they shall be connected to visual and audible alarms designed to attract attention to their signal. 
C.  Whenever groundwater or vadose zone monitoring wells are installed, it shall be the responsibility of the permittee/storage facility owner/operator/property owner of the storage facility to ensure the wells are maintained while in use and to have their contents sampled and analyzed in a manner and frequency to the satisfaction of the city. Upon cessation of use of or sampling, such wells shall be closed or removed in a manner approved by the city in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.40.230. 
(Ord. 1082 N.S. § 8, 1992; Ord. 849 § 5, 1987: Ord. 655 N.S. (part), 1983; Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983) 
* It is anticipated that a follow-up task force will develop construction and monitoring standards for gases.  
8.40.520 - Containment requirements. 
A.  Containment requirements, primary and secondary levels of containment shall be required for all new storage facilities intended for the storage of hazardous materials which are liquids or solids at standard temperature and pressure (STP) unless exempted by the city.* 
B.  All primary containment shall be product-tight. 
C.  Secondary Containment. 
1.  All secondary containment shall be constructed of materials of sufficient thickness, density and composition so as not to be structurally weakened as a result of contact with the discharged hazardous materials and so as to be capable of containing hazardous materials discharged from a primary container for a period of time equal to or longer than the maximum anticipated time sufficient to allow recovery of the discharged hazardous material; 
2.  In the case of an installation with one primary container, the secondary containment shall be large enough to contain at least one hundred ten percent of the volume of the primary container; 
3.  In the case of a storage facility with multiple primary containers, the secondary container shall be large enough to contain one hundred fifty percent of the volume of the largest primary container placed in it, or ten percent of the aggregate internal volume of all primary containers in the storage facility, whichever is greater; 
4.  When, in the opinion of the fire chief it is acceptable for a storage facility to be open to rainfall, then the secondary containment shall be able to additionally accommodate the volume of a twenty-four-hour rainfall as determined by a one-hundred-year storm history. 
D.  Laminated, coated or clad materials shall be considered single-walled and shall not be construed to fulfill the requirements of both primary and secondary containment. 
E.  Storage Tank Testing for Underground Storage Tanks. 
1.  Before an underground storage tank is covered, enclosed or placed in use, the standard installation testing for requirements for underground storage systems specified in Section 2-7 of the Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code, adopted by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA 30) as amended and published in the respective edition of the Uniform Fire Code, shall be followed. 
2.  Before the underground storage tank is placed in service, the underground storage systems shall be tested in operating condition using a precision test as defined in National Fire Protection Association Pamphlet 329, Recommended Practice of Handling Underground Leakage of Flammable and Combustible Liquids, as amended, for proving the integrity of an underground storage tank. 
F.  Excess Water Removal for Underground Storage Tanks. If the underground storage tank is designed to maintain a water level in the secondary containment, the tank shall be equipped with a safe method of removing any excess water to a holding facility and the owner or operator shall inspect the holding facility monthly for the presence of excess water overflow. If excess water is present in the holding facility, the permit holder shall provide a means to analyze the water for hazardous substance contamination and a means to dispose of the water, if so contaminated, at an authorized disposal facility. 
(Ord. 1005 N.S. § 3, 1990; Ord. 947 N.S. § 4, 1989: Ord. 708 N.S. §§ 2, 4, 1984; Ord. 655 N.S. (part), 1983: Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983) 
* It is anticipated that a follow-up task force will develop construction and monitoring standards for gases.  
8.40.530 - Overfill protection. 
Means of overfill protection may be required for any primary container. This may be an overfill prevention device and/or an attention-getting high-level alarm. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.540 - Separation of materials. 
Materials that in combination may cause a fire or explosion, or the production of a flammable, toxic or poisonous gas, or the deterioration of a primary or secondary container shall be separated in both the primary and secondary containment so as to avoid potential intermixing. 
(Ord. 655 N.S. (part), 1983: Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.550 - Drainage system. 
A.  Drainage of precipitation or infiltration from within a storage facility containing hazardous materials which are liquids or solids at STP shall be controlled in a manner approved by the city so as to prevent hazardous materials from being discharged. No drainage system will be approved unless the flow of the drain can be controlled. 
B.  With regard to underground storage facilities, if water could enter into the secondary containment by precipitation or infiltration, the underground storage facility shall contain a means of removing the water by the owner or operator. This removal system shall also prevent uncontrolled removal of this water. Water removed by such removal system shall be analyzed for hazardous substance contamination, and disposed of, if so contaminated, at an authorized disposal facility. 
(Ord. 708 N.S. § 3, 1984: Ord. 655 N.S. (part), 1983: Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.560 - Existing storage facilities. 
Any storage facility in existence as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or any storage facility for which a building permit was issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, which does not meet the standards of Sections 8.40.500 through 8.40.550 of this article, may be permitted pursuant to this chapter as long as it is providing suitable storage for hazardous materials. In addition, storage facilities which contain hazardous materials which are liquids or solids at standard temperature and pressure (STP) must be monitored in accordance with a plan approved by the city as set forth in herein.* 
A.  A monitoring plan for each such storage facility containing hazardous materials which are liquids or solids at STP, shall be submitted to the city as part of the hazardous materials management plan. 
B.  Monitoring under such plan shall include visual inspection of the primary containment wherever practical; however, if the visual inspection is not practical, an alternative method of monitoring each storage facility on a monthly or more frequent basis may be approved by the city. 
C.  Alternative method(s) of monitoring may include but are not limited to chemical trace testing, pressure testing, vacuum testing or hydrostatic testing of piping systems, or underground storage tanks, groundwater monitoring well(s) which are downgradient and adjacent to the storage facility; vapor analysis within the well(s) where appropriate; and analysis of soil boring(s) at the time of initial installation of the well(s). The location of well(s), number of well(s), depth of well(s) and sampling frequency shall be approved by the city. The installation of all monitoring equipment, their methodology and frequency of use are subject to approval by the city. 
D.  Such monitoring devices and methods, as approved by the city, shall be installed and operating within six months of the issuance of a provisional permit in accordance with Sections 8.40.190 and Section 8.40.130(A) of this chapter. The city may grant an extension of this compliance date; however, such extension shall not exceed one additional year. The full-term permit may be issued when compliance with this subsection has been achieved. In all events, a monitoring system capable of detecting unauthorized releases shall be installed by January 1, 1985. 
E.  The continued use of, and permit approval for, existing storage facilities is subject to review and modification or termination by the city whenever there has been any unauthorized discharge. It shall also be reviewed by the city each time the permit is renewed. In determining whether continued storage in such storage facility is suitable, the city shall consider the age of the storage facility, the methods of containment, the methods of monitoring, the feasibility of the required retrofit, the concentration of the hazardous materials contained, the severity of potential unauthorized discharge, and the suitability of other long-term preventive measures which meet the intent of this chapter. The owner shall install a monitoring system capable of detecting unauthorized releases. 
F.  Existing storage facilities which are not approved in accordance with this section must be upgraded to comply with this chapter or be closed in accordance with Section 8.40.570 of this article within one year of a decision not to issue a full-term permit. An extension of time for compliance with this subsection, not to exceed one additional year, may be granted by the city. 
(Ord. 1082 N.S. § 9, 1992; Ord. 655 N.S. (part), 1983; Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983) 
* It is anticipated that a follow-up task force will develop construction and monitoring standards for gases.  
8.40.570 - Out-of-service storage facilities. 
A.  No storage facility shall be abandoned. 
B.  Storage facilities which are temporarily out-of-service and are intended to be returned to use, must continue to be monitored and inspected. 
C.  Any storage facility which is not being monitored and inspected in accordance with this chapter must be closed or removed in a manner approved by the city in accordance with Section 8.40.230 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 947 N.S. § 5, 1989: Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.580 - Monitoring and inspection. 
A.  Monitoring methods shall include at least one system for detecting leakage from the primary container. A monitoring system capable of detecting that the hazardous material stored in the primary containment has entered the secondary containment shall be provided. Visual inspection of the primary containment is the preferred method; however, other means of monitoring may be required by the city. Where secondary containment may be subject to the intrusion of water, a means of monitoring for such water shall be provided. 
B.  Whenever monitoring devices are provided they shall be connected to visual and audible alarms designed to attract attention to their signal. 
C.  Every permittee under this chapter shall provide testing, monitoring, if applicable, and inspections in compliance with the hazardous materials management plan and shall maintain records adequate to demonstrate compliance therewith. 
D.  Whenever groundwater or vadose monitoring wells are installed, it shall be the responsibility of the permittee/storage facility owner/operator/property owner of the storage facility to ensure the wells are maintained while in use and to have their contents sampled and analyzed in a manner and frequency to the satisfaction of the city. Upon cessation of use or sampling, such wells shall be closed or removed in a manner approved by the city in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.40.230. 
(Ord. 1082 N.S. § 10, 1992; Ord. 1005 N.S. § 4, 1990; Ord. 849 N.S. § 6, 1987; Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.590 - Maintenance, repair or replacement. 
A.  The permittee will carry out maintenance, ordinary upkeep and minor repairs in a careful and safe manner. No permit or other approval will be required for such maintenance and upkeep. 
B.  Any substantial modification or repair of a storage facility other than minor repairs or emergency repairs shall be in accordance with plans to be submitted to the city and approved in accordance with Section 8.40.230 of this chapter, prior to the initiation of such work. 
C.  The permittee may make emergency repairs to a storage facility in advance of seeking an additional permit approval whenever an immediate repair is required to prevent or contain an unauthorized discharge or to protect the integrity of the containment; however within five working days after such emergency repairs have been started, the permittee shall seek approval pursuant to Section 8.40.230 of this chapter, by submitting drawings or other information adequate to describe the repairs to the city. 
D.  Replacement of any storage facility for hazardous materials, which are liquids or solids at STP, must be in accordance with the new installation standards of Sections 8.40.500 through 8.40.550 of this article. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.600 - Handling. 
A.  Dispensing and mixing of hazardous materials must not be done in such a manner as to substantially increase the risk of an unauthorized discharge. 
B.  When hazardous materials are moved into or out of a storage facility, they shall remain in the travel path only for the time reasonably necessary to transport the hazardous material and such movement shall be in a manner which will not result in an unauthorized discharge. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.610 - Secured facilities. 
Access to the storage facilities shall be secured by means of fences and/or locks. The access to the storage facilities shall be kept securely locked when unattended. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.620 - Emergency equipment. 
Emergency equipment shall be provided which is reasonable and appropriate for potential emergencies presented by the stored hazardous materials. Such equipment shall be regularly tested and adequately maintained. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.630 - Posting of emergency procedures. 
Simplified emergency procedures shall be posted conspicuously in locations where hazardous materials are stored. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
Article VI. - Hazardous Materials Management Plans 
 
8.40.640 - Hazardous Materials Management Plan (HMMP). 
Each applicant for a permit pursuant to this chapter shall file a written plan, for the city's approval to be known as a hazardous materials management plan ("HMMP"), which shall demonstrate the safe storage and handling of hazardous materials. The HMMP may be amended at any time with the consent of the city. The HMMP shall be a public record except as otherwise specified. Approval of the HMMP shall mean that the HMMP has provided adequate information for the purposes of evaluating the permit approval. Such approval shall not be understood to mean that the city has made an independent determination of the adequacy of that which is described in the HMMP. No person, firm or corporation shall store or possess any hazardous material regulated by this chapter without a current HMMP on file with the City. 
(Ord. 1082 N.S. § 11, 1992; Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.650 - Standard form. 
The standard form hazardous materials management plan must be submitted unless the facility qualifies as a minimal storage site under Section 8.40.730 of this article. Any person, firm or corporation which has filed an HMMP shall amend the HMMP prior to any substantive changes such as but not limited to: the storage or handling of any hazardous material not listed thereon but regulated under Article IV, an increase of one hundred percent or more in the quantity of a single previously disclosed material providing such storage does not increase the hazard of fire of explosion or the hazard of the production of flammable or poisonous gas, a change in hazardous materials storage placement, business address, ownership or business name, or when required by Section 8.40.140. All other changes shall be amended in writing within thirty days of their occurrence. The HMMP shall include the information set out in Sections 8.40.660 through 8.40.760. 
(Ord. 1082 N.S. § 12, 1992: Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.660 - Facility description. 
A.  General Information. The HMMP shall contain the name and address of the facility and business telephone number of the applicant, the name and titles and emergency telephone numbers of the primary response persons and an alternate, the number of employees, number of shifts, hours of operation and principal business activity. 
B.  General Facility Description. 
1.  The HMMP shall contain a map drawn at a legible scale and in a format and detail determined by the city. It shall show the location of all buildings and structures, chemical loading areas, parking lots, internal roads, storm and sewer drains, and shall specify the uses of adjacent properties. 
2.  The city may also require information as to the location of wells, floodplains, earthquake faults, surface water bodies, and/or general land uses (schools, hospitals, institutions, residential areas) within one mile of the facility boundaries. 
C.  Facility Storage Map. 
1.  a.  The HMMP shall contain a facility storage map at a legible scale for licensing and enforcement purposes. The information in this section is provided for purposes of ensuring the suitable and secure storage of hazardous materials and for the protection and safety of emergency response personnel of the city. The city shall take reasonable precautions to ensure the confidentiality of the information provided pursuant to this subsection. 
b.  The facilities storage map shall indicate the location of each hazardous materials storage facility, including all interior, exterior and underground storage facilities, and access to such storage facilities. In addition, the map shall indicate the location of emergency equipment related to each storage facility, and the general purpose of the other areas within each facility. 
c.  For each storage facility, the map shall contain information as prescribed in this section; except that where the hazardous material being stored is a trade secret, it shall be identified in a coded manner (together with its key) and not in a manner which would reveal trade secret information: 
i.  A floor plan to scale and the permit quantity limit, 
ii.  For each nonwaste hazardous material which is stored in a quantity greater than the quantities specified in Section 8.40.750 of this article, the general chemical name, common/trade name, major constituents for mixtures, United Nations (UN) or North America (NA) number, if available, and physical state. For each waste hazardous material stored in any quantity range within the storage facility, the presence of wastes shall also be indicated; 
iii.  For all hazardous materials, including wastes, stored in each storage facility, the hazard class or classes and the quantity range for each such class, aggregated within each storage facility, in the following ranges: 
Quantity Range 
Number 	Range Amounts 
1 	Less than 500 pounds, 55 gallons for liquids, and 200 cubic feet at STP for compressed gases 
2 	Between 500 and 5,000 pounds for solids, 55 and 550 gallons for liquids, and 200 and 2,000 cubic feet at STP for compressed gases 
3 	Between 5,000 and 25,000 pounds for solids, 550 and 2,750 gallons for liquids, and 2,000 to 10,000 cubic feet at STP for compressed gases 
4 	Between 25,000 and 50,000 pounds for solids, 2,750 and 5,500 gallons for liquids, and 10,000 and 20,000 cubic feet at STP for compressed gases 
5 	More than 50,000 pounds for solids, 5,550 gallons for liquids, and 20,000 cubic feet at STP for compressed gases 
 
iv.  For materials not regulated under this chapter, but regulated under the Uniform Fire Code, such as radioactives or cryogens, or for materials stored in storage facilities exempted by subsections A and B of Section 8.40.090 of this chapter, the city may require that the hazard class or classes and the quantity range of each such hazard class, using the quantity ranges listed in subsection (C)(1)(c)(iii) of this section, be provided; 
v.  For tanks, the capacity limit of each tank, and the hazardous material contained in each tank by general chemical name, common/trade name, major constituents for mixture, United Nations (UN) or North America (NA) number, if available, and physical state. 
2.  Due to the threat to the security of the facility posed by the disclosure of the information in the facility storage map, this information shall be maintained by the city for law enforcement purposes only and shall not be made public. Public disclosure of this information could endanger the security of the facility or present a clear danger to public health and safety. The city shall not disclose this information to the public without the consent of the permittee or permit applicant unless ordered to do so by a court of competent jurisdiction. The permittee or permit applicant shall be deemed a real party in interest in any such action. Prompt notice of a lawsuit to compel disclosure shall be given by the city to the permittee or permit applicant; however, the city shall be under no duty to prevent disclosures where there has been any unauthorized discharge of hazardous materials stored in storage facility(s) shown on such map or where such disclosure arises out of any official emergency response relating to the storage facility(s). 
3.  The facility storage map shall be updated annually or whenever an additional approval is required for the facility or whenever the hazardous materials inventory statement is required to be amended pursuant to Section 8.40.740 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1082 N.S. § 13, 1992; Ord. 786 N.S. § 4, 1986; Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.670 - Hazardous materials inventory statement. 
A hazardous materials inventory statement shall be filed in accordance with Article VII of this chapter. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.680 - Separation of materials. 
The HMMP shall contain a description of the methods to be utilized to ensure separation and protection of stored hazardous materials from factors which may cause a fire or explosion, or the production of a flammable, toxic or poisonous gas, or the deterioration of the primary or secondary containment. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.690 - Monitoring program. 
The HMMP shall contain a description of the location, type, manufacturer specifications, if applicable, and suitability of monitoring methods to be used in each storage facility storing hazardous materials which are liquids or solids at STP. It shall also specify the frequency of inspections of storage facilities which will be conducted by the permittee. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.700 - Recordkeeping forms. 
The HMMP shall contain an inspection check sheet or log designed to be used in conjunction with routine inspections. The check sheet or log shall provide for the recording of the date and time of any corrective action taken, the name of the inspector, and the countersignature of the designated safety manager for the facility or the responsible official as designated in the HMMP. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.710 - Emergency equipment. 
The HMMP shall describe emergency equipment availability, testing and maintenance. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.720 - Variation in information. 
A.  Additional information may be required for the HMMP where such information is reasonably necessary to meet the intent of this chapter. 
B.  Requirements for information in the HMMP may be waived where such information is not reasonably necessary to meet the intent of this chapter. 
C.  Whenever the permittee has submitted a plan which includes substantially the same information as is required for any component(s) of the HMMP to any other public agency regulating hazardous materials, such plan may be submitted to the city in lieu of such component(s). The city may give deference to any approval of such plan by the other public agency. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.730 - Short form—Minimal storage site. 
A.  A facility shall qualify as a minimal storage site if the quantity of each hazardous material stored in one or more storage facilities in an aggregate quantity for the facility is less than five hundred pounds for solids, less than fifty-five gallons for liquids or less than two hundred cubic feet at STP for compressed gases. 
B.  The applicant for a permit for a facility which qualifies as a minimal storage site may opt to file the short form hazardous material management plan. Such plan shall include the following components: 
1.  General application information; 
2.  A simple line drawing of the facility showing the location of the storage facilities and indicating the hazard class or classes of the hazardous materials being stored; 
3.  For each nonwaste hazardous material which is stored: the general chemical name, common or trade name, major constituents for mixtures, United Nations (UN) or North America (NA) number, Department of Transportation Hazard Class, and physical state. For each waste hazardous material, its presence shall be indicated. The short form HMMP shall also include a carcinogen identification form which shall indicate the storage of any quantity of any carcinogen listed in Sections 5208 through 5215 and 5219 of Title 8 of the California Administrative Code, as amended. This provision will be satisfied by the submittal to the city of a copy of the carcinogen registration form submitted to the California Department of Industrial Relations in accordance with the said sections of Title 8 of the California Administrative Code, as amended; 
4.  Information describing that the hazardous materials will be stored in a suitable manner and will be appropriately contained, separated and monitored; 
5.  A description of emergency equipment to be maintained; 
6.  Assurance that the disposal of any hazardous materials will be in an appropriate manner. 
C.  Where a claim for trade secret protection pursuant to Section 8.40.770 of this chapter is made for any carcinogen listed in Sections 5208 through 5215 and 5219 of Title 8 of the California Administrative Code, as amended, pursuant to subsection (B)(3) of this section, the carcinogen identification form to be publicly disclosed shall identify all carcinogens not claimed to be trade secrets and it shall indicate the number of carcinogens claimed to be trade secrets. 
D.  A minimal storage site shall file an amended HMMP short form or standard form as appropriate, prior to any substantive change such as but not limited to: the storage or handling of any hazardous material not listed thereon but regulated under Article IV, an increase of one hundred percent or more in the quantity of a single previously disclosed material providing such storage does not increase the hazard of fire or explosion of the hazard of the production of flammable or poisonous gas, a change in hazardous materials storage placement, in business address, ownership or business name, or when required by Section 8.40.140. All other changes shall be amended in writing within thirty days of their occurrence. 
(Ord. 1082 N.S. § 14, 1992; Ord. 849 N.S. §§ 7, 8, 1987; Ord. 786 N.S. § 5, 1986; Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.732 - Signature under penalty of perjury/HMMP applications. 
All standard form and short form HMMP applications shall be signed under penalty of perjury in a form approved by the city. 
(Ord. 1082 N.S. § 15, 1992)  
8.40.735 - Supplemental requirements for emergency response plans. 
A.  In addition to the HMMP requirements set forth in this section, any person, firm or corporation which handles a hazardous material or a mixture containing a hazardous material which has a quantity at any one time during the reporting year equal to, or greater than, a total weight of five hundred pounds, or a total volume of fifty-five gallons, or two hundred cubic feet at standard temperature and pressure for compressed gas, shall establish and implement a plan for emergency response to a release or threatened release of a hazardous material pursuant to this section. Said plan, including the Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS) described in Section 8.40.670 of this chapter, shall comprise the "business plan" for purposes of Chapter 6.95 of Title 20 of the Health and Safety Code. 
B.  Unless the facility qualifies as a minimal storage site under Section 8.40.730, or is otherwise exempt pursuant to Section 8.40.470, the following information shall be provided: emergency response plans and procedures in the event of a reportable release or threatened release of a hazardous material which include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Immediate notification to the city, or to the city fire department, and to the state Office of Emergency Services; 
2.  Procedures for the mitigation of a release or threatened release to minimize any potential harm or damage to persons, property, or the environment; 
3.  Evacuation plans and procedures for the business site, including immediate audible notice and warning to all persons on the site. 
C.  Training shall be provided for all new employees, and annual training, including refresher courses, for all employees in safety procedures to be utilized in the event of a release or threatened release of a hazardous material. Such training shall include, but not be limited to, familiarity with the plans and procedures specified above. These training programs may take into consideration the technical and managerial responsibilities of each employee. 
D.  Any business required to file a pipeline operations contingency plan in accordance with the California Pipeline Safety Act of 1981 (Chapter 5.5 (commencing with Section 51010) of Part 3 of Division 1 of Title 5 of the Government Code) and the regulations of the Department of Transportation, found in Part 195 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, may file a copy of those plans with the city instead of filing an emergency response plan specified in subsection A of this section. 
E.  Any business operating a farm exempted by paragraph (5) of subdivision (b) of Section 25503.5 of the Health and Safety Code from filing the information specified in subsections B and C of this section shall, notwithstanding this exemption, provide the training programs specified in subsection C of this section. 
F.  The city shall maintain records of all emergency response plans and procedures received and shall index them by street address and company name. Such plans and revisions thereto shall be available for public inspection during regular working hours, except for those portions of such plan, including any maps of the facility as described in subsection C of Section 8.40.660, specifying the precise location where hazardous materials are stored and handled on site. The city is required by Health and Safety Code Section 25506 to transmit copies of the entire emergency response plan or any information contained therein to any requesting state or local agency. 
(Ord. 786 N.S. § 6, 1986)  
Article VII. - Hazardous Materials Inventory—Trade Secrets 
 
8.40.740 - Hazardous materials inventory statement. 
A Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS) shall be filed with the city in accordance with this section. Any person, firm or corporation which stores or handles any hazardous material in an amount which is equal to or greater than the quantities specified in subsection A of Section 8.40.750 of this article is required to file an HMIS. Such person, firm or corporation shall amend the HMIS prior to any substantive change such as but not limited to: the storage or handling of any hazardous material not listed thereon but required to be listed by Article IV, an increase of one hundred (100%) percent or more in the quantity of a single previously disclosed material provided such storage does not increase the hazard of fire or explosion or the hazard of the production of a flammable or poisonous gas, a change in business address, ownership or business name, or when required by Section 8.40.140. 
All other changes shall be amended in writing within thirty days of their occurrence. 
(Ord. 1082 N.S. § 16, 1992: Ord. 786 N.S. § 7, 1986: Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.750 - Information required. 
A.  Information shall be included in the HMIS for each hazardous material stored or handled in a facility (aggregated over all such material stored in one or more storage facilities) where the aggregate quantity throughout the facility is five hundred pounds or more in weight for solids, fifty-five gallons or more for liquids, or two hundred cubic feet or more at standard temperature and pressure (STP) for compressed gases. 
B.  The information in the HMIS shall include: 
1.  For nonwastes: The general chemical name, common/trade name, major constituents for mixtures, the manufacturer, United Nations (UN) or North America (NA) number, if available, and the hazard class or classes and the material safety data sheet (MSDS) or equivalent information as required by the city; 
2.  For wastes: The department of health services manifest for wastes or equivalent information, including the general chemical and mineral composition of the waste listed by probable maximum and minimum concentration, and the hazard class or classes; 
3.  A listing of the chemical name and common names of every other hazardous material or mixture containing a hazardous material handled by the business which is not otherwise listed pursuant to paragraphs 1 or 2 of this subsection; 
4.  The maximum amount of each hazardous material or mixture containing a hazardous material disclosed in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this subsection which is handled at any time by the business over the course of the year; 
5.  Sufficient information on how and where the hazardous materials disclosed in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this subsection are handled by the business to allow fire, safety, health and other appropriate personnel to prepare adequate emergency responses to potential releases of the hazardous materials; 
6.  The SIC Code number of the business, if applicable; 
7.  The name and twenty-four-hour phone number(s) of the person representing the business who is able to assist emergency personnel in the event of an emergency involving the business during nonbusiness hours. 
C.  The HMIS may report the amount of hazardous material under this section by ranges, rather than a specific amount, pursuant to Section 8.40.660(C)(1)(c)(iii), as long as those ranges provide the information necessary to meet the needs of emergency rescue personnel, to determine the potential hazard from a release of the materials, and meets the purpose of this chapter. 
D.  The HMIS shall also include a carcinogen identification form which shall indicate the storage of any quantity of any carcinogen listed in Sections 5208—5215 and Section 5219 of Title 8 of the California Administrative Code, as amended. This provision will be satisfied by the submittal to the city of a copy of the carcinogen registration form submitted to the California Department of Industrial Relations in accordance with the above cited sections of Title 8 of the California Administrative Code, as amended. 
(Ord. 786 N.S. § 8, 1986: Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.760 - Public records. 
The HMIS is a public record; however, the information contained therein is subject to trade secret protection pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 25511. 
(Ord. 786 N.S. § 9, 1986: Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
Article VIII. - Unauthorized Discharges 
 
8.40.780 - Reporting unauthorized discharges. 
A.  As soon as any person in charge of a storage facility or responsible for emergency response for a facility has knowledge of any confirmed or unconfirmed unauthorized discharge of a hazardous material which is liquid or solid at STP, such person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery and containment and clean up of such discharge and shall notify the city of the occurrence as required by this subsection. Should groundwater or vadose zone monitoring wells be installed to assist in the discovery, containment or cleanup of an unauthorized discharge, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to ensure they are maintained while in use and to have their contents sampled and analyzed in a manner and frequency to the satisfaction of the city. Upon cessation of use or sampling, such wells shall be closed or removed in a manner approved by the city. 
B.  Should an unauthorized discharge come into contact with the secondary containment of a hazardous material, it shall thereafter be verified to the satisfaction of the fire chief by physical inspection that there has been no significant impairment of said secondary containment. 
(Ord. 1005 N.S. § 5, 1990; Ord. 849 N.S. § 9, 1987: Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.790 - Confirmed unauthorized discharge—Recordable unauthorized discharge. 
Any recordable unauthorized discharge shall be contained and safely disposed of in an appropriate manner by the permittee and such occurrence and the response thereto shall be recorded in the permittee's monitoring records. A recordable unauthorized discharge is any unauthorized discharge of a hazardous material which meets all of the following criteria: 
A.  The discharge is from a primary containment to a secondary containment or to a rigid aboveground surface covering capable of containing the discharge until cleanup of the hazardous material is completed; and 
B.  The permittee is able to adequately cleanup the discharge before it escapes from such secondary containment or such aboveground surface, but if the cleanup requires more than eight hours, it becomes a reportable discharge in accordance with Section 8.40.800 of this article; and 
C.  There is no increase in the hazard of fire or explosion, nor is there any production of a flammable or poisonous gas, nor is there any deterioration of such secondary containment or such rigid aboveground surface; 
D.  An otherwise recordable unauthorized discharge does not need to be recorded if the discharge is not the result of the deterioration or failure of the primary container and the quantity discharged is less than one ounce by weight, and can be cleaned up within fifteen minutes. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.800 - Confirmed unauthorized discharge—Reportable unauthorized discharge. 
Any unauthorized discharge which is not determined to be recordable under Section 8.40.790 of this article, must be reported to the city immediately. The reporting party shall provide information to the city relating to the ability of the permittee to contain and dispose of the hazardous material, the estimated time it will take to complete containment and disposal, and the degree of hazard created. The city may verify that the hazardous material is being contained and appropriately disposed. The city, at any time upon a determination that the permittee is not adequately containing and disposing of such hazardous material, shall have the power and authority to undertake and direct an emergency response in order to protect the public health and/or safety. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.810 - Unconfirmed authorized discharge—Indication of loss in inventory records. 
Whenever a material balance or other inventory record, employed as a monitoring technique under the HMMP, indicates a loss of hazardous material, and no unauthorized discharge has been confirmed by other means, the permittee shall have five working days to determine whether or not there has been an unauthorized discharge. If before the end of such period, it is determined that there has been no unauthorized discharge, an entry explaining the occurrence shall be made in the permittee's monitoring records. Where the permittee has not been able, within such period, to determine that there has been no unauthorized discharge, an unauthorized discharge is deemed confirmed and the permittee shall proceed in accordance with Section 8.40.800 of this article. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.820 - Unconfirmed unauthorized discharge—Test results. 
Whenever any test results suggest a possible unauthorized discharge, and no unauthorized discharge has been confirmed by other means, the permittee shall have five working days to retest. If second test results obtained within that period establish that there has been no unauthorized discharge, the results of both tests shall be recorded in the permittee's monitoring records. If it has not been established within such period that there has been no unauthorized discharge, an unauthorized discharge is deemed confirmed and the permittee shall proceed in accordance with Section 8.40.800 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.830 - Gases at STP. 
A.  Provisions shall be made, to the satisfaction of the city, for the prevention, monitoring, control and mitigation of unauthorized discharges of all hazardous materials which are a gas at STP and the possible effects of such discharges. 
B.  Any person in charge of a storage facility or responsible for emergency response for a storage facility, who has knowledge of any unauthorized discharge of a hazardous material which is a gas at STP, must immediately report such a discharge to the city if such discharge presents a threat of imminent danger to public health and safety. 
(Ord. 947 N.S. § 6, 1989: Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.840 - Office of emergency services. 
The city shall submit a written report to the office of emergency services within ten working days from the date that the city is notified of an unauthorized discharge from an underground storage tank. 
(Ord. 655 N.S. (part), 1983: Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.850 - Cleanup responsibility. 
Any person, firm or corporation responsible for storing the hazardous material shall institute and complete all actions necessary to remedy the effects of any unauthorized discharge, whether sudden or gradual. The city shall undertake actions to remedy the effects of such unauthorized discharge itself, only if it determines that it is reasonably necessary under the circumstances for the city to do so. The responsible party shall be liable to reimburse the city for all costs incurred by the city in remedying the effects of such unauthorized discharge, including the costs of fighting fires to the extent allowed by law. This responsibility is not conditioned upon evidence of wilfulness or negligence of the party storing the hazardous material(s) in causing or allowing such discharge. Any responsible party who undertakes action to remedy the effects of unauthorized discharge(s) shall not be barred by the provisions of this chapter from seeking to recover appropriate costs and expenditures from other responsible parties except as provided in Section 8.40.860 of this article. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.860 - Indemnification. 
The permittee shall indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city against any claim, cause of action, disability, loss, liability, damage, cost or expense, howsoever arising, which occurs by reason of an unauthorized discharge in connection with the permittee's operations under this permit, except as arises from the city's sole wilful act or sole active negligence. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
Article IX. - Recordkeeping and Inspections 
 
8.40.870 - Maintenance of records. 
All records required by this chapter shall be maintained by the permittee for a period of not less than three years. The records shall be made available to the city during normal working hours and upon reasonable notice. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.880 - Inspections by city. 
A.  The city may conduct inspections, at its discretion, for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with this chapter and causing to be corrected any conditions which would constitute any violation of this chapter or of any other statute, code, rule or regulation affecting the storage of hazardous materials. 
B.  Permittees are not required to disclose the identity of hazardous materials protected as trade secrets pursuant to Section 8.40.770 of this chapter to anyone other than the official designated for that purpose pursuant to subsection (C)(3) of Section 8.40.770 of this chapter, except in the case of an emergency response or an unauthorized discharge related to the storage facility in which the trade secret material is contained. Therefore, the permittee may put temporary coverings over the labels of trade secret materials during the course of city inspections conducted by other than the city official so designated. 
C.  In order to carry out the purpose of this chapter the city may, at any reasonable hour of the day, or as authorized pursuant to duly issued inspection warrants under Sections 1822.50 and following of the Code of Civil Procedure do any of the following: 
1.  Enter and inspect any storage facility, factory, plant, construction site, waste disposal site, transfer station, establishment or any other place or environment where hazardous materials are stored, handled, processed, disposed of, or being treated to recover resources; 
2.  Carry out any sampling activities necessary to carry out this chapter, including obtaining samples from any individual or taking samples from the property of any person or from any vehicle in which a city officer reasonably believes has transported or is transporting hazardous material. However, upon request, split samples shall be given to the person from whom, or from whose property or vehicle, the samples were obtained if a sufficient volume of the sample exists to allow both quantification and characterization of the sample; 
3.  Stop and inspect any vehicle reasonably suspected of transporting hazardous materials when accompanied by a uniformed peace officer in a clearly marked vehicle; 
4.  Inspect, copy, photograph, videotape, or audiotape any records, reports, test results, or other information required to carry out this chapter; 
5.  Photograph or videotape any material, material container, material container label, vehicle, material or waste treatment process, waste disposal site, or any condition found during an inspection which constitutes or causes or allows to cause a violation of law. 
During any such inspection, the inspector shall comply with all reasonable security, safety and sanitation measures. In addition, the inspector shall comply with reasonable precautionary measures specified by the storage facility operator. Whenever photographs and/or videotapes have been taken pursuant to subsection (C)(4) or (C)(5) above, the department shall comply with all procedures established pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 25173 and shall notify the person whose facility was photographed/videotaped prior to public disclosure of the photographs/videotape, and, upon request of that person, shall submit a copy of any photograph and/or videotape to that person for the purpose of determining whether trade secret information, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 25173, or facility security, would be revealed by the photograph. "Public disclosure," as used in this section, shall not include review of the photographs/videotape by a court of competent jurisdiction or an administrative law judge. 
D.  Further, with respect to adjacent property as described herein, or as authorized pursuant to duly issued inspection warrants under Sections 1822.50 and following of the Code of Civil Procedure, in order to carry out the purposes of this chapter, the city, at any reasonable hour of the day, may enter and inspect any real property which is within two thousand feet of a hazardous materials storage facility and do any of the following: 
1.  Obtain samples of the soil, vegetation, air, water, and viota of or beneath the land; 
2.  Set up and maintain monitoring equipment for the purpose of assessing or measuring the actual or potential migration of hazardous wastes on, beneath or toward the land; 
3.  Survey and determine the topography and geology of the land; 
4.  Photograph or videotape any equipment, sample, activity, or environmental condition described in subsection (D)(1), (D)(2) or (D)(3). The photographs or videotapes shall be subject to the requirements of Health and Safety Code Section 21573. 
E.  The city may require permittee(s), or if permittee(s) is unable or unwilling, the property owner, to remove any designated hazardous wastes, as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 25125, as amended, only in the presence of an officer of the city. 
(Ord. 1082 N.S. § 17, 1992; Ord. 947 N.S. § 7, 1989: Ord. 849 N.S. § 10, 1987; Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.890 - Inspections by city—Discretionary. 
All inspections specified in this chapter shall be at the discretion of the city and nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring the city to conduct any such inspection nor shall any actual inspection made imply a duty to conduct any other inspection. Furthermore, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to hold the city or any officer, employee or representative of the city responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of making an inadequate or negligent inspection or by reason of any failure to make an inspection or reinspection. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.900 - Right of entry. 
Whenever necessary for the purpose of investigating or enforcing the provisions of this chapter, or whenever any enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any structure or upon any premises, any condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter, such officers may enter such structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same, or to perform any duty imposed upon any of such respective officers by law; provided, that if such structure or premises be occupied, the officer shall first present proper credentials and request entry; provided further, that if such structure or premises is unoccupied, the officer shall first make a reasonable attempt to contact a responsible person from such firm or corporation and request entry, except in emergency circumstances. If such entry is refused, the officer seeking entry shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.910 - Inspections by permittee. 
The permittee shall conduct regular inspections of its own facilities to assure compliance with this chapter and shall maintain logs or file reports in accordance with its hazardous materials management plan. The inspector conducting such inspections shall be qualified to conduct such inspections. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.920 - Special inspections. 
In addition to the inspections specified in this chapter, the city may require the periodic employment of special inspectors to conduct an audit or assessment of the permittee's facility to make a hazardous material safety evaluation and to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
A.  The special inspector shall be a qualified person or firm who shall demonstrate expertise to the satisfaction of the city. 
B.  The special inspection report shall include an evaluation of the facilities and recommendations consistent with the provisions of this chapter where appropriate. A copy of the report shall be filed with the city at the same time that it is submitted to the permittee. 
C.  The permittee shall, within thirty days of such report, file with the city a plan to implement all recommendations, or shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city why such recommendations shall not be implemented. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.930 - Substituted inspections. 
An inspection by an employee of any other public agency may be deemed by the city as a substitute for any requirement in this chapter. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
Article X. - Hearings, Notices and Enforcement 
 
8.40.940 - Hearing rules. 
In any hearing under the provisions of this chapter, all parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues, to be represented by counsel, and to confront and cross-examine any witnesses against them. Any hearing under the provisions of this chapter may be continued by the person conducting the hearing for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.950 - Notices. 
All notices required by Sections 8.40.340, 8.40.360, 8.40.400 and 8.40.430 shall be sent by certified mail, postage prepaid, to the applicant or the permittee at the address given for purposes of notice on the application or permit or delivered to the permittee personally. 
(Ord. 10 § 2, N.S. § 18, 1992: Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.960 - Criminal penalties. 
Criminal sanctions may be sought for violations of the provisions of this chapter, to the extent available under existing code provisions. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.970 - Civil penalties. 
A.  Any person, firm or corporation who intentionally or negligently violates any provision of this chapter, except that an unauthorized discharge which is recordable and recorded in compliance with Sections 8.40.780 through 8.40.830 of this chapter, shall not be a violation of this chapter for purposes of this section, or fails to comply with any order issued thereunder, shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed five hundred dollars per day for each violation which shall be assessed and recovered in a civil action brought in the name of the people by the city attorney. In determining the penalty, the court shall consider all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  The extent of harm or potential harm caused by the violation; 
2.  The nature and persistence of the violation; 
3.  The length of time over which the violation occurred; 
4.  The frequency of past violations; 
5.  The permittee's record of maintenance; 
6.  Corrective action, if any, taken by the permittee. 
B.  In any civil action brought pursuant hereto, in which the city prevails, the court shall determine and impose reasonable expenses, including attorneys' fees, incurred by the city in the investigation and prosecution of the action. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.980 - Civil action for retaliation. 
A civil action may be instituted against any employer by any employee who has been discharged, demoted, suspended or in any other manner discriminated against in terms or conditions of employment, or threatened with any such retaliation, because such employee has, in good faith, made any oral or written report or complaint related to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter to any company official, public official or union official, or has testified in any proceeding in any way related thereto. In addition to any actual damages which may be awarded, damages shall include costs and attorney's fees. The court may award punitive damages in a proper case. 
(Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
8.40.990 - Remedies not exclusive. 
A.  Remedies under this section are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. 
B.  All costs and attorney fees imposed pursuant to this chapter are declared to be costs of nuisance abatement and shall be assessed against the property upon which the violation of this chapter occurred. Such costs and attorney fees, if not paid within thirty days after assessment shall constitute a lien against the personal or real property of the person or persons responsible for the violation for the amount thereof from the time of recordation of the notice of lien. The lien shall continue until the assessment is paid or until it is discharged of record. 
C.  From and after the date of recording of the lien, all persons shall be deemed to have notice of the contents thereof. The notice of lien shall be delivered by the city finance director to the county auditor, who shall enter the amount thereof on the county assessment book opposite the description of the particular property. The amount shall be collected together with all other taxes thereon against the property. The notice of lien shall be delivered to the county auditor before the date fixed by law for the delivery. Thereafter, the amount of the lien shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary county taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and interest and to the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary county taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of county taxes are made applicable to such special assessment taxes. 
(Ord. 1082 N.S. § 19, 1992; Ord. 849 N.S. § 11, 1987: Ord. 636 N.S. (part), 1983)  
Article XI. - Construction and Monitoring Standards for Toxic Gases  
Part 1. - Purpose and Definitions 
 
8.40.1010 - Scope. 
This article applies to all new and existing facilities where regulated materials subject to this article are present. In the event of conflicting or overlapping regulatory provisions with other hazardous materials laws, regulations, codes, or ordinances and this article, the most stringent requirement shall be applied. In the event of conflicting or overlapping regulatory provisions with a federal law or state law or regulation, unless the application of this article is expressly preempted by an act of Congress or enactment of the Legislature, the more stringent requirement shall apply. This article shall not apply to the registration and application of pesticides since this is preempted by an Act of Congress. Handling and storage of pesticide cylinders, however, shall comply with all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1020 - Definitions—General. 
Unless the context otherwise requires, the words and phrases in this article shall have the meanings set forth in this Article XI and shall govern the construction of this article. For words and phrases not defined in this article, the definitions set forth in Article 2 of the California Fire Code shall apply. 
A.  "Class I material" is a material that has a median lethal concentration (LC 50 ) in air of 200 parts per million or less by volume of gas or vapor, or 2 milligrams per liter or less of mist, fume or dust, when administered by continuous inhalation for an hour, or less if death occurs within one hour, to albino rats weighing between 200 and 300 grams each. 
B.  "Class II material" is a material that has a median lethal concentration (LC 50 ) in air more than 200 parts per million but not more than 3,000 parts per million by volume of gas or vapor, or more than 2 milligrams per liter but not more than 30 milligrams per liter of mist, fume or dust, when administered by continuous inhalation for an hour, or less if death occurs within one hour, to albino rats weighing between 200 and 300 grams each. 
C.  "Class III material" is a material that has a median lethal concentration (LC 50 ) in air more than 3,000 parts per million but not more than 5,000 parts per million by volume of gas or vapor, or more than 30 milligrams per liter but not more than 50 milligrams per liter of mist, fume or dust, when administered by continuous inhalation for an hour, or less if death occurs within one hour, to albino rats weighing between 200 and 300 grams each. 
D.  "Controls" are means to regulate materials to prevent unauthorized discharges. 
E.  "Control area" means a space within a building where regulated materials may be stored, handled, dispensed or used. The control area is an area formed by one or more of the following: 
1.  An occupancy separation with a minimum one-hour fire-resistive rating, or 
2.  The exterior wall, roof or foundation of the building. A maximum of four control areas shall be permitted within a building except buildings or portions of buildings used for retail sales, which shall have a maximum of two control areas; otherwise, the entire building shall be considered an "H" occupancy and shall meet the requirements of this occupancy as set forth in the California Fire Code. 
F.  "Excess flow control" means a fail-safe system designed to shut off flow due to rupture in pressurized piping systems. 
G.  "Exterior storage" means a storage area enclosed by no more than two contiguous walls. 
H.  "Facility" means any building, structure, installation, equipment, pipe, container, site, area, appurtenant structure or surrounding land area where regulated materials are stored, used, dispensed, handled, placed or otherwise have come to be located. 
I.  "Fire code" means the California Fire Code. 
J.  "IDLH (immediately dangerous to life and health)" means a concentration of airborne contaminants, normally expressed in parts per million (ppm) or milligrams per cubic meter, which represents the maximum level from which one could escape within thirty minutes without any escape-impairing systems or irreversible health effects. This level is established by the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH). If adequate data do not exist for precise establishment of IDLH data, an independent certified industrial hygienist, industrial toxicologist or appropriate regulatory agency shall make such determination. 
K.  "Inert construction materials" means materials which, under reasonably foreseeable conditions, will not degrade or react upon contact with the regulated material to be contained. 
L.  "Lethal concentration" (LC 50 ) means the median lethal concentration level, at which fifty percent of appropriate test animals die when exposed by inhalation for a scientifically appropriate specified time period. For the purposes of this chapter, LC 50 values for a particular regulated material shall be those established by the Department of Transportation (D.O.T.). If D.O.T. has not established an LC 50 value for a particular regulated material, the LC 50 value established by the Compressed Gas Association (CGA) shall be used. If neither D.O.T. nor CGA has established an LC 50 value for a particular regulated material, the fire chief or his designee may use LC 50 values from other available scientific sources. 
M.  "Lethal concentration low" (LC Lo ) means the lowest concentration of a chemical at which some test animals died following inhalation exposure. 
N.  "Lethal dose median" (LD 50 ) means the dose at which fifty percent of test animals die following exposure. The lethal dose is given in milligrams per kilogram of body weight of the test animals. 
O.  "Lethal dose low" (LD Lo ) means the lowest dose of a chemical at which some test animals died following exposure. 
P.  "Maximum threshold quantity" (Max. T.Q.) means the maximum quantity of a Class II or Class III regulated material which may be stored in a single vessel before a stricter category of regulation is required by this article. Max. T.Q. is determined by the following equation: 
Max. T.Q. (pounds) = LC 50 (ppm) × 2 
For the purpose of calculating the Max. T.Q., storage tank, cylinder and piping systems which can be isolated in a manner approved by the fire chief or his designee may be designated as a separate storage vessel. 
Q.  "Minimum threshold quantity" (Min. T.Q.) means the aggregate quantity of a single regulated material in a control area which, due to the minimal aggregate quantities present, need only comply with specific control requirements established in Part 8 and Part 2 of this article and not with the specific requirements for Class I, II or III regulated materials. Min. T.Q. for mixtures shall be based on the aggregate weight of the regulated components. 
For all regulated materials: 
Min. T.Q. = 2 pounds or less. 
Minimum threshold quantity controls are set forth in Part 8 of this article. 
R.  "Permissible exposure limit" (PEL) means the maximum permitted eight-hour time-weighted average concentration of an airborne contaminant. The maximum permitted time-weighted average exposures are set forth in 29 CFR 1910.1000, as it may be amended from time to time. 
S.  "Person" means an individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation, partnership, association or other business activity, city, county, district, the state, any department or agency thereof, or the United States, to the extent authorized by law. 
T.  "Portable tank" means any packaging over sixty U.S. gallons capacity and designed primarily to be loaded into or on or temporarily attached to a transport vehicle or ship, and equipped with skids, mounting or accessories to facilitate handling of the tank by mechanical means. It does not include any cylinder having more than one thousand pounds water capacity, cargo tank, tank car tank or trailers carrying cylinders of over one thousand pounds water capacity. 
U.  "Reduced flow valve" means a valve equipped with a restricted flow orifice and inserted into a compressed gas cylinder, portable tank or stationary tank that is designed to reduce the maximum flow from the valve under full-flow conditions. The maximum flow rate from the valve is determined with the valve allowed to flow to atmosphere with no other piping or fittings attached. 
V.  "Regulated materials" are all materials, regardless of form (i.e., liquid, solid or gas) which meet the criteria established by Section 8.40.1040. 
W.  "Responsible persons" means permittees under this article, owners, managers and persons responsible for the day-to-day operation of any facility subject to this article. 
X.  "Stationary tank" means any packaging designed primarily for stationary installations not intended for loading, unloading, transport or attachment to a transport vehicle as part of its normal operation in the process of use. It does not include cylinders having less than one thousand pounds water capacity. 
Y.  "Unauthorized discharge" means releasing, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing of a regulated material into the environment, including any sewer, storm drain, ditch, drainage canal, lake, river or tidal waterway, surface water, ground water, land surface, sidewalk, street or highway, subsurface strata or ambient air except: 
1.  A "federally permitted release" as that term is defined in Section 101 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, 42 USC Section 9602(10), or pursuant to a permit of the Bay Area Air Quality Management District, or waste discharge requirements of the San Francisco Bay Regional Water Quality Control Board or local wastewater pretreatment requirements for publicly owned treatment works; or 
2.  The normal application of materials used in weed abatement, erosion control, soil amendment or similar application when used in accordance with manufacturer's instructions or nationally recognized standards. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
Part 2. - Special Provisions 
 
8.40.1030 - General provisions. 
This article governs the storage, dispensing, use and handling of regulated materials. To the extent that the application of this article to the registration and use of pesticides is preempted by an express provision of an act of Congress or a statute adopted by the state Legislature, this article does not apply. 
The provisions of Part 2 apply to all regulated materials, including Class I, Class II, Class III and minimum threshold quantities of regulated materials. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1040 - Regulated materials. 
"Regulated materials," including but not limited to gases, are those materials which meet the following criteria: 
A.  The materials fall under the definition of Class I, Class II or Class III materials; and 
B.  The materials meet either of the following criteria: 
1.  They are shipped in compressed gas cylinders and the material is or becomes or acts as a gas upon release at normal temperature and pressure (68° Fahrenheit and 760 mm Hg), or 
2.  The material is used or handled as a gas whether or not the material meets the definition of a compressed gas in Article 2 of the California Fire Code or 49 CFR Section 173.300(a). 
Materials which meet the foregoing criteria are subject to the provisions of this article unless exempted by the fire chief or his designee based upon scientific evidence provided by a toxicologist or other professional. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1050 - General obligation. 
No person shall cause, suffer or permit the storage, handling, use or dispensing of materials regulated by this article: 
A.  In a manner which is contrary to a provision of this article or any other federal or state or local statute, code, ordinance, rule, regulation or standard of performance relating to materials subject to this article; or 
B.  In a manner which causes an unauthorized discharge or which imposes a significant risk of such unauthorized discharge. 
A person responsible for a facility shall, as soon as he or she has knowledge of an unauthorized discharge from or at such facility, immediately notify the fire chief or designee of such discharge. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1060 - Permits and system upgrades. 
No person shall store, dispense, use or handle any regulated material in excess of an exempt amount at a facility unless a compliance plan and a plan review fee have been submitted to the fire chief or his designee and a permit for the facility has been issued pursuant to Part 10 of this article. 
The extent of system upgrades shall be determined by the following conditions: 
A.  If a building permit is required for a piping modification, then upgrading of the entire system for that gas shall be required. 
B.  If a building permit is not required for piping modification, such as for connecting an existing piping system to a new piece of equipment, then upgrading of the entire system shall not be required. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1070 - Closure. 
It is unlawful for any person to abandon, remove or close a facility or other area regulated by this article until a closure plan has been submitted to and approved by the fire chief or his designee. 
A closure plan and a closure plan review fee as set by the schedule of fees as adopted by the council shall be submitted by a responsible person to the fire chief or his designee at least thirty days prior to facility closure. The property owner of the property upon which the regulated materials are stored shall be responsible for the closure in the event that the regulated materials are abandoned or when the permittee has not complied with all provisions of this section. The closure plan shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the fire chief or his designee that regulated materials which are or have been stored, dispensed, handled or used in the facility will be transported, disposed of or reused in a manner consistent with public health and safety. The fire chief or his designee may waive all or part of the thirty-day period upon a finding of good cause. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1080 - Seismic protection. 
Persons responsible for a facility with one or more stationary tanks and piping systems used for regulated materials shall cause such tanks and piping systems to be seismically braced in accordance with the provisions of the California Building Code. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1090 - Security. 
Responsible persons shall cause facilities where materials subject to this article are stored, handled, dispensed or used to be secured against unauthorized entry. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1100 - Breathing apparatus. 
In order to provide for immediate initial on-scene response in the event of an unauthorized discharge and to provide on-scene assistance to firefighters and other emergency response personnel, persons responsible for any facility where Class I or corrosive regulated materials are present shall provide a minimum of two self-contained breathing apparatus. When self-contained breathing apparatus would be inadequate protection due to the nature of the gases present, other appropriate protective equipment shall be provided for on-site emergency response personnel. 
The self-contained breathing apparatus or other protective equipment shall be suitable for use with the material present and shall be readily available to on-site emergency response personnel in a location that provides safety for those expected to don the apparatus. A "location that provides safety" is one which is not likely to be immediately affected by the release of a regulated material. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1110 - Incompatible materials. 
Responsible persons shall cause regulated materials to be separated from other incompatible hazardous materials listed in Table 5108-A of the California Fire Code. Separation shall be maintained by one-hour fire-resistive construction or by the use of separate gas cabinets. 
Construction materials shall be compatible with the toxic gases they serve. Compatibility of construction materials shall be based on nationally recognized standards such as the National Association of Corrosion Engineers (NACE). 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1120 - Leak testing. 
Responsible persons shall cause containers of regulated materials to be tested for leaks immediately upon delivery and again immediately prior to departure of such containers from facilities. Testing methods shall be approved by the fire chief or his designee in accordance with appropriately nationally recognized industry standards and practices, if any. Appropriate remedial action shall be immediately undertaken when leaks are detected. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1130 - Protective plugs and caps. 
Responsible persons shall cause the protective plugs and caps of containers of regulated materials to be in place at all times unless and until the material is properly placed into use. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1140 - Emergency response plan. 
If the preparation of an emergency response plan for the facility is not required by any other law, a responsible person shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, and filed with the fire chief or his designee, a written emergency response plan. If the preparation of an emergency response plan is required by any other law, a responsible person shall file a copy of the plan with the fire chief or his designee. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1150 - Emergency response teams. 
If not required to do so by another law, a person responsible for a facility subject to this article shall designate, or cause to be designated, an on-site emergency response team, which shall be composed of an adequate number of trained, responsible persons, and which shall serve as liaison to the Santa Clara County fire department. 
Emergency response team members shall ascertain all on-site locations where regulated materials are stored, handled and used, and shall become familiar with the emergency response plan and the chemical nature of such regulated material, and shall act as facility liaison to the Santa Clara County fire department and shall be prepared to respond in an emergency. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1160 - Emergency drills. 
Responsible persons shall cause emergency drills of each on-site emergency response team to be conducted not less frequently than once every three months. Records of drills conducted shall be maintained at the facility for three years and shall be made available for inspection upon request by the fire chief or his designee. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1170 - Annual maintenance. 
Responsible persons shall cause all safety control systems at a facility to be tested not less frequently than annually and maintained in good working condition. Maintenance and testing shall be performed by persons qualified to perform the maintenance and tests. Maintenance records and test certifications shall be available to the fire chief or his designee upon inspection or request. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1180 - Flow-limiting orifices and devices for Class I materials. 
All containers of materials other than lecture bottles classified as Class I regulated materials and having a vapor pressure exceeding 29 psi, shall be equipped with a flow-restricting orifice, when commercially available. If a flow-restricting orifice is not available, the container shall be used with a flow-limiting device. All flow-limiting devices shall be part of the valve assembly and visible to the eye when possible; otherwise, they shall be installed as close as possible to the cylinder source. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1190 - Fire extinguishing systems. 
Except as provided below, responsible persons shall cause all interior and exterior use areas and all indoor storage areas and storage buildings to be protected from fire by automatic sprinkler systems. 
The design of the sprinkler system shall be not less than that required under the current edition of NFPA 13 for ordinary hazard Group II with a minimum design area of three thousand square feet. Where the materials or storage arrangement require a higher level of sprinkler system protection in accordance with nationally recognized standards, the higher level of sprinkler system protection shall be provided. 
If the chemical properties of the regulated materials are such that the materials will be incompatible with the use of a sprinkler system, the fire chief or his designee may require alternative forms of fire protection. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
Part 3. - Classification of Materials 
 
8.40.1200 - General. 
Regulated materials shall be classified as Class I, Class II, Class III or Min. T.Q. materials as defined in Part 1 of this article. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1210 - Exempt amounts. 
Except as provided below, any single regulated material which would otherwise be regulated is exempt from regulation under this article if: 
A.  The aggregate quantity of any single regulated material in a control area or exterior storage does not exceed the Min. T.Q.; and 
B.  The quantity of the material in a single vessel does not exceed the amounts specified as follows: 
1.  1 pound; or 
2.  A concentration below the permissible exposure limit (PEL); and 
C.  The aggregate quantity of all regulated materials in a control area or exterior storage does not exceed the exempt amounts specified in Article 80 of the currently adopted edition of the California Fire Code. 
Notwithstanding the exemption above, no amount of Class I regulated material is exempt from the provisions for flow-limiting devices and fire extinguishing systems found in Part 2 of this article. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1220 - Calculations for determining the class of mixtures. 
The LC 50 value for mixtures containing regulated materials shall be calculated using the following formula: 
LC 50 of gas mixture (ppm) = 
1 
_____
(molar fraction of toxic component)/ 
(ppm LC 50 of toxic component) 
 
If more than one toxic component is present, the LC 50 value shall be calculated using the following formula: 
LC 50 of gas mixture (ppm) = 

1 
_____
n 	
	S [ ( f i) / (LC 50 i)] 
	i=1 
 
where f i is the mole fraction of the i th toxic component of the gas mixture and LC 50 i is the LC 50 of the i th toxic component of the gas mixture. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
Part 4. - Hazard Classification and Control Table 
 
8.40.1230 - General. 
The requirements for controls for the use or indoor storage of regulated materials shall be cumulative as the hazard class of regulated material increases in accordance with the following table: 
Hazard Classifications and Controls 
	
Hazard Classification 	Hazard Controls 
	
Class I 	Includes Part 2, Class I, Class II, Class III, minimum threshold quantity and exempt amount controls 
Class II 	Includes Part 2, Class II, Class III, minimum threshold quantity and exempt amount controls 
Class III 	Includes Part 2, Class III, minimum threshold quantity and exempt amount controls 
Minimum threshold 	Includes Part 2, minimum threshold quantity and exempt amount controls 
Exempt amounts 	Other applicable statutes, codes and ordinances 
 
All control equipment for materials regulated by this article shall meet appropriate nationally recognized standards, if any, approved by the fire chief or his designee. 
Halogenated, non-carbon based gases may hydrolyze to their base mineral acid upon contact with moisture. Therefore, the monitoring and compatibility requirements of this article shall apply to their decomposition products. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
Part 5. - Class I Controls 
 
8.40.1240 - Class I controls. 
Persons responsible for any facility where Class I materials are present shall comply with all of the requirements of Part 2 and Parts 5, 6, 7, and 8 of this article. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1250 - Piping. 
Piping for Class I materials shall be designed and fabricated from materials compatible with the material to be contained. Piping shall be of strength and durability sufficient to withstand the pressure, structural and seismic stress and exposure to which it may be subjected, as required by the California Building Code. 
Secondary containment shall be provided for piping for Class I materials. The secondary containment shall be capable of directing a sudden release into an approved discharge treatment system and shall be monitored continually with a continuous gas monitoring system approved by the fire chief or his designee. Secondary containment includes, but is not limited to, doublewalled piping. Secondary containment for piping under sub-atmospheric conditions may not be required if the piping is equipped with an alarm and cylinder fail-safe-to-close valve activated by a loss of vacuum. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1260 - Automatic shutoff. 
An automatic shutoff valve which is of fail-safe-to-close design shall be provided. Each of the following shall activate automatic shutoff: 
A.  Gas detection at PEL in occupiable areas; at one-half IDLH (or 0.05 LC 50 if no established IDLH) in unoccupiable areas; 
B.  Manual activation of emergency shutoff valves, from remote locations; 
C.  Failure of emergency power; 
D.  Seismic activity; 
E.  Failure of primary containment; 
F.  Activation of manual fire alarm; 
G.  Failure of required exhaust flow ventilation rate. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1270 - Emergency control station. 
Signals from emergency equipment shall be transmitted to an emergency control station which is continually staffed by trained personnel. Continual staffing shall not be required during periods when regulated materials have been purged from all process piping and equipment and are no longer being used or dispensed. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
Part 6. - Class II Controls 
 
8.40.1280 - Class II controls. 
Responsible persons shall cause materials which are classified as Class II materials to be provided with the controls specified in Part 2 and Parts 6, 7 and 8 of this article. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1290 - Connections. 
Piping and tubing for Class II materials shall be installed in accordance with appropriate nationally recognized standards, if any, approved by the fire chief or his designee and shall have welded connections compatible with the regulated material throughout unless an exhausted enclosure is provided. 
Material which is not compatible with ferrous piping may be installed in nonferrous piping approved by the fire chief or his designee. 
Where connections other than welding connections meet appropriate nationally recognized industry standards, if any, a person responsible for a facility may seek an exception from the fire chief or his designee. A request for exception and a fee as set by the schedule of fees as adopted by the council shall be filed with the fire chief or his designee for approval. The request shall document the standards and reason for the exception. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1300 - Local gas shutoff. 
Manual activation controls for local gas shutoff shall be provided at locations near the point of use and near the source, as approved by the fire chief or his designee. The fire chief or his designee may require additional controls at other places, including but not limited to the entry to the building, the area in the building where regulated materials are stored or used and emergency control stations. Manually activated shutoff valves shall be of fail-safe-to-close design. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1310 - Emergency power. 
Emergency power shall be provided for: 
A.  Exhaust ventilation, including the power supply for treatment systems; 
B.  Gas detection systems; 
C.  Emergency alarm systems; 
D.  Temperature control systems which comply with the California Fire Code. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1320 - Excess flow control. 
Portable tanks and cylinders containing Class II material shall be provided with excess flow control. Excess flow control shall be permanently marked to indicate the maximum design flow rate. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1330 - Gas detection. 
A continuous gas detection system shall be provided to detect the presence of a gas at or below the permissible exposure limit in occupiable areas and at or below one-half IDLH (or 0.05 LC 50 if no established IDLH) in unoccupiable areas. The detection system shall initiate a local alarm and transmit a signal to a continually staffed remote location (to provide an immediate response to an alarm). The alarm shall be both visual and audible and shall be designed to provide warning both inside and outside of the interior storage, use or handling area. The audible alarm shall be distinct from all other on-site alarms. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1340 - Exhaust ventilation monitoring. 
A continuous monitoring system shall be provided to assure that the required exhaust ventilation rate is maintained. The monitoring system shall initiate a local alarm. The alarm shall be both visual and audible and shall be designed to provide warning both inside and outside of the interior storage, use or handling area. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1350 - Seismic shutoff valves. 
A seismically activated valve meeting standards approved by the fire chief or his designee shall be provided for an automatic shutoff of regulated materials. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1360 - Class II corrosives. 
Inert construction materials shall be used for the primary containment of Class II regulated materials which are corrosive. Alternatively, secondary containment shall be provided for Class II materials which are corrosive. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1370 - Emergency alarms. 
When materials regulated by this article are transported through exit corridors or exit enclosures, there shall be an emergency telephone system or a local manual alarm station or a signaling device approved by the fire chief or his designee at not more than one hundred fifty foot intervals and at each exit doorway throughout the transport route. The signals shall be relayed to an approved central, proprietary or remote station service or a constantly attended on-site location and shall also initiate a local audible alarm. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
Part 7. - Class III Controls 
 
8.40.1380 - Class III controls. 
Persons responsible for a facility shall cause materials which are classified as Class III materials to be provided with the controls specified in Part 2 and Parts 7 and 8 of this article. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1390 - Piping, valves and fittings. 
Piping, valves, fittings and related components shall be designed and fabricated from materials compatible with the material to be contained. They shall have strength and durability sufficient to withstand the pressure, structural, seismic and any other stress and exposure to which they may be subjected. 
Expansion chambers shall be provided between valves whenever appropriate in accordance with nationally recognized standards approved by the fire chief or his designee. Chambers shall be sized to provide protection for piping, valves and instrumentation and to accommodate the expansion of regulated materials. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1400 - Signage. 
Stationary above-ground tanks shall be placarded with hazard identification signs as specified in the California Fire Code, Standard 79-3, for the specific material contained. 
Signs prohibiting smoking shall be posted in indoor storage, use and handling areas and within twenty-five feet of outdoor storage, use and handling areas, except within buildings designated as "No Smoking" buildings and shall be as follows: 
A.  Signs shall not be obscured or removed. 
B.  Signs shall be in English and other languages as may be appropriate, as determined by the fire chief or his designee. 
C.  Signs shall be durable. 
D.  The size, color and lettering shall be in conformance with nationally recognized standards determined by the fire chief or his designee to be applicable to the regulated material. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1410 - Inert gas purge system. 
Gas systems for regulated materials shall be provided with individually dedicated inert gas purge systems (e.g., nitrogen, helium, argon and neon). A dedicated inert gas purge system may be used to purge more than one gas, provided the gases are compatible. Purge gas systems shall be located in an approved gas cabinet unless the system operates by vacuum demand. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
Part 8. - Minimum Threshold Quantity Controls 
 
8.40.1420 - Minimum threshold quantity controls. 
Responsible persons shall cause materials which do not exceed the minimum threshold quantity as defined in Section 8.40.1020 to be provided with controls specified in Part 2 and Part 8 of this article. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1430 - Minimum threshold quantity controls—Exhaust ventilation. 
Storage of cylinders shall be within ventilated gas cabinets, exhausted enclosures or within a ventilated separate gas storage room as defined in the California Fire Code. 
Storage of portable and stationary tanks shall be within a separate ventilated room without other occupancy or use. If gas cabinets are provided, the room or area in which they are located shall have independent exhaust ventilation when properly exhausted cabinets are not utilized. Exhaust systems for gas cabinets, exhausted enclosures and separate gas storage rooms shall be designed to handle the accidental release of gas. Such exhaust systems shall be capable of diluting, absorbing, neutralizing, burning or otherwise processing the entire contents of the single tank or cylinder of gas which presents the highest potential hazard. Systems utilized for such processing shall be designed as a treatment system, as described in Section 8.40.1450, below. If a total containment system is utilized, the system shall be designed to handle the maximum anticipated pressure of release to the system when the system reaches equilibrium. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1440 - Minimum threshold quantity controls—Gas cabinets. 
When gas cabinets are provided, they shall be: 
A.  Operated at negative pressure in relation to their surrounding area; 
B.  Provided with self-closing limited access ports or fire-rated windows to give access to equipment controls. The average velocity of ventilation at the face of access ports or windows shall be not less than two hundred feet per minute (FPM) with a minimum of one hundred fifty FPM at any point of the access port or window; 
C.  Connected to a treatment system; 
D.  Provided with self-closing doors; 
E.  Constructed of steel with a thickness of not less than twelve gauge. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1450 - Minimum threshold quantity controls—Treatment systems. 
Treatment systems shall be utilized to process all exhaust ventilation to be discharged from gas cabinets, exhausted enclosures or separate storage rooms. Treatment systems shall be designed to reduce the maximum allowable discharge concentration of the gas to one-half IDLH (or 0.05 LC 50 if no established IDLH) at the point of discharge to the atmosphere as specified below. When more than one gas may be emitted to the treatment system, the treatment system shall be designed to handle the worst-case release based on the release rate, the quantity and the IDLH (or 0.1 LC 50 if no established IDLH) for all the gases stored or used. In the event that a revised IDLH is published, the city shall establish a new timetable for existing facilities to upgrade their treatment systems to meet the revised IDLH value. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1460 - Minimum threshold quantity controls—Treatment systems sizing. 
Treatment systems shall be sized to process the worst-case release of each gas based on the maximum flow rate of release from the cylinder or tank utilized which presents the highest potential hazard. The entire contents of tanks and cylinders shall be considered. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1470 - Minimum threshold quantity controls—Stationary tanks. 
Stationary tanks shall be labeled with the maximum rate of release for the gas contained based on any valves or fittings that are inserted directly into the tank. 
If multiple valves or fittings are provided, the maximum flow rate of release for the valve or fitting with the highest flow rate shall be indicated. If liquefied gases are in contact with any valve or fitting, the liquid flow rate shall be utilized for purposes of computation of the maximum flow rate of release. All flow rates indicated on the label shall be converted to cubic feet per minute of gas at normal temperature and pressure. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1480 - Minimum threshold quantity controls—Portable tanks and cylinders. 
For portable tanks and cylinders, the maximum flow rate of release shall be calculated based on the actual release data or calculations using actual valve manufacturers specifications. When this data is not available, the maximum flow rate of release shall be calculated based on the total release from the cylinder or tank within the time specified in the table below: 
Container 	Nonliquefied 
(Minutes) 	Liquefied 
(Minutes) 
		
Cylinders 	5 	30 
		
Portable tanks 	40 	240 
 
When portable tanks or cylinders are equipped with approved reduced flow orifices in the cylinder valve, the worst-case release may be determined by the maximum achievable flow through the orifice as determined by the valve manufacturer or the gas supplier. Reduced flow and excess flow valves shall be permanently marked to indicate the maximum design flow rate. Such markings shall indicate the flow rate for air under standard conditions. Lettering shall be one-quarter inch high, minimum, and be in contrast to the color it is printed upon. 
When cylinders are manifolded together, the maximum release rate shall be the sum of the release rates for all of the manifolded cylinders. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1490 - Minimum threshold quantity controls—Piping and controls. 
All primary piping for regulated materials shall pass a helium leak test of 1×10 -9 cubic centimeters/second where practical, or other nationally recognized standard. Tests shall be conducted by a qualified "third party" not involved with the construction of the piping and control systems. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
Part 9. - Exterior Storage 
 
8.40.1500 - General. 
Persons responsible for a facility where there is exterior storage of any regulated material shall comply with the provisions of Part 2, Part 3 and Part 9 of this article and of the California Fire Code. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1510 - Distance limitation to exposures. 
Exterior storage of regulated materials shall not be within seventy-five feet of a building, structure, property line, street, alley, public way or exit to a public way unless the storage is shielded by a structure which has a minimum fire-resistive rating of two hours and which interrupts the line of sight between the storage and the exposure. The shielding structure shall be at least five feet from any exposure. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1520 - Openings in buildings subject to exposure. 
Notwithstanding Section 8.40.1510, when an exterior storage area is located within seventy-five feet of a building, openings into the building other than piping shall not be above the height of the top of the shielding structure referred to in Section 8.40.1510 or within fifty feet horizontally from the exterior storage area, whether or not protected by a shielding structure. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1530 - Air intakes. 
No exterior storage area for regulated materials shall be within seventy-five feet of any air intake. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1540 - Canopies. 
Portable tanks and cylinders stored outside of buildings shall be stored under a canopy constructed of noncombustible materials. Such exterior storage shall not be considered indoor storage. An automatic fire sprinkler system, or alternative systems as determined by the fire chief or his designee for materials incompatible with water, shall be provided for canopies installed for the storage of regulated materials. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1550 - Stationary tank controls. 
Controls on stationary tanks shall be in accordance with the following: 
A.  Pressure-relief devices shall be vented to a treatment system designed in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.40.1450 of this article. 
B.  Where filling or dispensing connections are provided, they shall be provided with a means of local exhaust. Such exhaust shall be designed to capture fumes and vapors. The exhaust shall be directed to a treatment system designed in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.40.1450 of this article. 
C.  Stationary tanks shall be provided with a means of excess flow control on all tank inlet or outlet connections. Inlet connections that are designed to preclude backflow and pressure-relief devices are exempt from this requirement. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1560 - Gas cabinets for leaking cylinders. 
At least one gas cabinet or exhausted enclosure shall be provided for the handling of leaking cylinders. The cabinet or enclosure shall be within or adjacent to the exterior storage area and connected to a treatment system as specified in Section 8.40.1450 of this article. 
A gas cabinet or exhausted enclosure need not be provided for leaking cylinders if all cylinders are stored within gas cabinets or exhausted enclosures and the exhaust is directed to a treatment system designed in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.40.1450 of this article. 
Encapsulating equipment or other equipment designed to contain high-pressure cylinders and their contents as approved by the fire chief or his designee shall be acceptable in meeting the intent of this section in lieu of gas cabinets or exhausted enclosures. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1570 - Local exhaust for leaking portable tanks. 
A means of local exhaust shall be provided to capture regulated material leaking from portable tanks. The local exhaust may consist of portable ducts or collection systems designed to be applied to the site of a leak in a valve or fitting on the tank. The local exhaust system shall be connected to a treatment system as specified in Section 8.40.1450 of this article. A local exhaust system shall be provided within or immediately adjacent to every storage area and within separate gas storage rooms used for portable tanks. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
8.40.1580 - Tank cars and piping. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to tank cars which meet all requirements of the U.S. Department of Transportation, while such tank cars are used for the transportation and unloading of regulated material, as such terms are used in the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act, 49 U.S.C. Section 1801 et seq. "Unloading" does not include the use of tank cars to store regulated materials. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to piping and control systems, automatic shutoff valves, emergency control stations, gas detection systems, treatment systems and alarm systems used with piping which connects tank cars to facilities for the unloading and delivery of regulated material, and to tank cars used to store regulated materials. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
Part 10. - Permit Process 
 
8.40.1590 - General. 
Responsible persons shall obtain and keep current a regulated materials permit. The process and procedures set forth in the California Fire Code as well as local hazardous materials storage ordinances shall govern regulated materials. 
(Ord. 1494 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000)  
Chapter 8.44 - SMOKING POLLUTION CONTROL 
 
8.44.010 - Purpose. 
A.  Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution and a potential health hazard in outdoor settings. Studies have shown exposure to secondhand smoke is a significant health hazard for several populations, including children, elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive airway disease. Health hazards induced by exposure to secondhand smoke include lung cancer, heart disease, respiratory infection, decreased respiratory functions, bronchoconstriction, and bronchospasm. Nonsmokers with allergies, respiratory diseases and those who suffer other ill effects of breathing secondhand smoke may experience a loss of job productivity or may be forced to take periodic sick leave because of reactions to secondhand smoke. Smoking is a potential cause of fires, and cigarette butts are a pervasive source of litter. 
B.  The city council of the city finds and declares that the purposes of this chapter are (1) to protect the public health and welfare by reducing exposure to secondhand smoke by prohibiting smoking in places where people live, work, and play, and (2) to strike a reasonable balance between the needs of persons who smoke and the need of nonsmokers to breathe smoke-free air, and to recognize that, where these needs conflict, the need to breathe smoke-free air should have priority. 
(Ord. 749 N.S. § 1 (IV-14-2), 1985) 
(Ord. No. 2040 N.S., 5-2-2012)  
8.44.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined as follows: 
1.  "Dining area" means any area, including streets and sidewalks, which is available to or customarily used by the general public or an employee, and which is designed, established, or regularly used for consuming food or drink. Dining area includes outdoor patios and other areas used for the consumption of food or drink, including any public right-of-way in which dining is permitted through city approval. 
2.  "Employee" means any person who is employed or retained as an independent contractor by any employer in the consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, or any person who volunteers his or her services for an employer. 
3.  "Employer" means any person, business, nonprofit entity, or corporation, including public agencies, who retain the services of one or more employees. 
4.  "Enclosed" means closed in by a roof and four walls with appropriate openings for ingress and egress. 
5.  "Unenclosed" means any area that is not enclosed. 
6.  "Place of employment" means any enclosed area under the legal or de facto control of a public or private employer which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Conference and class rooms; 
b.  Employee cafeterias and dining areas; 
c.  Employee lounges, breakrooms, and restrooms; 
d.  Hallways, elevators, and warehouses; 
e.  Work areas. 
A private residence is not a "place of employment." 
7.  "Public place" means any enclosed area, publicly or privately owned, to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, regardless of any fee or age requirement, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Banks; 
b.  Educational facilities; 
c.  Health care facilities; 
d.  Public transportation facilities; 
e.  Reception areas, and hotel and motel lobbies; 
f.  Restaurants, bars, and hotel and motel banquet rooms; 
g.  Retail stores; 
h.  Retail service establishments; 
i.  Retail food production and marketing establishments; 
j.  Waiting rooms, elevators, and restrooms; 
k.  Government buildings. 
A private residence is not a "public place." 
8.  "Reasonable distance" means a distance of twenty-five feet in any direction from an area in which smoking is prohibited. 
9.  "Service area" means any publicly or privately owned area, including streets and sidewalks, that is used by one or more persons to receive a service, wait to receive a service, or to make a transaction, whether or not such service or transaction includes the exchange of money. The term "service area" includes, but is not limited to, areas including or adjacent to information kiosks, automatic teller machines (ATMs), ticket lines, bus stops or shelters, mobile vendor lines, or cab stands. 
10.  "Smoke" means the gases, particles, or vapors released into the air as a result of combustion, electrical ignition, or vaporization when the apparent or usual purpose of the combustion, electrical ignition, or vaporization is human inhalation of the byproducts, except when the combusting material contains no tobacco or nicotine and the purpose of inhalation is solely olfactory, such as smoke from incense. The term "smoke" includes, but is not limited to, tobacco smoke, electronic cigarette vapors, and marijuana smoke. 
11.  "Smoking" means engaging in an act that generates smoke, such as possessing a lighted pipe, a lighted hookah pipe, an operating electronic cigarette, a lighted cigar, or a lighted cigarette of any kind or lighting or igniting a pipe, a hookah pipe, a cigar, or a cigarette of any kind. 
12.  "Recreational area" means any area that is publicly owned and open to the general public for recreational purposes, regardless of any fee or age requirement. The term "recreational area" includes, but is not limited to, parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, sports fields, golf courses, walking paths, gardens, hiking trails, bike paths, riding trails, swimming pools, roller- and ice-skating rinks, recreation centers, dog parks, and skateboard parks. 
13.  "Retail or wholesale tobacco shop" means any business establishment the main purpose of which is the sale of tobacco products, including, but not limited to, cigars, pipe tobacco, and smoking accessories. "Private smokers' lounge" means any enclosed area in or attached to a retail or wholesale tobacco shop that is dedicated to the use of tobacco products, including, but not limited to, cigars and pipes. A retail or wholesale tobacco store does not include any enclosed area or business establishment that also serves or sells services or products other than tobacco use or tobacco products. 
(Ord. 749 N.S. § 1 (IV-14-3), 1985) 
(Ord. No. 2040 N.S., 5-2-2012)  
8.44.030 - Smoking—Where prohibited. 
1.  Smoking is prohibited and shall not be permitted in the following enclosed areas within the city, in addition to places where smoking is already prohibited by state or federal law, in which case those laws apply: 
A.  Public places; 
B.  Buses, taxicabs and other means of public transit under the authority of the city, while within the boundaries of the city; 
C.  Places of employment; 
D.  Service areas; 
E.  Dining areas; 
F.  Recreational areas; 
H.  Private residences licensed as family day care homes during the hours of operation as family day care homes and in those areas where children are present. 
2.  Smoking is prohibited and shall not be permitted in the following unenclosed areas within the city, in addition to places where smoking is already prohibited by state or federal law, in which case those laws apply: 
A.  Service areas; 
B.  Dining areas and within a reasonable distance of any outdoor dining area, except private events that 1) are held entirely on private property, 2) limit attendees to those who are invited prior to the event, and 3) occupy the entire facility, both enclosed and unenclosed, at which the event is held, may be permitted to have a designated smoking area on such private property so long as such designated smoking area is a reasonable distance from any recreational area or any public sidewalk or street; 
C.  Recreational areas, except events at the Community and Cultural Center or the Outdoor Sports Center may be permitted to have a designated smoking area that is approved and defined by the community services director or his or her designee as part of rental permit process including clean up of the designated smoking area; 
D.  Within a reasonable distance from any doorway, window, opening, crack, or vent into a public place which fronts the sidewalk and/or street, except while the person smoking is actively passing on the way to another destination; 
E.  Unenclosed areas being used for a public event on a public right-of-way, including a farmers' market, parade, craft fair, festival, or any other event which may be attended by the general public, except in a designated smoking area. The need for a designated smoking area is solely at the discretion of the event organizer and is not mandatory. If applicable, a designated smoking area: 
(1)  must be completely within an unenclosed area; 
(2)  must not overlap with any area in which smoking is otherwise prohibited by this chapter, state law or federal law; 
(3)  must be located a reasonable distance from any areas primarily used by children; 
(4)  must be no more than five percent of the total outdoor area of the property on which it is located; 
(5)  must have a clearly marked perimeter; and 
(6)  must be identified by conspicuous signs. 
(Ord. 749 N.S. § 1 (IV-14-4), 1985) 
(Ord. No. 2040 N.S., 5-2-2012)  
8.44.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2040 N.S., adopted May 2, 2012, repealed § 8.44.040 which pertained to smoking policy requirements and derived from Ord. No. 749 N.S., § 1 (IV-14-5), 1985.  
8.44.050 - Retail or wholesale tobacco shops and private smokers' lounges. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, retail or wholesale tobacco shops and private smokers' lounges shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 749 N.S. § 1 (IV-14-6), 1985) 
(Ord. No. 2040 N.S., 5-2-2012)  
8.44.060 - Posting of signs. 
A.  At least one "No Smoking" sign with letters not less than one inch in height or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted on the building or other places where smoking is regulated by this chapter by the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of such building or other places. 
B.  Every theater owner and/or manager shall post signs conspicuously in the lobby stating that smoking is prohibited within the theater or auditorium, and in the case of motion picture theaters, such information shall be shown upon the screen for at least five seconds prior to the showing of each feature motion picture. 
C.  Notwithstanding this section, the presence or absence of "No Smoking" signs shall not be a defense to a charge of smoking in violation of any other provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. 749 N.S. § 1 (IV-14-7), 1985) 
(Ord. No. 2040 N.S., 5-2-2012)  
8.44.070 - Enforcement. 
A.  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this chapter may file the same with the city manager or his or her designees. 
B.  Enforcement shall be implemented by the city manager or his or her designees. The fire department or the health department shall have the authority of requiring from any occupancy, while undergoing any regular inspection, a "self-certification" from the owner, manager, operator or other person having control of such establishment, that all requirements of this chapter have been complied with. 
C.  Any owner, manager, operator or employee of any establishment controlled by this section shall have the right to inform persons violating this section of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
D.  No person, employer, or landlord shall intimidate, threaten any reprisal, or effect any reprisal, for the purpose of retaliating against another person who seeks to attain compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 749 N.S. § 1 (IV-14-8), 1985) 
(Ord. No. 2040 N.S., 5-2-2012)  
8.44.080 - Governmental agency cooperation. 
The city manager shall request governmental and educational agencies having offices within the city to establish local operating procedures to cooperate and comply with this section. In federal, state and special school districts within the city, the city manager shall urge enforcement of their existing smoking prohibitions and request cooperation with this chapter. 
(Ord. 749 N.S. § 1 (IV-14-11), 1985) 
(Ord. No. 2040 N.S., 5-2-2012)  
8.44.090 - Other applicable laws. 
This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable health, safety or fire codes. 
(Ord. 749 N.S. § 1 (IV-14-12), 1985) 
(Ord. No. 2040 N.S., 5-2-2012)  
8.44.100 - Violation. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to the restrictions of this chapter to fail to comply with its provisions. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to smoke in any area restricted by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 31, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 31, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 8.44.100 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8.44.100 pertained to penalties and derived from Ord. No. 2040 N.S., adopted May 2, 2012; and Ord. 749 N.S., § 1(IV-14-9), adopted in 1985.  
Chapter 8.46 - SHOPPING CART REGULATIONS 
 
8.46.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Laundry cart" means a basket which is mounted on wheels and used in a coin-operated laundry or dry-cleaning retail establishment by a customer or an attendant for the purpose of transporting fabrics and the supplies necessary to process them. 
B.  "Parking area" means a parking lot or other property provided by a retailer for use by a customer for parking an automobile or other vehicle. 
C.  "Shopping cart" means a basket which is mounted on wheels or a similar device generally used in a retail establishment by a customer for transporting goods of any kind. 
(Ord. 1411 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.46.020 - Cart identification required. 
Every person who, in connection with the conduct of a business including but not limited to a food dispensing business, owns or makes any cart available to the public, shall mark and identify such carts with signs which are permanently affixed to the cart. The sign shall state the following information in a typeface which is easily readable and in at least fourteen point type: identification of the owner of the cart or the retailer, or both; notification of the procedure to be utilized for authorized removal of the cart from the premises; notification that the unauthorized removal of the cart from the premises or parking area of the retail establishment, or the unauthorized possession of the cart, is a violation of state law and the municipal code of the city of Morgan Hill; and listing of a valid telephone number or address for returning the cart removed from the premises or parking area to the owner or retailer. 
(Ord. 1411 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.46.030 - Sign posting by retailer. 
There shall be posted by the owner of any retail establishment furnishing a parking area and shopping carts or laundry carts for its customers, prominently and conspicuously at all entrances to the retail establishment, a notice in substantially the following form: "REMOVAL OF SHOPPING CARTS (OR LAUNDRY CARTS) FROM THESE PREMISES IS PROHIBITED BY LAW (CMC SECTION 8.46.0400) AND WILL SUBJECT THE VIOLATOR TO A MINIMUM FINE OF $100.00." 
(Ord. 1411 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.46.040 - Unlawful activities. 
It is unlawful to do any of the following acts, if a shopping cart or laundry cart has a permanently affixed sign as provided in Section 8.46.020: 
A.  Remove a shopping cart or laundry cart from the premises or parking area of a retail establishment with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart; 
B.  Be in possession of any shopping cart or laundry cart that has been removed from the premises or the parking area of a retail establishment, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart; 
C.  Be in possession of any shopping cart or laundry cart with serial numbers removed, obliterated or altered, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart; 
D.  Leave or abandon a shopping cart or laundry cart at a location other than the premises or parking area of the retail establishment with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart; 
E.  Alter, convert, or tamper with a shopping cart or laundry cart, or to remove any part or portion thereof or to remove, obliterate or alter serial numbers on a cart, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart; 
F.  Be in possession of any shopping cart or laundry cart while that cart is not located on the premises or parking lot of a retail establishment, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart. 
This section shall not apply to the owner of a shopping cart or laundry cart or to a retailer, or to their agents or employees, or to a customer of a retail establishment who has written consent from the owner of a shopping cart or laundry cart or a retailer to be in possession of the shopping cart or laundry cart or to remove the shopping cart or laundry cart from the premises or the parking area of the retail establishment, or to do any of the acts specified in subsections (A) through (F) of this section. 
(Ord. 1411 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.46.050 - Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. The provisions of this chapter are not intended to preclude the application of any other laws relating to prosecution for theft. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 32, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 32, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 8.46.050 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8.46.050 pertained to penalties and derived from Ord. 1141 N.S., § 1(part), adopted in 1998.  
8.46.060 - Retrieval of carts by city. 
Retrieval of carts by the city of Morgan Hill or its agents shall be governed by the following provisions: 
A.  A shopping cart that has a sign affixed to it in accordance with Section 8.46.020 may be impounded by the city if: 
1.  The shopping cart is located outside the premises or parking area of a retail establishment. The parking area of a retail establishment located in a multi store complex or shopping center shall include the entire parking area used by the complex or center; and 
2.  The shopping cart is not retrieved within three business days from the date the owner of the shopping cart, or his or her agent, receives actual notice from the city of the shopping cart's discovery and location. 
B.  Effective January 1, 1999, the city may immediately impound a cart without providing the three-day notice specified in subsection (A) of this section to the owner or his or her agent if the owner or his or her agent is provided actual notice within twenty-four hours following the impound and that notice informs the owner, or his or her agent, as to the location where the shopping cart may be claimed. If the cart is retrieved by the owner or his or her agent within three business days following the date of such actual notice, no fine or storage fee shall be assessed, nor shall such impoundment constitute an "occurrence," pursuant to subsection (F) of this section. Carts not retrieved within the three-day period will begin to accrue fines and fees, and to constitute an "occurrence" pursuant to subsection (F) of this section, starting on the fourth day of impoundment. Any cart not retrieved within thirty days following the date of such actual notice shall be disposed of in accordance with subsection (G) of this section. 
C.  In instances where the location of a shopping cart will impede emergency services, the city may immediately retrieve the shopping cart from public or private property. 
D.  If a shopping cart is impounded pursuant to subsections (A) or (C) of this section, the city may recover its actual costs for providing this service. If a shopping cart is impounded pursuant to subsection (B) of this section, the city may recover its actual costs for providing this service commencing with the fourth day of actual notice. 
E.  Any shopping cart impounded by the city shall be held at a reasonable location. 
F.  The city may fine the owner of a shopping cart in an amount not to exceed fifty dollars for each occurrence in excess of three occurrences during a specified six-month period for failure to retrieve shopping carts in accordance with this section. An occurrence includes all shopping carts impounded in accordance with this section in a one-day period. 
G.  Any shopping cart not reclaimed from the city within thirty days of receipt of a notice of violation by the owner of the shopping cart may be sold or otherwise disposed of by the city. 
H.  This section shall not invalidate any contract entered into prior to June 30, 1996, between a city, county, or city and county and a person or business entity for the purpose of retrieving or impounding shopping carts. 
(Ord. 1411 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
Chapter 8.48 - BURGLARY AND ROBBERY ALARM SYSTEM REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2272 N.S., § 1, adopted March 7, 2018, amended Ch. 8.48 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 8.48, §§ 8.48.010—8.48.140, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 1020 N.S., § 1(part), adopted in 1991; and Ord. No. 1934 N.S., §§ 1—12, adopted June 3, 2009. 
 
8.48.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context indicates otherwise, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  "Alarm dispatch request" means a notification to the police department that an alarm system, either manual or automatic, has been activated at a particular premises. 
B.  "Alarm owner" means a person having or maintaining an alarm system on real property owned or controlled by such person. "Alarm owner" does not include an alarm system installation company or alarm system monitoring company. 
C.  "Alarm response manager (ARM)" means an individual capable of reaching and having access to the premises, the code to the alarm system, and the authority to approve repairs to the alarm system. 
D.  "Alarm system" means any mechanical or electrical device which is designed or used for the detection of any unauthorized entry into a building, structure or facility, or upon land or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act within a building, structure or facility, or upon land; and which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when actuated. Alarm systems include, but are not limited to, automatic telephone dialing devices, telephone lines or other lines used solely to report emergency circumstances from a mechanical or electrical device directly from the premises to the police dispatch or alarm system monitoring company, audible alarms and proprietor alarms. Devices which are not designed or used to register alarms that are audible, visible or perceptible outside of the protected land, building, structure or facility are not included within this definition, nor are auxiliary devices installed by the telephone company to protect telephone company systems which might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an alarm system. 
E.  "Alarm system installation company" means a person in the business of selling, providing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing an alarm system in a premises. This definition shall also include individuals or firms that install and service the alarm systems that will be used in their private or proprietary facilities. This does not include persons doing installation or repair work where such work is performed without compensation of any kind. 
F.  "Alarm system monitoring company" means any person, either located within or outside the city, that engages in the business, practice, or profession of monitoring alarm systems within the city, and which reports, directly or indirectly, any activation of such alarm systems to the city, its departments, divisions, officials, agents, or employees including, but not limited to, the police department and/or police dispatch. 
G.  "Audible alarm" means a device designed for the detection of unauthorized entry on premises which generates an audible sound on the Premises when it is activated. 
H.  "Automatic telephone dialing device" means a device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit by voice message or digital signal an emergency message indicating a need for emergency response. 
I.  "Duress alarm" means a silent alarm signal generated by the entry of a designated code into the alarm system to signal that the alarm owner is being forced to turn off the system and requires police response. 
J.  "False alarm" means an alarm system that emits a light or sound, or transmits a signal or message, resulting in a response by the police department when the situation does not require such response. False alarms caused as a result of power failure, power surges, or acts of nature not the fault of the alarm owner or alarm system installation Company shall not be considered to be a false alarm. 
K.  "False alarm management company" means a company or organization who administers certain provisions of this chapter. 
L.  "False alarm program" means the program run by the chief of police which administers the provisions on this chapter. 
M.  "Holdup alarm" means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress or immediately after it has occurred. 
N.  "Nuisance alarm" means an alarm as described in Section 8.48.060 herein. 
O.  "One plus duress alarm" means the manual activation of a silent alarm signal by entering a code at the mechanism from which the alarm system is turned on (armed) and off (disarmed) regularly activated by adding one to the last digit of the normal arm/disarm code. 
P.  "Panic alarm" means an audible signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency situation requiring police response. 
Q.  "Person" means any individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, company, corporation, limited liability company, business or other form of association or entity. 
R.  "Premises" means any private residential, commercial or industrial land and/or buildings located within the city. Premises includes land or buildings owned, rented, or leased by the federal, state or local governments, and school districts. 
S.  "Proprietor alarm" means an alarm which is not serviced by an alarm system installation company or alarm system monitoring company. 
(Ord. No. 2272 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.48.020 - Power of chief of police to regulate. 
A.  The chief of police is empowered and authorized to regulate the use of alarm systems and administer the regulations and provisions of this chapter through the false alarm program. The chief of police may, in his or her discretion, suspend police response to a nuisance alarm as defined in Section 8.48.060 or to an alarm or alarm owner due to excessive false alarms, except that the chief of police, in his or her discretion, may continue to respond to duress alarms, holdup alarms, or panic alarms. 
B.  The chief of police shall: 
1.  Designate the manner, form and telephone numbers for the communication of alarm dispatch requests. 
2.  Establish a procedure to accept cancellation of alarm dispatch requests. 
3.  Establish a system of recording data and maintaining records necessary to implement this chapter. 
4.  Establish procedure for notifying alarm owners of false alarms, including information regarding the date and time of police response to the false alarm, the amount of the fine for a false alarm and that response will be suspended to a nuisance alarm or for excessive false alarms; and a description of the appeals procedure available to the alarm owner. 
C.  If so requested by the chief of police, an alarm owner and the alarm system installation company and/or alarm system monitoring company responsible for the repair or monitoring of the alarm system shall appear at an appointed time and place to meet with a representative of the city to review the circumstances of each false alarm. For these purposes, the alarm system installation company and/or alarm system monitoring company must have a designated contact on record with the chief of police. 
D.  The chief of police is authorized to promulgate regulations and procedures to require the removal, replacement or modification of certain types of alarm system devices, including but not limited to any duress, panic, or holdup alarm button. 
E.  The chief of police is authorized to delegate his or her duties under this chapter in the promulgation of the false alarm program. 
(Ord. No. 2272 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.48.030 - Automatic telephone dialing devices prohibited except under certain limited circumstances. 
It is unlawful for any person to use, or cause to be used, any electrical or mechanical device or attachment to a telephone that automatically reports a taped or other recorded message of a police or fire emergency direct to the police department, except for special conditions of certain handicapped individuals. Each such call shall be deemed a separate violation punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2272 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.48.040 - Audible alarm system requirements. 
A.  No alarm system shall be installed, maintained or activated which emits the sound of a siren similar to those utilized on emergency vehicles or for air raid/disaster warnings. 
B.  Every alarm system having an audible signal shall have a sign or notice posted on or near the audible device with the name and telephone number of the alarm owner or person responsible for the maintenance of the system. The notice shall be posted in such a position as to be readable from the ground level outside and adjacent to the building. 
C.  Every alarm system having an audible signal installed after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall have a timing device which automatically silences the alarm within thirty minutes after the alarm is activated. Every alarm system having an audible signal installed prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter without such a timing device shall be required to have such a device installed if any activated alarm is not deactivated within the thirty-minute time limit. The alarm owner or alarm system monitoring company shall be responsible for deactivating an alarm within thirty minutes after notification that such alarm is activated and ringing, or within thirty minutes after reasonable efforts have been made to provide such notification. 
(Ord. No. 2272 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.48.050 - False alarm fees. 
A.  The chief of police may assess a false alarm response fee to an alarm owner for each police response to a false alarm. The amount of such fee shall be paid by the alarm owner as set forth by resolution of the city council. 
B.  A false alarm response fee shall not be assessed if the alarm system monitoring company or alarm owner promptly notifies police dispatch that a police response is not necessary, prior to the arrival of the police officer at the premises. 
C.  The chief of police shall notify the alarm owner in writing after each false alarm. The notification shall include: the amount of the false alarm fee assessment, the fact that police response may be suspended for excessive false alarms, and a description of the appeals procedure available to the alarm owner if they think the fee assessment is in error. 
D.  The alarm owner may request that a false alarm fee assessment be waived by setting forth, in writing, the reasons for the waiver request within fifteen business days after notice is received. This written appeal shall be sent to the false alarm management company. The appeal shall be reviewed by the chief of police or his or her designee. The decision of the chief of police or his or her designee is final. 
(Ord. No. 2272 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.48.060 - Nuisance alarms. 
A.  An alarm shall be deemed a nuisance alarm and a public nuisance when it has been emitting sound continuously for at least one hour, or intermittently for two hours, and has been reported to the police department as an annoyance by a person in the vicinity of the alarm, and the alarm owner or alarm response manager(s) is not available to silence the alarm or to cause it to be silenced. 
1.  Any officer of the police department is authorized to enter on exterior private property areas, and into vehicles on private property or public streets, for the purpose of silencing a nuisance alarm. Forcible entry may be made into exterior alarm equipment boxes, attics, and crawlspace vents, in order to accomplish this purpose. Actions may be taken to silence vehicle alarms, including the towing of the vehicle as prescribed in the California Vehicle Code. 
2.  Neither the city nor its police officers, nor any officer or employee of the city, or of a private alarm service contractor engaged by the police department, shall be liable for damages to the alarm owner whose alarm system is emanating a nuisance alarm, for silencing the nuisance alarm, or for entry on the alarm owner's premises for the purpose of silencing a nuisance alarm or for any damage resulting from reasonable efforts to silence the nuisance alarm. 
B.  An alarm system shall be deemed a nuisance alarm and a public nuisance if such alarm system actuates excessive false alarms. Five or more false alarms in a one-year period shall be deemed a nuisance under this section. 
C.  An alarm system shall be deemed a nuisance alarm and a public nuisance if such an alarm system has been intentionally activated at least once to summon the police department to an incident for which the alarm system was not intended. This may include, but not be limited to, a robbery alarm being intentionally activated for an incident which is not a robbery, or an alarm which is intentionally activated, merely to see what police response would result. 
D.  An alarm system shall be deemed a nuisance alarm and a public nuisance if, after a request by the police department of the alarm owner or ARM to respond to an activated alarm in a manner requested by the police department, the alarm owner or ARM refuses to respond as requested. 
(Ord. No. 2272 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.48.070 - No response status. 
A.  If an alarm system has fallen into the category of a nuisance alarm as defined in Section 8.48.060, the chief of police may, upon the next activation of that alarm, send a notice of no response to the alarm owner for the nuisance alarm. This notice shall indicate that the police department shall not respond to future activations of the nuisance alarm unless a violation of the law is personally reported to the department by a witness at the scene of the alarm. Such notice shall be sent ten days before the alarm response is to be suspended. 
B.  The no response status shall remain in effect until such time that the alarm owner for the nuisance alarm has provided adequate evidence to the chief of police that the problems causing the alarm to become a nuisance have been satisfactorily corrected. 
(Ord. No. 2272 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.48.080 - Duties of the alarm owner. 
A.  An alarm owner shall: 
1.  Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarms; 
2.  Make every reasonable effort to respond, or have an ARM respond to the alarm system's location within twenty minutes when requested by the police department in order to: 
a.  Deactivate an alarm system; 
b.  Provide access to the premises; and/or 
c.  Provide alternative security for the premises. 
3.  Not activate an alarm system for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report. 
B.  An alarm owner shall adjust the alarm system or cause the alarm system to be adjusted so that an audible alarm on the exterior of a premises will sound for no longer than thirty minutes after being activated. 
C.  An alarm owner shall have a licensed alarm system installation company inspect the alarm system after two false alarms in a one-year period. The chief of police may waive a required inspection if it determines that a false alarm could not have been related to a defect or malfunction in the alarm system. After four false alarms within a one-year period, the alarm owner must have a licensed alarm system installation company modify the alarm system to be more false alarm resistant and provide additional user training as appropriate. 
D.  An alarm owner shall not use an automatic telephone dialing device. 
E.  An alarm owner shall maintain at each premises, a set of written operating instructions for each alarm system. 
F.  All alarm owners shall agree with their alarm system installation company and/or alarm system monitoring company to go through an acclimation period for the first seven days after installation of an alarm system during which time the alarm system installation company and/or alarm system monitoring company will have no obligation to respond to any alarm signal from the premises or make alarm dispatch request of the police department, even if the alarm signal is the result of an actual alarm event. 
G.  This section applies to all persons, who have installed and/or monitor their own alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 2272 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.48.090 - Duties of alarm system installation company. 
A.  Each alarm system installation company or an agent of any such company, operating or, or otherwise doing business in the city shall register its name and file a copy of its state issued identification card with the chief of police on a form prescribed by the chief of police. 
B.  Every alarm system installation company shall provide written and oral instructions to each of its alarm owners in the proper use and operation of their alarm systems. Such instructions will specifically include all instructions necessary to turn the alarm system on and off and to avoid false alarms. Alarm system installation Companies shall ensure that all alarm owners of alarm systems equipped with a duress, holdup, or panic alarm are given adequate training as to the proper use of the duress, holdup, or panic alarm. 
C.  Alarm system installation companies shall not program alarm systems so that they are capable of sending one plus duress alarms. The alarm system installation company shall remove the one plus duress alarm feature from alarm systems whenever an alarm technician is at the premises or otherwise accessing the panel for reprogramming purposes. 
D.  Alarm system installation companies shall not install a device to activate a holdup alarm, which is a single action, non-recessed button. 
E.  Alarm system installation companies shall use only ANSI/SIA CP-01 listed alarm control panels on all new installations and panel replacements or upgrades. 
F.  Alarm system installation companies shall not install automatic telephone dialing devices. 
G.  After completion of the installation of an alarm system, an alarm system installation company employee shall review with the alarm owner the customer false alarm prevention checklist or an equivalent checklist approved by chief of police. 
H.  An alarm system installation company that purchases alarm system accounts from another person shall notify the chief of police of such purchase and provide details as may be reasonably requested by the chief of police. 
I.  Each alarm system installation company must designate one individual as the alarm response manager ("ARM") for the company who will manage alarm related issues and act as the point of contact for the chief of police. The appointed individual must be knowledgeable of the general provisions of the ordinance, as well as have the knowledge and authority to deal with false alarm issues and respond to requests from the chief of police. The name, phone number, and email address of the designated ARM must be provided to the chief of police. 
J.  An alarm system installation company shall provide the false alarm management company with a customer list in a format acceptable to the chief of police, upon request, to assist with creating the police department's tracking data, so far as allowed with respect to state or local law that protects this customer information as confidential. 
K.  An alarm system installation company shall provide the false alarm management company with a list, in a format acceptable to the chief of police, of all new alarm system installations within thirty days of each new installation. This list shall include the contact information of the alarm owner and alarm response manager(s). 
(Ord. No. 2272 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.48.100 - Duties of alarm system monitoring company. 
A.  Each alarm system monitoring company or an agent of any such company, operating, monitoring, or otherwise doing business in the city, shall register its name and file a copy of its state issued identification card with the chief of police on a form prescribed by the chief of police. 
B.  Alarm system monitoring companies shall not make an alarm dispatch request of the police department in response to an alarm signal, excluding panic, duress and holdup signals, during the first seven days following an alarm system installation. The chief of police may grant an alarm owner's request for an exemption from this waiting period based upon a determination that special circumstances substantiate the need for the exemption. 
C.  An alarm system monitoring company shall: 
1.  Verify every alarm signal, except a duress or holdup alarm activation, before initiating an alarm dispatch request; 
2.  Attempt to contact the alarm owner or alarm response manager(s) (ARM) at least twice (using at least two separate contact numbers) before initiating an alarm dispatch request; 
3.  Communicate alarm dispatch requests to the police department in a manner and form determined by the chief of police; 
4.  Communicate alarm dispatch request cancellations to the police department in a manner and form determined by the chief of police; 
5.  Ensure that all alarm owners of alarm systems equipped with a duress, holdup or panic alarm are given adequate training as to the proper use of the duress, holdup or panic alarm; 
6.  Communicate any available information about the location on all alarm signals related to the alarm dispatch request; 
7.  Communicate nature of alarm; 
8.  After an alarm dispatch request, promptly advise the police department if the alarm system monitoring company knows whether the alarm owner or the ARM is on the way to the premises; 
9.  Upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, alarm system monitoring companies must maintain for a period of at least one year from the date of the alarm dispatch request, records relating to alarm dispatch requests. Records must include the name, address and telephone number of the alarm owner, the alarm system zone activated, the time of the alarm dispatch request and evidence of an attempt to verify the alarm owner or ARM(s). The chief of police may request copies of such records for individually named alarm owners. If the request is made within sixty days of an alarm dispatch request, the alarm system monitoring company shall furnish requested records within three business days of receiving the request. If the records are requested between sixty days to one year after an alarm dispatch request, the alarm system monitoring company shall furnish the requested records within thirty days of receiving the request. 
D.  An alarm system monitoring company that purchases alarm system accounts from another person shall notify the false alarm management company of such purchase and provide details as may be reasonably requested by the chief of police. 
E.  Each alarm system monitoring company must designate one individual as the alarm response manager (ARM) for the company who will manage alarm related issues and act as the point of contact for the chief of police. The appointed individual must be knowledgeable of the general provisions of the ordinance, as well as have the knowledge and authority to deal with false alarm issues and respond to requests from the chief of police. The name, phone number, and email address of the designated ARM must be provided to the chief of police. 
F.  An alarm system monitoring company shall provide the false alarm management company with a customer list in a format acceptable to the chief of police, upon request, to assist with creating the police department's tracking data, so far as allowed with respect to state or local law that protects this customer information as confidential. 
G.  An alarm system monitoring company shall provide the false alarm management company with a list, in a format acceptable to the chief of police, of all new alarm monitoring accounts within thirty days of each new account. This list shall include the contact information of the alarm owner and ARM(s). 
(Ord. No. 2272 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.48.110 - Appeals. 
A.  If the chief of police suspends response to alarms pursuant to Section 8.48.020 or Section 8.48.070, the chief of police shall send written notice of the action not less than ten (10) days prior to the effective date of such suspension and action and a statement of the right to an appeal to the alarm owner. 
B.  The alarm owner may appeal the above-referenced suspension to the city manager or his or her designee by setting forth in writing the reasons for the appeal within fifteen business days after notice. The decision of the city manager is final. 
C.  Filing of a request for appeal shall stay the action by the chief of police suspending the alarm response, until the city manager has completed his or her review. 
(Ord. No. 2272 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.48.120 - Confidentiality. 
In the interest of public safety, all information pertaining to an alarm owner contained in and gathered through, the administration of the false alarm program shall be held in confidence by all employees or representatives of the city, provided that the city may disclose any information required to be disclosed by state or federal law or by court order after a reasonable notice to the alarm owner. 
(Ord. No. 2272 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.48.130 - Government immunity. 
Administration of the false alarm program is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of police response. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to an alarm dispatch request is hereby disclaimed, and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. When making an alarm dispatch request, the alarm owner acknowledges that police response may be influenced by factors such as: the availability of police units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels and prior response history. 
(Ord. No. 2272 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.48.140 - Enforcement. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to violate or cause or permit to be violated any provision of this chapter. The assessment of a false alarm response fee as provided for in Section 8.48.050 is in addition to all other remedies available to the city. 
B.  In the event of the failure of any person to pay the assessments or fines pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the city may institute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to collect any charges which may be due and payable in the same manner as any other debts owing to the city may be collected. 
(Ord. No. 2272 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
Chapter 8.49 - FIRE ALARM REGULATIONS 
 
8.49.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the dangers and inefficiencies associated with false fire alarms and nuisance fire alarms, and to encourage alarm owners/entities and fire alarm businesses to properly use and maintain the operational effectiveness of fire alarm systems in order to improve the reliability of fire alarm systems and reduce or eliminate false fire alarms and nuisance fire alarms. 
B.  This chapter governs fire alarm systems intended to summon fire department personnel, requires assessment of fines for excessive false fire alarms and nuisance fire alarms, provides for education of alarm owners, provides for the severability of the parts hereof if declared invalid, and provides an effective date. 
(Ord. No. 2271 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.49.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
A.  Adopted Code(s) means the California Fire Code including all indices and appendices, errata and amendments thereto, as adopted by the City of Morgan Hill and that are enforced by the City of Morgan Hill Fire Department. 
B.  Alarm initiating device means a device that is designed to respond either manually or automatically to smoke, fire, or activation of a fire suppression system. 
C.  Alarm owner means any person who owns, occupies, or controls the premises in which a fire alarm system is installed. 
D.  Alarm response administrator means the person or persons designated by the fire department to administer the provisions of this chapter. 
E.  Alarm response manager (ARM) means an individual capable of reaching and having access to the premises, the code to the fire alarm system, the authority to approve repairs to the fire alarm system, and is the individual designated by a fire alarm business to handle alarm issues for the business, or designated by the alarm owner to handle alarm issues for the premises, and act as the primary point of contact for the Morgan Hill Fire Department's Alarm Response Administrator. 
F.  Building division means the building division within the Morgan Hill Community Development Department. 
G.  Business license means a business license issued by the City of Morgan Hill to a fire alarm business to conduct business in the City of Morgan Hill. 
H.  Certificate of occupancy means no building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the city code or of other ordinances of the City of Morgan Hill. 
I.  Cancellation means the termination of a fire department response to a premises after a fire alarm dispatch request is made, but prior to the arrival of the fire department. 
J.  Conversion of alarm owner means the transaction or process by which one fire alarm business begins the servicing or monitoring of a previously unmonitored fire alarm system or a fire alarm system that was previously serviced or monitored by another fire alarm business 
K.  False fire alarm means the activation of any fire alarm system which results in a response by the fire department and which is caused by the negligence or intentional misuse of the fire alarm system by the alarm owner, its employees, or agents; or any other activation of a fire alarm System not caused by heat, smoke or fire, exclusive of a nuisance fire alarm. 
L.  Fee means the assessment of a monetary charge, including fines, payable to the City of Morgan Hill authorized pursuant to this chapter, to defray the expenses of responding to a false fire alarm or nuisance fire alarm and the administration of this chapter. "Fees" include any type or class of fee including late fees. 
M.  Fee schedule means the fee schedule adopted by city council applicable to this chapter. 
N.  Fine includes the fine payable to the city pursuant to Title 1 for violation of this chapter, unless otherwise specified in this chapter. 
O.  Fire alarm dispatch request means a notification to the fire department that an alarm, either manual or automatic, has been activated at a premises. 
P.  Fire alarm business means any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity that is appropriately licensed by the California State Fire Marshal's Office that installs, causes to be installed, permits to be installed, alters, maintains, repairs, replaces, services, or monitors any fire alarm system. 
Q.  Fire Alarm System means a system or portion of a combination system consisting of components and circuits arranged to monitor and/or exterior annunciate the status of a fire alarm or supervisory signal-initiating devices and to initiate the appropriate Fire Alarm Dispatch Request. 
R.  Fire department means the City of Morgan Hill Fire Department. 
S.  Fire watch means an alarm response administrator or designee approved by the Morgan Hill Fire Department assigned to the Premises for the purpose of protecting the occupants from fire or similar emergencies. A fire watch may involve at least some special action beyond normal staffing, such as assigning a competent legal adult to walk the premises, who has been specially trained in fire prevention, the use of fire extinguishers, notifying the fire department, sounding the fire alarm system located on the premises, and understanding the particular fire safety situation. 
T.  Monitored System means the process by which a fire alarm business receives signals from a fire alarm system and notifies the Morgan Hill Fire Department. 
U.  Nuisance fire alarm means the activation of any fire alarm system, which results in a response by the fire department, caused by mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, lack of proper maintenance, deliberate activation, or any other response for which the fire department personnel are unable to determine the apparent cause of the alarm activation. 
V.  Premises means any private or public residential, commercial, or industrial land and/or building(s) located within the city, wherein a fire alarm system is installed. 
W.  Proprietor alarm means an alarm which is not serviced by a fire alarm business. 
X.  Qualified fire alarm technician means any person who is licensed by the State of California Fire Marshal's Office to inspect, install, repair, or perform maintenance on fire alarm systems. 
(Ord. No. 2271 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.49.030 - Administration; increases in fees; annual evaluation. 
A.  Responsibility for administration of this section is vested with the fire chief. 
B.  The fire chief shall designate an alarm response administrator to carry out the duties and functions described in this section. 
C.  The amount of the fees and fines shall be specified in the city fee schedule adopted by city council. The fees and fines set forth in this Chapter may only be increased by a duly-adopted resolution of the city council. 
D.  The alarm response administrator shall conduct an annual evaluation and analysis of the effectiveness of this chapter and identify and implement system improvements as warranted. 
(Ord. No. 2271 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.49.040 - Notification of fire alarm system. 
A.  Every fire alarm business shall notify the alarm response administrator of the existence of a fire alarm system prior to the fire alarm system being put into operation. It shall be the responsibility of the installing fire alarm business to provide the alarm owner with notice of the existence of this chapter, and a copy of the fire alarm system operation instructions in accordance with adopted Codes, and the manufacturer's instructions. 
B.  The alarm owner shall be required to notify the alarm response administrator whenever there is a change in the fire alarm business responsible for maintaining, servicing, and/or monitoring the fire alarm system. 
C.  When any of the information above has changed, it shall be reported to the alarm response administrator by the alarm owner within fifteen days of the alarm owner becoming aware of such change; failure to comply shall result in an assessment against the alarm owner of a fine for a registration violation. 
(Ord. No. 2271 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.49.050 - Monitored fire alarm system. 
A.  All premises that are required to have a fire alarm system shall have the fire alarm system continuously monitored by a fire alarm business that holds a valid license issued by the California State Fire Marshal's Office. Violation of this section shall result in an assessment against the alarm owner of a fine for failure to have the fire alarm system continuously monitored. An alarm owner ordered by the alarm response administrator to disconnect or deactivate their fire alarm system are exempted from this section. 
B.  The fire alarm business shall report within five days to the alarm response administrator any commercial fire alarm system premises that discontinues or disconnects their monitoring service for any reason. 
(Ord. No. 2271 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.49.060 - System certification. 
All newly installed or re-certified commercial fire alarm systems shall be approved by the alarm response administrator. The certification shall indicate that the fire alarm system is in compliance with adopted Codes. The certification shall be signed by a qualified fire alarm technician. A copy of the installation certification shall be provided to the Alarm response administrator after the completion of the testing of the fire alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 2271 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.49.070 - Inspection, testing and maintenance. 
A.  The alarm owner shall ensure that all fire alarm systems are inspected and tested at least once per year in accordance with adopted Codes. 
B.  The alarm owner shall ensure that all fire alarm systems are periodically maintained per manufacturer specifications and adopted Codes. 
C.  All fire alarm systems shall be inspected, tested, and maintained by a licensed fire alarm business. 
(Ord. No. 2271 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.49.080 - Duties of fire alarm business. 
A.  Each fire alarm business must designate one individual as the alarm response manager (ARM) for the business. The individual designated as the ARM must be knowledgeable of the provisions of this section, as well as have the knowledge and authority to deal with false fire alarm issues and respond to requests from the alarm response administrator. The name, contact number, and email address of the ARM must be provided to the alarm response administrator. 
B.  Report a fire alarm signal by using telephone numbers designated by the alarm response administrator. 
C.  After an fire alarm dispatch request, promptly advise the fire department if the fire alarm business knows that the alarm owner or an ARM is responding to the premises; 
D.  Each fire alarm business that monitors a fire alarm system must maintain, for a period of at least one year after the date of a fire alarm dispatch request, all records relating to the fire alarm dispatch request. Records must include the name, address and telephone number of the alarm owner, each fire alarm system zone activated, and the time of the fire alarm dispatch request. The alarm response administrator may request copies of such records for any individual alarm owner. If the request is made within sixty days after the fire alarm dispatch request, the fire alarm business shall furnish requested records within three business days after receiving the request. If the records are requested between sixty days and one year after the fire alarm dispatch request, the fire alarm business shall furnish the requested records within thirty days after receiving the request. 
E.  Each fire alarm business shall, upon request, immediately provide the fire department with the names and phone numbers of the alarm owner's emergency contacts at the time of each fire alarm dispatch request. 
F.  Existing Accounts. Within thirty days prior to the first day of January of each year, a fire alarm business shall provide the alarm response administrator with a complete list of active alarm owners whose premises are located within the city, to assist the alarm response administrator with creating and maintaining tracking data. The alarm owner information must be provided in a format acceptable to the alarm response administrator, which includes the following: 
1.  Alarm owner name; 
2.  Alarm owner billing address; 
3.  alarm Owner telephone number; 
4.  Premises address; 
5.  Fire alarm business State of California license number; 
6.  The monitoring fire alarm business State of California license number, if different. 
G.  Conversion of Alarm Owners. A fire alarm business that converts the servicing of any fire alarm system account from another business shall notify the alarm response administrator of such conversion and shall provide to the alarm response administrator, within thirty days from the date of conversion, a list of the converted accounts, in a format acceptable to the alarm response administrator, which includes the following: 
1.  Alarm owner name; 
2.  Alarm owner billing address; 
3.  Alarm owner telephone number; 
4.  Premise address; 
5.  Fire alarm business State of California license number; 
6.  The monitoring fire alarm business State of California license number, if different. 
H.  It is unlawful for any fire alarm business to fail to comply with any applicable requirement within this Section 8.49.080. 
(Ord. No. 2271 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.49.090 - Fire alarm activation; response. 
A.  The alarm owner shall be responsible for the activation of a fire alarm system. 
B.  A response to the activation of a fire alarm system shall result when any officer or member of the fire department is dispatched to the premises where the fire alarm system has been activated. 
C.  The alarm owner shall be responsible for the fire alarm business to report a fire alarm signal by using telephone numbers designated by the alarm response administrator. 
D.  The alarm owner shall be responsible for the fire alarm business to communicate a fire alarm to the fire department in a manner and form determined by the alarm response administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2271 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.49.100 - System performance review. 
The alarm response administrator may require that a system performance review be held with an alarm owner and the fire alarm business responsible for repairing or monitoring of the fire alarm system to review the circumstances of each false or nuisance fire alarm. The review meeting may be held in person or through a conference telephone call, at the alarm response administrator's discretion. It is unlawful for an alarm owner to fail to participate in a scheduled system performance review. 
(Ord. No. 2271 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.49.110 - Nuisance fire alarms. 
The fire department may declare a fire alarm system at a specific premises to be a nuisance if such fire alarm system activates excessive false fire alarms. The city council hereby finds and determines that three false fire alarms within a three hundred sixty-five-day period is excessive and thereby constitutes a public nuisance. The fire department may not consider any false fire alarm in this computation of nuisance alarms if such was generated by earthquakes, high intensity winds, or unusual acts of nature. Nuisance alarms shall be those that are the result of the negligence of the alarm owner, the agents or employees of the alarm owner, or a defect in the fire alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 2271 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.49.120 - Enforcement. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to violate or cause or permit to be violated any provision of this chapter. 
B.  Penalties, fines, and fees shall not apply to any newly installed fire alarm system for a period of forty-five days from the date of installation, but shall apply from and after the expiration of the initial forty-five-day period following installation. 
C.  A false fire alarm or nuisance fire alarm response fee or fine shall be paid to the city by the alarm owner upon the occurrence of four, and any subsequent, false or nuisance fire alarms received from any one source or from any one fire alarm system within a three hundred sixty-five-day period. 
D.  The fire alarm business or fire sprinkler company will be subject to the fee, fine and penalties if the firefighter responding to the false fire alarm determines that the fire alarm business or fire sprinkler company directly caused the false fire alarm. In this situation, the false fire alarm will not be counted against the alarm owner. 
(Ord. No. 2271 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.49.130 - Remedies and penalties. 
A.  The alarm response administrator has the authority to order a fire watch in accordance with adopted Codes, due to repetitive nuisance fire alarms and/or false fire alarms, until corrective action is taken. 
B.  Each building affected because the signal from the fire alarm system has been disconnected or deactivated shall be required to establish a fire watch until the fire alarm system has been returned to service. Duties of the fire watch may include notifying the fire department and building occupants of an emergency, preventing a fire from occurring, or extinguishing small fires. 
C.  The alarm owner is responsible for paying all costs associated with establishing a fire watch. 
D.  The alarm response administrator has the authority to request from the building division a temporarily suspension of the certificate of occupancy of the premises until all outstanding repairs are made on the fire alarm system or if the fire watch is not maintained to the satisfaction of the alarm response administrator. 
E.  The alarm response administrator shall have the authority to direct the alarm owner or alarm response manager of the premises to silence an activated fire alarm system, have corrective action taken and thereafter reset the fire alarm system. 
F.  Anyone convicted of falsifying reports as required under this chapter is subject to maximum penalty as established by the City of Morgan Hill or as otherwise provided under state law, in addition to administrative fines. 
(Ord. No. 2271 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.49.140 - Appeals. 
If the fire department assesses a fee or fine, the fire department shall send written notice of the action and a statement of the right to an appeal to the affected alarm owner or fire alarm business. 
(Ord. No. 2271 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.49.150 - Reconnection of fire alarm system. 
A.  A fire alarm system may be reactivated upon a finding by the alarm response administrator that the alarm owner of the premises has taken corrective action to remedy the cause of the false fire alarms or nuisance fire alarms. 
B.  In making a request for such a reactivation, the alarm owner shall have the burden of showing what corrective action has been taken. 
C.  The alarm response administrator shall have the right to inspect the fire alarm system and test it prior to approving a new order to reconnect or reactivate the fire alarm system. 
D.  A reconnection fee shall be assessed to the alarm owner before any reconnection of a fire alarm system may be made. 
E.  The alarm response administrator shall not approve a new order to reconnect or reactivate if the alarm owner has failed to pay any fee or fine pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2271 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.49.160 - Confidentiality. 
In the interest of public safety, all information pertaining to an alarm owner, contained in and gathered through, the administration of this chapter shall be held in confidence by all employees of the fire department, the city, or their representatives, provided that the city may disclose any information required to be disclosed by state or federal law or by court order after a reasonable notice to the alarm owner. 
(Ord. No. 2271 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.49.170 - Government immunity. 
Certification of a fire alarm system is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of fire department response. Any and all liability and/or consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a fire alarm dispatch request is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. When installing a fire alarm system, the alarm owner acknowledges that fire department response may be based on factors such as: availability of fire department units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels, prior alarm history and administrative actions. The City of Morgan Hill, its officers, employees and agents shall not assume any duty or responsibility for the installation, maintenance, operation, repair or effectiveness of any privately or publicly owned fire alarm system. All such duties or responsibilities are solely those of the alarm owner. 
(Ord. No. 2271 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
8.49.180 - Severability. 
In the event any subsection, sentence, clause or phrase incorporated in this chapter is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the chapter. The city council declares that it would have adopted the ordinance codified in this chapter and each and every section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase not declared invalid or unconstitutional without regard to whether any portion of the ordinance would be subsequently declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 2271 N.S., § 1, 3-7-2018)  
Chapter 8.50 - RIGHT-TO-FARM 
 
8.50.010 - Purpose. 
The purposes of this chapter are to promote public health, safety and welfare and to support and encourage continued agricultural operations in the city of Morgan Hill, the county of Santa Clara and the state of California. In addition, this chapter helps implement Section G, commencing with Goal 25. A Viable Agricultural Industry, of the land use element of the city's General Plan. This section of the General Plan land use element is designed to protect and preserve agricultural operations within and adjacent to City boundaries through the establishment of several goals, policies and actions. 
(This chapter is not to be construed as in any way modifying or abridging state law as set out in the California Civil Code, Health and Safety Code, Fish and Game Code, Food and Agricultural Code, Division 7 of the Water Code, or any other applicable provisions of state law relative to nuisances, rather it is only to be utilized in the interpretation and enforcement of the provisions of this code.) 
(Ord. 1293 N.S. § 1 (part), 1996)  
8.50.020 - Definitions. 
"Agricultural land" means all that real property within the boundaries of Morgan Hill or Santa Clara County currently used for agricultural operations or upon which agricultural operations may in the future be established. 
"Agricultural operation" means and includes, but is not limited to, the cultivation and tillage of the soil, dairying, the production, irrigation, frost protection, cultivation, growing, harvesting, on-farm marketing, and processing of any agricultural commodity, including viticulture, horticulture, mushrooms, timber or agriculture, the raising of livestock, fur-bearing animals, fish or poultry, and any commercial agricultural practices performed as incident to or in conjunction with such operations, including preparation for market, delivery to storage or to market, or to carriers for transportation to market. 
"Proper and accepted customs and standards" means the compliance with all applicable state and federal statutes and regulations governing the operation of the agricultural processing activity, operation, facility or appurtenances thereof with respect to the condition or effect alleged to be a nuisance. 
(Ord. 1293 N.S. § 1 (part), 1996)  
8.50.030 - Real estate transfer disclosure statement. 
A.  Pursuant to Section 1102.6a of the California Civil Code, it is intended by Section 8.50.040 of this chapter to require disclosures in addition to those disclosures required by Section 1102.6 of the California Civil Code. 
B.  Upon any transfer of real property by sale, exchange, installment land sale contract, lease with an option to purchase, any other option to purchase, or ground lease coupled with improvements, or transfer of residential stock cooperative, the transferor shall require that the disclosure statement set forth in subsection C of this section shall be signed by the purchaser or lessee. 
C.  The disclosure required by subsection B of this section, as may be amended administratively from time to time, shall remain on file in the office of the city clerk of the city of Morgan Hill. The disclosure shall include but not be limited to the following: a statement recognizing the city's support for the right to farm agricultural lands within the city of Morgan Hill, the county of Santa Clara, and the state of California, a statement that agricultural operations where permitted and conducted in a manner consistent with accepted customs and practices shall not be deemed a nuisance by the city, and a list of the effects and inconveniences which can be associated with living near agricultural operations conducted in accordance with accepted customs and standards. 
(Ord. 1293 N.S. § 1 (part), 1996)  
8.50.040 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid, or unconstitutional, by the decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter. 
(Ord. 1293 N.S. § 1 (part), 1996)  
8.50.050 - Resolution of disputes. 
A.  Should any controversy arise regarding any inconveniences, or discomforts, occasioned by agricultural operations, including, but not limited to, noises, odors, fumes, dust, the operation of machinery of any kind during any twenty-four-hour period (including aircraft), the storage and disposal of manure, and the application by spraying, or otherwise, of chemical fertilizers, soil amendments, herbicides and pesticides, the parties may submit the controversy to arbitration and a grievance committee as set forth below in an attempt to resolve the matter prior to the filing of any court action. 
B.  Grievance Committee. The grievance committee shall consist of three members. One member, who shall act as chairperson, shall be from the Santa Clara County office of human relations, one member shall be from the Santa Clara County farm bureau, and one member shall represent the interested homeowners' association, or aggrieved property owner, as designated by the chairperson. Should a representative from the office of human relations not be available, a chairperson shall be appointed by the Morgan Hill city council. 
1.  Any controversy between the parties may be submitted to a grievance committee within thirty days of the date of the occurrence of the particular activity giving rise to the controversy, or the date a party became aware of the occurrence. 
2.  The parties recognize the value and importance of full discussion and complete presentation and agreement concerning all pertinent facts in order to eliminate any misunderstandings. The parties will cooperate in the exchange of pertinent information concerning the controversy. 
3.  The controversy shall be presented to the committee by written request of one of the parties within the time limits specified. Thereafter, the committee may investigate the facts of the controversy, but must, within thirty days, hold a meeting to consider the merits of the matter and within twenty days of the meeting must render a written decision to the parties. At the time of the meeting both parties shall have an opportunity to present what each considers to be pertinent facts. 
4.  The decision of the committee shall not be binding. If, however, one of the parties is not satisfied with the committee decision, upon agreement of both parties, the matter may be submitted to binding arbitration according to the procedures set forth in subsection (B)(5) of this section. 
5.  Binding Arbitration Procedures. 
a.  The controversy between the parties shall be submitted to arbitration upon the written agreement of both parties. 
b.  The parties shall each appoint one person to hear and determine the dispute. If these two arbitrators cannot agree, then the two arbitrators shall choose a third impartial arbitrator who shall make the decision. The cost of the arbitration shall be borne by the losing party, or in such proportions as the arbitrators shall decide. 
(Ord. 1293 N.S. § 1 (part), 1996)  
Chapter 8.52 - PLASTIC CARRYOUT BAGS 
 
8.52.010 - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this chapter: 
A.  "Customer" means any person purchasing goods from a store. 
B.  "Operator" means the person in control of, or having the responsibility for, the operation of a store, which may include, but is not limited to, the owner of the store. 
C.  "Permitted carryout bag" means a recyclable paper carryout bag or a reusable bag. 
D.  "Person" means any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other organization or group however organized. 
E.  "Plastic carryout bag" means any bag made predominantly of plastic derived from either petroleum or a biologically-based source, such as corn or other plant sources, which is provided to a customer at the point of sale. "Plastic carryout bag" includes compostable and biodegradable bags but does not include reusable bags, produce bags, or product bags. 
F.  "Postconsumer recycled material" means a material that would otherwise be destined for solid waste disposal, having completed its intended end use and product life cycle. "Postconsumer recycled material" does not include materials and by-products generated from, and commonly reused within, an original manufacturing and fabrication process. 
G.  "Prepared food" means foods or beverages which are prepared on the premises by cooking, chopping, slicing, mixing, freezing, or squeezing, and which require no further preparation to be consumed. "Prepared food" does not include any raw, uncooked meat product or fruits or vegetables which are chopped, squeezed, or mixed. 
H.  "Produce bag" or "product bag" means any bag without handles provided to a customer (1) to carry produce, meats, or other food items to the point of sale inside a store; (2) to hold prescription medication dispensed from a pharmacy; (3) to protect food or merchandise from being damaged or contaminated by other food or merchandise when items are placed together in a reusable bag or recyclable paper carryout bag; or (4) a bag without handles that is designed to be placed over articles of clothing on a hanger. 
I.  "Public eating establishment" means a restaurant, take-out food establishment, or any other business that receives 90 percent or more of its revenue from the sale of prepared food to be eaten on or off its premises 
J.  "Recyclable" means material that can be sorted, cleansed, and reconstituted using available recycling collection programs for the purpose of using the altered form in the manufacture of a new product. "Recycling" does not include burning, incinerating, converting, or otherwise thermally destroying solid waste. 
K.  "Recyclable paper carryout bag" means a paper bag that meets all of the following requirements: (1) is 100 percent recyclable overall and contains a minimum of 40 percent post-consumer recycled material; (2) is capable of composting, consistent with the timeline and specifications of the American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM) Standard D6400; (3) is accepted for recycling in curbside programs in the city; (4) has printed on the bag the name of the manufacturer, the location (country) where the bag was manufactured, and the minimum percentage of postconsumer recycled material used; and (5) displays the word "Recyclable" in a highly visible manner on the outside of the bag. 
L.  "Reusable bag" means a bag with handles that is specifically designed and manufactured for multiple reuse and meets all of the following requirements: (1) meets the EcoLogo ATP-001 standard for durability Dynamic Test with a minimum of 1500 cycles of testing; (2) meets the EcoLogo ATP-001 standard for durability capacity test with a minimum volume of 15 liters; (3) is machine washable or is made from a material that can be cleaned or disinfected; (4) does not contain lead, cadmium, or any other heavy metal in toxic amounts as determined by testing using state methods following the model toxics in packaging legislation; (5) has printed on the bag, or on a tag that is permanently affixed to the bag, the name of the manufacturer, the location (country) where the bag was manufactured, a statement that the bag does not contain lead, cadmium, or any other heavy metal in toxic amounts, and the percentage of postconsumer recycled material used, if any; and (6) if made of plastic, is a minimum of at least 2.25 mils thick as measured according to ASTM D6988-08 or ISO 4593-1993 or ISO 4591:1992 standards. 
The director of community services or his or her designee is authorized to approve alternate testing methods meeting this section's requirements provided that the proposed testing standards satisfactorily comply with the intent, quality and effectiveness in order to meet the purposes of this chapter. 
M.  "Store" means any of the following retail establishments located within the city limits that are not "public eating establishments" as defined in section 8.52.010(I): 
1.  A full-line, self-service retail store with gross annual sales of $2,000,000.00 or more, that sells a line of dry grocery, canned goods, or nonfood items and some perishable items; 
2.  A store of at least 5,000 square feet of retail space that sells any perishable or non-perishable goods including, but not limited to, clothing, food, or personal items, and generates sales or use tax pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law (Part 1.5 (commencing with Section 7200) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code); 
3.  A drug store, pharmacy, supermarket, grocery store, convenience food store, foodmart, or other entity engaged in the retail sale of a limited line of goods that includes milk, bread, soda, and snack foods, including those stores with a Type 20 or 21 license issued by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control; or 
4.  A store or other location of less than 5,000 square feet of retail space that sells any perishable or non-perishable goods including, but not limited to, clothing, food, or personal items, and generates sales or use tax pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law (Part 1.5 (commencing with Section 7200) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code), excluding temporary events and mobile vendors operating without a fixed place of business. 
(Ord. No. 2089 N.S., § 1, 11-6-2013)  
8.52.020 - Plastic carryout bags prohibited. 
A.  No operator of a store shall provide to any customer a plastic carryout bag. 
B.  This prohibition applies to bags provided for the purpose of carrying away goods from the point of sale and does not apply to produce bags or product bags. 
(Ord. No. 2089 N.S., § 1, 11-6-2013)  
8.52.030 - Permitted bags. 
All operators of stores shall provide or make available to a customer only recyclable paper carryout bags or reusable bags for the purpose of carrying away goods or other materials from the point of sale, subject to the terms of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter prohibits customers from using bags of any type that they bring to the store themselves or from carrying away goods that are not placed in a bag, in lieu of using bags provided by the store. 
(Ord. No. 2089 N.S., § 1, 11-6-2013)  
8.52.040 - Regulation of permitted carryout bags. 
A.  (1)  Any operator of a store that provides a permitted carryout bag to a customer must charge the customer a minimum of $0.10 for each bag provided, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(2)  An operator of a store shall adjust the minimum charge for permitted carryout bags set forth in subsection 8.52.040.(A)(1) as of July 1, 2014 and annually on July 1 thereafter to reflect changes in the San Francisco/Oakland/San Jose Metropolitan Area Consumer Price Index (All Urban Consumers: 1982-84 = 100) (CPI-U), or successor index compiled and published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. The index level as of December 2012 (i.e. 239.533) shall be the base index and shall be compared with the index in subsequent years. The minimum charge will be adjusted only when the percentage change from the base index would result in a difference of at least $0.05 in the minimum charge. In no event shall the adjustment exceed $0.05 per year. 
B.  No operator of a store shall rebate or otherwise reimburse a customer any portion of the charge required in subsection A., except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
C.  All operators of stores as defined by subsection 8.52.010.(M)(1)-(3) must indicate on the customer receipt the number of recyclable paper carryout bags provided and the total amount charged for the bags. Operators of stores as defined by subsection 8.52.010(M)(4) are exempt from this specific subsection. 
D.  All operators of stores must retain a complete and accurate record or documents showing the total number of recyclable paper carryout bags provided, the total number of reusable bags provided and the total amount of monies collected for providing recyclable paper carryout bags and reusable bags, and a summary of any efforts a store has undertaken to promote the use of reusable bags by customers. Records will include permitted carryout bags provided free of charge per the exemptions in section 8.52.060. Such information must be retained for a minimum period of three years from the date of purchase and made available upon request at no cost to the director of community services. Operators of stores as defined by subsection 8.52.010(M)(4) may comply with this subsection by completing a simple reporting form and compliance statement supplied by the city. 
E.  If the information required in subsection (d) is not provided by an operator of a store within 30 days after receiving a request from the director of community services, such operator of a store shall be subject to the fines set forth in section 8.52.080. 
(Ord. No. 2089 N.S., § 1, 11-6-2013; Ord. No. 2102 N.S., § 1, 3-5-2014)  
8.52.050 - Use of reusable bags. 
Operators of stores are strongly encouraged to educate their staff to promote reusable bags and to post signs encouraging customers to use reusable bags. In order to promote the use of reusable bags, operators of stores may provide reusable bags to customers at no charge for a limited time of not more than 30 days per year. 
(Ord. No. 2089 N.S., § 1, 11-6-2013)  
8.52.060 - Exemptions. 
A.  All operators of stores must provide at the point of sale, free of charge, permitted carryout bags to any customer participating in the California Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children pursuant to Article 2 (commencing with Section 123275) of Chapter 1 of Part 2 of Division 106 of the Health and Safety Code or in the Supplemental Food Program pursuant to Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 15500) of Part 3 of Division 9 of the Welfare and Institutions Code, or in Calfresh pursuant to Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 18900) of Part 6 of Division 9 of the California Welfare and Institutions Code. 
B.  This chapter shall not apply to a charitable organization, as defined in Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, or a distinct operating unit or division of the charitable organization, that reuses and recycles donated goods or materials and receives more than 50 percent of its revenues from the handling and sale of those donated goods or materials. 
(Ord. No. 2089 N.S., § 1, 11-6-2013)  
8.52.070 - Operative date. 
A.  Stores, and the operators thereof, as defined in subsections (M)(1), (M)(2), (M)(3), and (M)(4) of section 8.52.010 shall become subject to this chapter on April 22, 2014. 
(Ord. No. 2089 N.S., § 1, 11-6-2013)  
8.52.080 - Enforcement and violation. 
A.  The director of community services or his or her designee has primary responsibility for enforcement of this chapter. The director of community services is authorized to promulgate regulations and to take any and all other actions reasonable and necessary to enforce this chapter, including, but not limited to, investigating violations, issuing fines, and entering the premises of any store during business hours. 
B.  It is unlawful for any operator of a store to violate or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 33, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 33, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 8.52.080 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8.52.080 pertained to enforcement and violation—penalty and derived from Ord. No. 2089 N.S., § 1, adopted Nov. 6, 2013.  
8.52.090 - No conflict with federal or state law. 
Nothing in this chapter is intended to create any requirement, power or duty that is in conflict with any federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2089 N.S., § 1, 11-6-2013)  
Chapter 8.56 - ENVIRONMENTALLY ACCEPTABLE FOOD CONTAINERS AND SERVICE WARE 
 
8.56.010 - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below: 
A.  "Customer" means a person obtaining prepared food from a food provider. 
B.  "Food container" means a container that is used, or is intended to be used, to hold prepared food. "Food container" includes, but is not limited to, a cup, bowl, plate, tray, carton, or clamshell container that is intended for single use. 
C.  "Food provider" means any vendor, business, organization, entity, group or individual operating in the City of Morgan Hill that offers food or beverages to the public for consumption on or off premises, regardless of whether there is a charge for the food. "Food provider" includes, but is not limited to, food providers operating restaurants, retail food establishments, caterers, cafeterias, stores, shops, sales outlets, grocery stores, delicatessens, itinerant restaurants, pushcarts, and vehicular food vendors. "Food provider" also includes food providers operating cafeterias in private schools and places of employment whether or not such establishments are open to the general public. 
D.  "Food service ware" includes plates, bowls, cups, lids, straws, stirrers, forks, spoons, knives, napkins, trays, and other items primarily designed for use in consuming food. 
E.  "Polystyrene foam" means a container made of blown polystyrene, and expanded and extruded foams (sometimes called Styrofoam) which are thermoplastic petrochemical materials utilizing a styrene monomer and processed by any number of techniques including, but not limited to, fusion of monomer spheres (expanded bead polystyrene), injection molding, foam molding, and extrusion-blown molding (extruded foam polystyrene), which is used, or is intended to be used, to hold prepared food. 
F.  "Prepared food" means any food, including beverages, that is served, packaged, cooked, chopped, sliced, mixed, brewed, frozen, squeezed, or otherwise prepared for consumption, including but not limited to ready-to-eat and takeout food. 
G.  "Vendor" means the operator of any store or business which sells or offers goods or merchandise, located or operating within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2090 N.S., § 2, 11-6-2013)  
8.56.020 - Polystyrene foam containers and service ware prohibited. 
A.  On or after April 22, 2014, a vendor or food provider shall not dispense prepared food to a customer in a polystyrene foam food container. 
(Ord. No. 2090 N.S., § 2, 11-6-2013)  
8.56.030 - Exemptions. 
The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
A.  Raw eggs and raw, butchered meat, fish, or poultry that is sold from a butcher case or a similar retail appliance. 
B.  A vendor or food provider may dispense prepared food to a customer using polystyrene foam containers if that food provider demonstrates, in writing, to the satisfaction of the director of community services that compliance with the provisions of this chapter will impose a unique problem, not generally applicable to other persons in similar circumstances, that will result in an undue economic hardship. The director of community services shall put the decision to grant or deny an exemption in writing and may exempt the vendor or food provider pursuant to this subdivision until April 22, 2015, or not more than one year from the date of the demonstration, whichever date is sooner. The director's decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2090 N.S., § 2, 11-6-2013)  
8.56.040 - Violations. 
A.  The director of community services or his or her designee has primary responsibility for enforcement of this chapter. The director of community services is authorized to promulgate regulations and to take any and all other actions reasonable and necessary to enforce this chapter, including, but not limited to, investigating violations, issuing fines, and entering the premises of any store during business hours. 
B.  It is unlawful for any vendor or food provider to violate or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2090 N.S., § 2, 11-6-2013; Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 34, 5-2-2018)  
8.52.050 - No conflict with federal or state law. 
Nothing in this chapter is intended to create any requirement, power or duty that is in conflict with any federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2090 N.S., § 2, 11-6-2013)  
Chapter 8.60 - PROHIBITION OF SCAVENGING 
 
8.60.010 - Purpose. 
To reduce the waste stream generated by citizens of Morgan Hill, the city council has entered into a franchise agreement with South Valley Refuse Disposal, Inc., to permit collection of residential curbside and commercial recycling programs. Scavenging of recyclables from the program undermines the participation of residents and business. The provisions of this chapter are intended to eliminate scavenging. 
(Ord. 1396 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.60.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and phrases are defined as follows: 
"City agent" means any person designated by the city manager or city council, or their designees, as being responsible for administering, directing, supervising, collecting or providing for the disposal of garbage, rubbish, and other refuse. 
"Franchisee" means a recycling operator issued a franchise by the city council, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 13.28 (Solid Waste Collection and Disposal) of this code. 
"Recyclable materials" means paper, glass, plastic, used motor oil, ferrous metal, aluminum, or other materials which may be recycled for use, have been segregated from other solid waste, and placed at a designated collection location for the purpose of collection and recycling. 
"Recycling" shall have the meaning established by Government Code Section 66716.5. 
(Ord. 1396 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.60.030 - Scavenging prohibited. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner thereof, the owner's agents or employees, a city agent, a franchisee or their agents or employee, to do any of the following: 
1.  Tamper or meddle with a container for recyclable materials; 
2.  Tamper or meddle with the contents of any container for recyclable materials; 
3.  Remove the contents of any container for recyclable materials; 
4.  Remove any container for recyclable material from the location where such container has been placed by the owner of the container or the owner's agent; or 
5.  Remove, or tamper or meddle with, any recyclable material set out for collection, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, on private property or on any sidewalk, street, or public right-of-way. 
B.  The provisions of this section do not apply to: 
1.  A franchisee or their agent or employee performing under the authority of their franchise agreement; 
2.  A city agent performing within the authority granted by the city; or 
3.  The owner, or their authorized representative, of the recyclable materials or its container. 
(Ord. 1396 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
Chapter 8.70 - GRAFFITI 
 
8.70.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a program to prevent and control the further spread of graffiti within the city, to establish a process for the removal of graffiti from real and personal property, and to assess and recover costs related to such removal. 
(Ord. 1403 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.70.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and phrases are defined as follows: 
"Graffiti" includes any unauthorized inscription, writing, lettering, word, figure, marking, drawing or design that is marked, written, etched, scratched, drawn, or painted or otherwise placed on any part of building, structure, facility or surface, regardless of the nature of the material of that part. 
"Graffiti abatement costs and expenses" means and includes, but are not limited to, the following costs and expenses incurred by the city: 
1.  The costs and expenses of having graffiti removed from defaced property; 
2.  The costs and expenses of having defaced property repaired or replaced when the city determines that the removal of the graffiti would not be cost effective; 
3.  The costs of administering and monitoring the participation of a defendant and his or her parents or guardians in a graffiti abatement program; 
4.  The related administrative, overhead, and incidental costs incurred in performing or causing the performance of the enforcement, abatement or collection procedures described in this chapter; and 
5.  Related court costs and attorneys' fees in accordance with Government Code Section 38773.5. 
"Graffiti eradication costs and expenses" include but are not limited to the following costs and expenses incurred by the city: 
1.  All costs enumerated above in the definition of "graffiti abatement costs and expenses"; and 
2.  The law enforcement costs and expenses incurred in identifying and apprehending a responsible party. 
"Graffiti implements" include, but are not limited to, the following items: 
1.  "Aerosol paint container" means any aerosol container, regardless of the materials from which it is made, which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint or other substance capable of defacing property. "Aerosol paint container" does not include a container of less than six ounces capacity provided to a minor for the minor's use or possession under the supervision of the minor's parent, guardian, instructor or employer. 
2.  "Felt tip marker" means any broad tip marker pen with a tip exceeding three-eighths of one inch in width, or any similar implement containing an ink that is not water soluble. 
3.  "Paint stick or graffiti stick" means any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, leaving a mark at least one-sixteenth of one inch in width, which cannot be removed with water after it dries. 
"Graffiti implements" do not include the above items if they are furnished for use in school-related activities that are part of an approved instructional program, when such items are used under controlled and supervised situations within the classroom or on the site of a supervised project. These items may not leave the supervised site and shall be inventoried by the instructor. 
"Police chief" means the chief of police of the city of Morgan Hill or his or her designee. 
"Real or personal property" includes, but is not limited to: buildings or other structures, such as walls; fences; signs; retaining walls; driveways; walkways; sidewalks; curbs; street lampposts; hydrants; trees; electric, light, power, telephone or telegraph poles; drinking fountains; and garbage receptacles. 
"Responsible party" means: 
1.  Any person, including a minor, who has been determined to have placed graffiti on real or personal property of another person. 
2.  A minor who has: confessed to, admitted to, or pled guilty or no contest to, a violation of Penal Code Section 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7; or who has been convicted by final judgement of a violation of Penal Code Section 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7; or who has been declared a ward of the juvenile court pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Section 602 by reason of the commission of an act prohibited by Penal Code Section 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7. 
3.  The parents or guardians having custody and control of a minor who is responsible party also are responsible parties for the purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1403 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.70.030 - Nuisance declared. 
The city council declares that graffiti is a public and private nuisance, and may be abated pursuant to this chapter, or as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. 1403 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.70.040 - Graffiti prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful to place graffiti upon any real or personal property when the graffiti is visible from any public right of way or from any other public or private property. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person who owns any real or personal property within the city to permit graffiti to be placed upon, or to allow graffiti to remain upon, real or personal property, when the graffiti is visible from any public right of way or from any other public or private property. 
(Ord. 1403 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.70.050 - Graffiti eradication program. 
The police chief is authorized to establish a comprehensive graffiti eradication program within the city which may, but is not required to, include: proactive enforcement to identify, apprehend and prosecute persons who have placed graffiti on the real or personal property of another; establishment of procedures to pursue restitution of graffiti eradication costs from responsible parties; establishment of a preventive education program within local schools to prevent graffiti; establishment of an offender education program with the intent of diverting those apprehended for graffiti related offenses; establishment of a "graffiti hotline" to be used by the community to report real or personal property which has been defaced with graffiti; and the coordination and maintenance of a graffiti wipe-out program which utilizes available resources and enlists citizen volunteers and those who are responsible for community service as an imposition of sentence or condition of probation with the goal of cleaning graffiti from real or personal property within the city within seventy-two hours of its appearance. 
(Ord. 1403 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.70.060 - Identification of responsible party. 
To assist the police chief in identifying the responsible party in incidents of graffiti, the police chief is authorized to request and receive any report or materials containing the names and addresses of responsible parties to the fullest extent allowed by law. 
A.  This authority includes, without limitation, the authority to receive a report from the county probation officer containing the names and addresses of parent or guardians having custody and control of minors who are responsible parties pursuant to California Government Code Section 38772(c). 
B.  The police chief may apply to the juvenile court for the release of the names and addresses of responsible parties who are minors. 
(Ord. 1403 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.70.070 - Recovery of graffiti eradication costs and expenses. 
A.  Any responsible party as defined in this chapter shall be liable to the city for all graffiti eradication costs and expenses. 
B.  All responsible parties for graffiti on a particular property shall be jointly and severally liable for the graffiti eradication costs and expenses. 
(Ord. 1403 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.70.080 - Invoice for graffiti eradication costs and expenses. 
The police chief, or his or her designee, shall cause to be sent an invoice for graffiti eradication costs and expenses to a responsible party. In addition to information on the standard invoice for city service fees, the invoice for graffiti abatement costs and expenses shall contain: 
A.  The address or location of the defaced real or personal property and the location and a description of the defaced personal property, sufficient to identify the defaced property; and 
B.  A summary of the graffiti abatement actions performed; and 
C.  A listing of the graffiti abatement costs and expenses incurred; and 
D.  The identity of the responsible party and the basis of that determination; and 
E.  A description of the payment process, including the time within which and the place to which the graffiti eradication costs and expenses shall be paid; and 
F.  A statement advising that the graffiti abatement costs and expenses shall be a personal obligation of the party; and 
G.  A statement advising that the city may pursue a special collection process for the graffiti abatement costs and expenses against real property owned by the responsible party; and 
H.  A description of the process by which a responsible party may protest the determination that he or she is a responsible party or the amount of the graffiti abatement costs and expenses. 
(Ord. 1403 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.70.090 - Graffiti removal. 
Graffiti which is visible from any public right-of-way or public or private property shall be removed in accordance with the following provisions: 
A.  Removal by Property Owner. The property owner or other person in control of such property shall be encouraged to perform the removal with his/her own resources; 
B.  Removal by the City with Consent of Property Owner. The city or its agents may remove graffiti upon satisfaction of the following conditions: 
1.  The consent of the owner of the property is obtained; 
2.  The property owner executes a release and right of entry form permitting such graffiti removal; 
3.  The city shall not paint or repair a more extensive area than is necessary to remove the graffiti, unless the police chief determines that a more extensive area needs repainting or repairing in order to avoid an aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community, or unless the property owner agrees to pay for the cost of repainting or repairing the more extensive areas; and 
3.  The owner provides paint of a specific color or match if they so desire. 
C.  Removal by City Without Consent of Property Owner. The police chief may order abatement of graffiti from real or personal property when the owner does not remove the graffiti with his or her own resources, or satisfy the conditions of subsection A or B of this section. 
(Ord. 1403 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.70.100 - Property owner's obligation to remove. 
All persons who own real or personal property upon which graffiti has been placed shall cause the removal of such graffiti within ten days after it is placed on the property. If the owner fails to do so, the police chief may abate and remove graffiti on public or private property in accordance with the procedure set forth in Section 8.70.110. 
(Ord. 1403 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.70.110 - Graffiti abatement and cost recovery proceedings. 
Abatement of graffiti and assessment of graffiti abatement and/or eradication costs shall be in accordance with the following procedure: 
A.  Following a report of graffiti from any source, the police chief shall issue a notice of intent to abate the graffiti as a public nuisance, and shall serve such notice by any of the following methods: 
1.  By personal service on the owner, occupant or person in charge or control of the property; 
2.  By posting at a conspicuous place on the property or abutting public right-of-way; or 
3.  By sending a copy of such notice by registered or certified mail addressed to the owner at the address shown on the last available assessment roll, or as otherwise known. 
B.  The notice of intent shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE OF INTENT TO ABATE 
NUISANCE—GRAFFITI 
___________ 
(Name and address of person notified) 
___________ 
(Date) 
 NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that you are required by Morgan Hill Municipal Code Chapter 8.70 to, at your sole expense, remove or paint over the graffiti in existence on the property located at (address), which is visible to public view, by (date). If you fail to do so, the City or its agents will enter your property and remove or paint over the graffiti. The cost of such removal and/or painting will be assessed against you and your property, and such costs will constitute a lien upon such property until paid. 
 You may request a hearing to contest this notice. To request a hearing, you must submit a written request to the Police Chief by (date). If a request is not received by this date by the Police Chief, the Police Chief shall have the authority to proceed with the abatement of the graffiti inscribed on your property without further notice or hearing, and at your expense. 
 Your presence is not required at the hearing. In lieu of attendance, you may submit a sworn written statement as to why you are not responsible for the removal of the graffiti, and/or assessment of costs of removal and/or painting. If you do not appear in person at the hearing, your sworn written statement as described will be considered as your sole testimony. 
C.  Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the police chief shall set a date and time for the hearing and notify the person requesting the hearing of the date, time, and location of the hearing. All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the police chief who shall hear all facts and testimony he or she deems pertinent. Said facts and testimony may include testimony on the location of the graffiti and the circumstances concerning its placement on the real or personal property. The police chief shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. After the hearing, the police chief shall serve notice of his or her written decision to the person requesting the hearing, or other affected parties, within ten working days. 
D.  Any owner of the real or personal property on which graffiti is to be abated that is aggrieved by the decision of the police chief to abate said graffiti, may appeal to the city manager or his or her designee. The written appeal must be filed with the city manager within ten working days of service of the police chief's decision. The city manager, or his or her designee, may uphold the order of the police chief to abate the graffiti granted under this chapter if the city manager, or his or her designee, determines that the graffiti is detrimental to the public safety or welfare. 
(Ord. 1403 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.70.120 - Assessment and payment of costs. 
A.  Following abatement, the police chief shall send an invoice to the owner of the real or personal property upon which graffiti has been abated. The notice shall specify all graffiti abatement costs. 
B.  The total cost of graffiti abatement, including all administrative costs, shall be paid by the owner or other person in control of the real or personal property upon which graffiti has been abated, within thirty calendar days after service of the invoice. 
C.  Pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.5, the total cost of abatement, including all administrative costs, shall constitute a special assessment against the property subject to the graffiti abatement, if not paid in full within thirty days after service of the invoice. After the assessment is made, it shall constitute a lien on the property subject to the graffiti abatement. Such special assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedures and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. 
(Ord. 1403 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.70.130 - Cost of abatement a personal obligation. 
Instead of making the cost of abating a nuisance a special assessment against the property subject to the graffiti abatement, the city may make the cost the personal obligation of the property owner or other person creating, causing committing or maintaining the nuisance. In such a case, all of the procedures of this chapter apply except those specially related to assessment of the property. 
(Ord. 1403 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.70.140 - Alternative means of enforcement. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city council from authorizing the city attorney to commence any other available civil or criminal proceedings to abate a public nuisance in addition to or alternative to proceedings set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1403 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
8.70.150 - Sale and display of graffiti implements. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a commercial, retail or wholesale establishment where graffiti implements are sold, to store or display, or cause to be stored or displayed, such graffiti implements in an area that is accessible to the public without employee assistance in the regular course of business pending legal sale or other disposition. Such graffiti implements must be stored or displayed in a locked display case, or other area of the store accessible only to employees and under constant monitoring by employees. 
B.  Nothing herein shall preclude the storage or display of graffiti implements in areas viewable by the public so long as such items are not accessible to the public without employee assistance. 
C.  Every retail establishment which sells or offers for sale aerosol paint containers shall post in a conspicuous place a sign, in letters at least three-eighths of an inch high, stating; "Any person who maliciously defaces real or personal property with paint is guilty of vandalism which is punishable by a fine, imprisonment or both." 
(Ord. 1403 N.S. § 1 (part), 1998)  
Chapter 8.80 - DISKING RESTRICTIONS 
 
8.80.010 - Disking restrictions. 
A.  Except as specifically provided in Sections 8.80.020 and 8.80.030, it shall be unlawful for any person or entity to disc, plow or otherwise break into or turnover soil upon any real property within the city at any time or for any purpose, including, without limitation, for weed or vegetation management or abatement purpose, if the real property, or portion thereof, meets one of the following criteria: 
1.  The real property, by itself or together with any contiguous real property, constitutes an area that is two acres or greater in size, and that real property, or the portion thereof that constitutes an area that is two acres or greater in size, supports grassland and/or mixed herbaceous vegetation where water is not applied for the purpose of growing short grasses or agricultural products; or 
2.  There is known to be one or more occupied burrowing owl burrows present on a real property of any size at any time within the immediately preceding thirty-six-month period. 
B.  For the purposes of this chapter, real property shall be considered contiguous even if it is separated by a street or roadway that does not exceed one hundred feet in width, utility easement, railroad right-of-way or other similar feature, element or facility. 
C.  For the purposes of the chapter, a burrowing owl burrow shall be considered occupied when a burrowing owl is currently using the burrow, or has used the burrow at any time within the immediately preceding thirty-six-month period even if the burrow is temporarily unoccupied. 
(Ord. 1629 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.80.020 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of Section 8.80.010 shall not apply to the disking or plowing activities described in Section 8.80.010 performed on: 
A.  That portion of real property that is actively being used for the production of agricultural products, when the disking activity is performed in connection with that agricultural production activity; or 
B.  Real property that is less than two acres in size and upon which a dwelling unit is located that is being used solely for residential occupancy; or 
C.  That portion of real property that is disked for fire break purposes along the perimeters of real property adjacent to roadways, creeks, and buildings or through the middle of real property if needed to create interior fire breaks in parcels greater than five acres, provided, however, that such fire breaks may not exceed thirty feet in width; or 
D.  Real property located in areas that have been identified by the city, upon the advice of a qualified ornithologist, as having little or no potential as burrowing owl nesting habitat. The locations and boundaries of these areas, and any changes, deletions or other modifications thereto, shall be set forth in a resolution adopted by the city council; or 
E.  Real property, located within the hazardous fire boundary, as adopted by Santa Clara County fire department. 
(Ord. 1629 § 1 (part), 2003)  
8.80.030 - Exception—Development activity. 
This chapter is not intended to and shall not be used or interpreted to prevent or prohibit the development or improvement of real property pursuant to and in full compliance with all planning, building or grading permits or approvals. 
(Ord. 1629 § 1 (part), 2003)  
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE  
Chapter 9.04 - WEAPONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2289 N.S., § 1, adopted Nov. 28, 2018, amended Ch. 9.04 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 9.04, §§ 9.04.010—9.04.040, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 290 N.S., § A(part), adopted in 1970; Ord. 1198 N.S., § 1, adopted in 1994; Ord. 1226 N.S., § 2, adopted in 1995; Ord. 1693 N.S., § 2, adopted in 2004; and Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 35, adopted May 2, 2018. 
 
9.04.010 - Discharge—Permit required—Fee. 
A.  No person shall discharge in the city, outside of a licensed shooting range, any instrument or device of any kind, character or description which discharges, propels or hurls bullets, missiles of any kind to any distance from such instrument or device by means of elastic force, air pressure, vacuum, explosive force, mechanical spring action or electrical charge, without first having applied for and obtained a written permit therefore from the chief of police. 
B.  Subject to review by and as specifically directed by the council, the chief of police shall be the sole judge as to the desirability or necessity of such permit, which must be, in his judgment, necessary for the protection of the applicant or his property, or in the furtherance of the public welfare, and which necessity cannot be reasonably abated by other means. 
C.  Applicants for such permit shall provide the following: 
1.  An application in writing which states the purpose of such permit, the nature of the problem to be abated which necessitates the protection of the applicant, his property or the furtherance of the public welfare, and lists all other means which have been unsuccessfully employed to abate the problem; 
2.  Proof of liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars per occurrence, obtained by the applicant and naming the city as additional insured, in a form and with companies approved by the city; 
3.  A certificate of agreement holding the city harmless for any action by applicant under this chapter, in a form prescribed by the city. 
D.  Upon approval, such permit may be issued upon payment of a fee of twenty-five dollars and shall be upon conditions and limitations and for such a length of time as the chief of police may determine. 
(Ord. No. 2289 N.S., § 1, 11-28-2018)  
9.04.020 - Licensed dealers—Posting of regulations. 
Any person or business establishment engaged in the business of offering for sale any instrument or device described in Section 9.04.010 of this chapter shall have posted in a conspicuous place in the place of sale, a copy of this chapter and shall deliver a copy of this chapter to any purchaser of such instrument or device. 
(Ord. No. 2289 N.S., § 1, 11-28-2018)  
9.04.030 - Duty to report theft or loss of firearms. 
Any person who owns or possesses a firearm (as defined in Penal Code Section 16520 or as amended) shall report the theft or loss of the firearm to the Morgan Hill Police Department within forty-eight hours of the time he or she knew or reasonably should have known that the firearm had been stolen or lost, whenever: (1) the person resides in the city of Morgan Hill; or (2) the theft or loss of the firearm occurs in the city of Morgan Hill. 
(Ord. No. 2289 N.S., § 1, 11-28-2018)  
9.04.040 - Safe storage of firearms. 
No person shall leave a firearm (as defined in Penal Code Section 16520 or as amended) unattended in any residence owned or controlled by that person unless the firearm is stored in a locked container (as defined in Penal Code Section 16850 or as amended), or the firearm is disabled with a trigger lock that is listed on the California Department of Justice's list of approved firearms safety devices. 
(Ord. No. 2289 N.S., § 1, 11-28-2018)  
9.04.050 - Possession of large-capacity ammunition magazines prohibited. 
A.  No person may possess a large-capacity magazine in the city of Morgan Hill whether assembled or disassembled. For purposes of this section, "large-capacity magazine" means any detachable ammunition feeding device with the capacity to accept more than ten rounds, but shall not be construed to include any of the following: 
1.  A feeding device that has been permanently altered so that it cannot accommodate more than ten rounds; or 
2.  A .22 caliber tubular ammunition feeding device; or 
3.  A tubular magazine that is contained in a lever-action firearm. 
B.  Any person who, prior to the effective date of this section, was legally in possession of a large-capacity magazine shall have ninety days from such effective date to do either of the following without being subject to prosecution: 
1.  Remove the large-capacity magazine from the city of Morgan Hill; or 
2.  Surrender the large-capacity magazine to the Morgan Hill Police Department for destruction; or 
3.  Lawfully sell or transfer the large-capacity magazine in accordance with Penal Code Section 12020. 
C.  This section shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Any federal, state, county, or city agency that is charged with the enforcement of any law, for use by agency employees in the discharge of their official duties; 
2.  Any government officer, agent, or employee, member of the armed forces of the United States, or peace officer, to the extent that such person is otherwise authorized to possess a large-capacity magazine and does so while acting within the course and scope of his or her duties; 
3.  A forensic laboratory or any authorized agent or employee thereof in the course and scope of his or her duties; 
4.  Any entity that operates an armored vehicle business pursuant to the laws of the state, and an authorized employee of such entity, while in the course and scope of his or her employment for purposes that pertain to the entity's armored vehicle business; 
5.  Any person who has been issued a license or permit by the California Department of Justice pursuant to Penal Code Sections 18900, 26500-26915, 31000, 32315, 32650, 32700-32720, or 33300, when the possession of a large-capacity magazine is in accordance with that license or permit; 
6.  A licensed gunsmith for purposes of maintenance, repair or modification of the large-capacity magazine; 
7.  Any person who finds a large-capacity magazine, if the person is not prohibited from possessing firearms or ammunition pursuant to federal or state law, and the person possesses the large-capacity magazine no longer than is reasonably necessary to deliver or transport the same to a law enforcement agency; 
8.  Any person lawfully in possession of a firearm that the person obtained prior to January 1, 2000, if the person can show that the large capacity magazine was included with the purchase of the firearm or no magazine that holds fewer than ten rounds of ammunition is compatible with the firearm, and the person possesses the large-capacity magazine solely for use with such firearm. 
9.  Any retired peace officer holding a valid, current Carry Concealed Weapons (CCW) permit issued pursuant to California Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2289 N.S., § 1, 11-28-2018)  
9.04.060 - Confiscation—Authority—Conditions. 
Any instrument, device or article used or possessed in violation of the provisions of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance and may be confiscated and possessed by a police officer of the city and turned over to the chief of police under the conditions set forth in this section. If no complaint for violation of this chapter is filed within seventy-two hours of the taking, the instrument or device shall be returned to the person from whom it was taken. If a complaint for violation of this chapter is filed within seventy-two hours, the chief of police may return it to the person from whose possession it was taken upon such conditions as he deems desirable for the public welfare. If the person from whom it was taken is not convicted of a violation of this chapter, then the device or instrument shall be returned to him without any conditions. If there is a conviction and sixty days have expired since the date of conviction, the same may be destroyed by the chief of police or returned to the person from whom it was taken upon such conditions as the chief deems desirable for the public welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2289 N.S., § 1, 11-28-2018)  
9.04.070 - Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate or cause or permit the violation of the provisions of any section of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2289 N.S., § 1, 11-28-2018)  
Chapter 9.06 - IMITATION WEAPONS 
 
9.06.010 - Possession of imitation weapons unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or display an imitation firearm on public property, in the public right of way, or in an area viewable from public property or the public right of way. 
(Ord. 1693 N.S. § 1 (part), 2004)  
9.06.020 - Imitation weapon—Definition. 
For the purposes of this section, an imitation firearm means a replica of a firearm that is so substantially similar in visual characteristics to an existing firearm as to lead a reasonable person to believe that the replica is a firearm that could be operational. 
(Ord. 1693 N.S. § 1 (part), 2004)  
9.06.030 - Imitation weapon—Confiscation and destruction. 
Any imitation firearm that is possessed or displayed in violation of this chapter may be impounded and held as evidence, returned to the person from whom it was taken or destroyed as outlined in Section 9.04.030. 
(Ord. 1693 N.S. § 1 (part), 2004)  
9.06.040 - Imitation weapon—Exception. 
This section shall not apply to the possession or display of an imitation firearm as authorized in writing by the police chief. 
(Ord. 1693 N.S. § 1 (part), 2004)  
Chapter 9.08 - DRINKING IN PUBLIC 
 
9.08.010 - Permit required when. 
No person shall drink or possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage when upon any public right-of-way, lane, alley or any private parking lot open to the public located within the city except under a permit issued by the city. 
(Ord. 752 N.S. § 1, 1986)  
9.08.020 - Permit required—Private parking lot open to public. 
No person shall drink or possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage when upon any private parking lot which is open to the public except by lawful permit issued by the city. 
(Ord. 752 N.S. § 2, 1986)  
9.08.030 - Permit—Approval authority. 
The city council delegates to the city manager or his designate the authority to review and approve or disapprove all applications made under this chapter pursuant to guidelines which shall be adopted by resolution. 
(Ord. 752 N.S. § 3, 1986)  
9.08.040 - Applicability. 
This chapter is not intended to apply to any activity presently governed by state law, nor shall this chapter prohibit the transportation of any alcoholic beverage from one location to another in a manner permitted under state law. 
(Ord. 752 N.S. § 4, 1986)  
9.08.050 - Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 36, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 36, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 9.08.050 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 9.08.050 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 752 N.S., § 5, adopted in 1986.  
Chapter 9.10 - LOITERING 
 
9.10.010 - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply for purposes of this chapter: 
A.  "Loitering" means intentionally entering or remaining on any premises specified by this chapter under circumstances where a person engaged in such conduct: 
1.  Does not have a purpose directly and legitimately connected with the business or activity of the legal occupant of the premises or premises immediately adjacent, or their agents, servants, customers or employees; and 
2.  Refuses to comply with the lawful order of the legal owner, occupant or agent thereof, or a police officer to leave the property or premises or, after complying with such lawful order, such person returns (within forty-eight hours) and resumes loitering. 
B.  "Private property" means any private property or business premises open to public use, including but not limited to any parking facility, sidewalks or grounds adjacent thereto owned, occupied or used by the business or property owner. 
C.  "Public property" means any property owned by a federal, state or local agency, including but not limited to highways, streets, alleys, parking lots, sidewalks or crosswalks. 
D.  "Public nuisance" means anything which is: (1) injurious to health, (2) indecent or offensive to the senses of a reasonable person, (3) an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by an entire community or neighborhood, or by any considerable number of persons, or (4) hindering or obstructing in any manner, through verbal or physical conduct, the free passage or use of any public property. 
(Ord. 1508 N.S. § 2 (part), 2001)  
9.10.020 - Causing a public nuisance while on private property. 
It is unlawful for any person to loiter on any private property so as to cause a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 1508 N.S. § 2 (part), 2001)  
9.10.030 - Causing a public nuisance while loitering on public property. 
It is unlawful for any person to loiter on any public property so as to cause a public nuisance. 
(Ord. 1508 N.S. § 2 (part), 2001)  
9.10.040 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply in any of the following instances: 
A.  Where its application would result in an interference with or inhibition of peaceful labor picketing or other lawful activities; 
B.  Where its application would result in the interference with or inhibition of any exercise of a constitutionally protected right of freedom of speech or assembly, including but not limited to peaceful expression of political or religious opinions. 
(Ord. 1508 N.S. § 2 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 9.12 - DISTURBING THE PEACE 
 
9.12.010 - Disturbing the peace—Second response service fee. 
A.  A violation of California Penal Code Section 415 (Disturbance of the Peace) so as to require a second emergency response by the police department will result in a service fee charged to the person who is responsible for the premises at which the disturbance occurred. 
B.  Prior to issuance of a service fee the following procedural steps must be completed: 
1.  Identification of a disturbance of the peace; 
2.  Identification of the responsible person; 
3.  Issuance of a written notice of first response to a disturbance which outlines the ordinance and the possible ramifications of a second response and is presented to the person apparently responsible for the premises at which the disturbance is occurring. 
C.  The service fee will be based on a per minute charge for responding officers, dispatchers, overhead and equipment. 
D.  This service fee shall not apply in any of the following instances: 
1.  Where its application would result in an interference with or inhibition of peaceful labor picketing or other lawful activities; 
2.  Where its application would result in interference with or inhibition of any other exercise of a constitutionally protected right or freedom of speech such as (but not limited to) peaceful expression of political or religious opinions. 
(Ord. 1160 N.S., 1994)  
Chapter 9.13 - SOCIAL HOST 
 
9.13.010 - Findings. 
A.  Underage persons consuming alcoholic beverages at gatherings held at private residences or at rented residential and commercial premises is harmful to the underage persons themselves and a threat to the peace, health, safety, quiet enjoyment of residential property and the general welfare of the public. Underage persons, who have been consuming alcoholic beverages, are at greater risk to be in automobile accidents, to commit suicide, to be assaulted, and girls are at greater risk of sexual assaults. 
B.  Persons responsible for the occurrence of these types of gathering on private property over which they have possession or control have failed to ensure that alcoholic beverages are neither served to nor consumed by underage persons at these parties. 
C.  Problems associated with gatherings involving underage persons drinking alcohol are difficult to prevent and deter. Police need an arsenal of tools to deal with the issue of underage drinking and its attendant problems. If persons are held civilly responsible by having to pay a significant fine for hosting a party where there is underage drinking, they will be more likely to properly supervise or stop such conduct at events held on property under their possession or control. Because the high median household income of residents of the city of Morgan Hill, the fine needs to be significant to have such a deterrent effect. 
D.  In the past and present, law enforcement, fire and other emergency response services personnel have and are required to respond, sometimes on multiple occasions, to these types of gatherings. The repeated return of police officers to the location of an event constitutes a drain of emergency personnel and resources, often leaving other areas of the city of Morgan Hill without police protection or with unreasonably limited protection. Responses to such gatherings also result in a disproportionate expenditure of public safety resources of the city of Morgan Hill, which are underwritten by general municipal taxes paid to the city of Morgan Hill by its taxpayers and residents. 
(Ord. 1850 N.S. § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.13.020 - Purpose. 
A.  To enforce laws prohibiting the service to and consumption of alcoholic beverages by underage persons; 
B.  To protect public health, safety, general welfare and quiet enjoyment of residential property and properties neighboring one of these gatherings; and 
C.  To establish standards and controls of parties, gatherings or assemblages involving underage persons consuming alcoholic beverages on private property when such gatherings are determined to be a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare and require initial police response and return calls to the location to disperse uncooperative participants. 
(Ord. 1850 N.S. § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.13.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  "Alcoholic beverage" shall mean alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances. 
B.  "Juvenile" means any person under eighteen years of age. 
C.  "Residence" or "Other private property" shall mean a home, yard, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling, party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation. 
D.  "Response costs" means those reasonable and necessary costs directly incurred by the city of Morgan Hill for a response to an underage gathering, and include the cost of providing police, firefighting, and/or other emergency services at the scene of the underage gathering including but not limited to: 
1.  Salaries and benefits of law enforcement and/or emergency personnel for the amount of time spent responding to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with underage gatherings, and the administrative costs attributable to such response(s); 
2.  The cost of any medical treatment to or for any law enforcement personnel injured responding to, remaining at or leaving the scene of an underage gathering; and 
3.  The cost of repairing any city of Morgan Hill equipment or property damage, and the cost of the use of any such equipment, in responding to, remaining at or leaving the scene of an underage gathering. 
E.  "Responsible person" shall mean a person or persons as defined below. A responsible person need not reside at, need not be present at, and need not have prior knowledge of an underage gathering, as a prerequisite to a finding that such person is a responsible person as defined by this section. Responsible person includes, but is not limited to: 
1.  Owner(s) of the residence or other private property where an underage gathering is taking place, provided that if said owner has rented or leased said property to another person, said owner shall not be considered a responsible person until said owner receives notice of at least one previous underage gathering on said property in the prior twelve months. Notice shall be by a copy of the citation transmitted via certified mail to the owner of the residence or other private property as recorded by the last equalized assessment roll of the Santa Clara County Assessor. Such owner shall not be considered a responsible person where he or she has commenced and is diligently proceeding with eviction proceedings against the responsible lessee and/or tenant of the property where the underage gathering occurred. 
2.  Lessee(s) and/or tenant(s) of the residence or other private property where an underage gathering is taking place; 
3.  Person(s) hosting an underage gathering; 
4.  Person(s) providing and/or serving alcohol to an underage person at an underage gathering; 
5.  Person(s) receiving money or other consideration for granting access to an underage gathering; 
6.  Parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of a juvenile who is also a responsible person; 
7.  Person(s) exercising control over the residence or other private property at the time of the underage gathering. 
F.  "Underage gathering" means a party or gathering of three or more underage persons at a residence or other private property in the city of Morgan Hill at which alcoholic beverages are being consumed or possessed by one or more underage persons. 
G.  "Underage person" shall mean any person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(Ord. 1850 N.S. § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.13.040 - Underage gatherings prohibited. 
A.  An underage gathering of three or more persons at a residence or other private property in the city of Morgan Hill at which alcoholic beverages are being consumed or possessed by one or more underage persons shall constitute a public nuisance, as an immediate threat to public health and safety, and is prohibited. 
B.  As a public nuisance, the underage gathering may be summarily abated by police by all reasonable means, singularly or in combination, including, but not limited to: 
1.  An order requiring the gathering to be disbanded; 
2.  Issuance of an administrative citation under this ordinance; and 
3.  Issuance of a criminal citation and/or arrest of any law violators under any other applicable ordinances and/or statutes. 
C.  In addition to, in combination with, or as an alternative to, any other remedy provided by law, the city of Morgan Hill may abate the underage gathering as a public nuisance pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.18. 
(Ord. 1850 N.S. § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.13.050 - Violation. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Violations of this chapter may be criminally prosecuted if the responsible person knowingly caused or permitted the violation to occur, or reasonably should have known that a violation would occur. 
B.  In addition to all other available remedies, all responsible persons in violation of this chapter, regardless of whether they knew or should have known that a violation would occur, shall be jointly and severally liable for all response costs. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 37, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 37, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 9.13.050 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 9.13.050 pertained to criminal and civil penalties for violation of the ordinance.  
9.13.060 - Imposition of liens or special assessments. 
Any administrative fine imposed for violation of this chapter, including any administrative fines pursuant to other codes or statutes to which violations of this chapter are subject, and any administrative costs or other expenses of enforcement, response costs as defined in this chapter, and the cost or expenses associated with the abatement of a nuisance condition pursuant to this chapter, may be enforced by the recordation of a lien or special assessment on the real property where the violation occurred in accordance with and subject to the requirements of Chapter 1.18. 
(Ord. 1850 N.S. § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.13.070 - Protected activities. 
This chapter shall not apply to activities protected by Article I, section 4 of the California Constitution or the 1st or 14th Amendments of the United States Constitution. 
(Ord. 1850 N.S. § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 9.14 - YOUTH CURFEW 
 
9.14.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
"Curfew hours" means: 
1.  The hours between eleven p.m. and five a.m. for minors under the age of eighteen years. 
"Emergency" means an unforeseen circumstance or circumstances or the resulting situation that calls for immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
"Establishment" means any privately owned place of business to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement, entertainment or recreation. 
"Guardian" means: 
1.  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
2.  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court; or 
3.  A person who is at least eighteen years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
"Loiter" means to stand idly, wander about or linger aimlessly. 
"Minor" means any person under eighteen years of age. 
"Parent" means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent of a minor. 
"Public place" means: 
1.  Any out-of-door area to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, including, but not limited to, streets, highways, sidewalks, alleys, parks, schools, playgrounds, vacant lots or other public grounds; and 
2.  The out-of-doors common area of establishments, including, but not limited to, entry ways and parking lots or other areas open to the public. 
"Remain" means to: 
1.  Linger or stay; or 
2.  Fail to leave a public place when requested to do so by a police officer or the person in control of the public place. 
"Serious bodily injury" means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(Ord. 1274 N.S. § 1 (part), 1996)  
9.14.020 - Regulations. 
A.  It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen years to loiter or remain in any public place within the city during curfew hours, except as provided under Section 9.14.030. 
(Ord. 1274 N.S. § 1 (part), 1996)  
9.14.030 - Exemptions. 
A minor under the age of eighteen shall not be in violation of this chapter if, at the time the minor was stopped by a police officer, the minor was: 
A.  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
B.  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without detour or stop; 
C.  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
D.  Engaged in lawful employment activity, or going to or returning home from a lawful employment activity or from a lawful entertainment activity, without detour or stop; 
E.  Acting in response to an emergency; 
F.  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence which is immediately adjacent to the minor's residence; 
G.  Returning directly home, without detour or stop, from a school, church, cultural, sports, amusement, entertainment or recreation activity; or an organized rally, demonstration, meeting or similar activity; 
H.  Waiting at a train or bus station for transportation; 
I.  Emancipated in accordance with the California Family Code or other applicable state law; 
J.  When the minor is engaging in speech or religious rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of peaceful assembly. 
(Ord. 1274 N.S. § 1 (part), 1996)  
9.14.040 - Enforcement procedure. 
A.  Before taking any enforcement action under Section 9.14.020, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and the reason for being in the public place. 
B.  The officer shall not take enforcement action under this chapter unless the officer has probable cause to believe that no exemption under Section 9.14.030 applies. 
(Ord. 1274 N.S. § 1 (part), 1996)  
9.14.050 - Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 38, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 38, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 9.14.050 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 9.14.050 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 1274 N.S., § 1(part), adopted in 1996; and Ord. 1320 N.S., § 10, adopted in 1997.  
9.14.060 - Severability. 
If any provision, including exception, part, phrase or term, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby and the validity of this chapter in any and all other respects shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. 1274 N.S. § 1 (part), 1996)  
Chapter 9.15 - NUISANCES 
 
9.15.010 - Definition. 
A "nuisance" or "public nuisance" is defined as an act or omission which interferes with the public health, comfort and convenience or by California Civil Code Section 3479, California Penal Code Section 370, case law interpreting such code sections or applicable sections of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 1362 N.S. § 1 (part), 1997)  
9.15.020 - Nuisance per se. 
Any one of the following acts or omissions shall constitute a "nuisance per se," which may be abated pursuant to Chapter 1.18, upon proof that the nuisance per se exists: 
A.  The maintenance or tolerance of any building or condition that violates the Uniform Building, Electrical, Plumbing, Mechanical, Fire, Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, or Uniform Housing Codes as adopted by the city of Morgan Hill, or which violate any provision of state or federal law relating to health, safety, and/or environmental protection. Buildings in existence at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter may have their existing use or occupancy continued, if such use or occupancy was legal at the time of adoption of the codes they were constructed under, provided such continued use is not dangerous to life. 
B.  The maintenance of the exterior of any vacant or unoccupied building, or of any fence, wall, or vegetation located on vacant or unoccupied premises or of the interior of any vacant or unoccupied building which is readily visible from any public street or adjacent parcel of property in a state so as to constitute a hazard to health, safety and welfare or constitute an attractive nuisance. 
C.  Maintaining or managing, or failing to maintain or manage, slopes, debris, erosion, protection structures or the growth of vegetation, including trees, shrubs, weeds, and ornamental flowers and plants, in such a manner as to restrict or inhibit the flow of waters, including storm and flood waters, in any natural stream or creek bed. 
D.  Maintenance of any premises so as to constitute a fire hazard or a harbor for rats, vermin, or insects by reason of wood, rank overgrowth, or an accumulation of debris, whether the same be a causative or only a contributive factor, or which causes detriment to neighborhood properties or property values. 
E.  Maintenance of any attractive nuisance dangerous to children and consisting of abandoned or broken motor vehicles and equipment; hazardous pools, ponds, or excavations; abandoned, neglected, unused, or unprotected machinery; or any unprotected pool or unprotected reservoir, whether or not the same contains any water or liquid. 
F.  Maintenance of trees on private property in such a manner that the branches of the trees restrict or impede access to or public use of adjacent sidewalks or streets; obstruct official traffic control devices, including traffic signs and signals. 
G.  Any encroachment on a public street or right of way for which no encroachment permit has been issued, and any fence, wall or other permanent structure which has been erected in violation of this code and which encroaches upon any public right-of-way; or for which an encroachment permit has been issued, but the encroachment exceeds the terms of the encroachment permit or creates a danger to public safety. 
H.  Any other condition recognized in law or in equity as constituting a public nuisance. 
I.  Any violation of any provision of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code, including but not limited to provisions which further define a nuisance or public nuisance. 
J.  Every other activity, use of property, or condition of property which the city council may from time to time declare to be a nuisance pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. 1362 N.S. § 1 (part), 1997)  
Chapter 9.16 - MARIJUANA[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2257 N.S., § 1, adopted July 26, 2017, amended Ch. 9.16 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 9.16, §§ 9.16.010—9.16.050, pertained to medical marijuana and derived from Ord. No. 2183 N.S., § 1, adopted Jan. 20, 2016. 
 
9.16.010 - Intent. 
The city council intends that this chapter: (1) is meant to prohibit all activities related to the cultivation, delivery, and dispensing of marijuana for which a state license is required under the Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act (Bills AB 243, AB 246, and SB 643) which were signed into law on October 9, 2015, as the same may be amended from time to time; (2) expresses its intent to prohibit the cultivation of marijuana in the city except as authorized pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.1(3); (3) exercises its local authority to enact and enforce local regulations and ordinances, including those regarding the permitting, licensing, or other entitlement of the activities prohibited by this chapter; (4) exercises its police power to enact and enforce regulations for the public benefit, safety, and welfare of the city and its community; and (5) expressly prohibits the delivery of marijuana and marijuana distribution facilities in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2257 N.S., § 1, 7-26-2017)  
9.16.020 - Definitions. 
(a)  "Marijuana" means any or all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin or separated resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin, including marijuana infused in foodstuff or any other ingestible or consumable product containing marijuana. The term "marijuana" shall also include "medical marijuana" as such phrase is used in the August 2008 Guidelines for the Security and Non-Diversion of Marijuana Grown for Medical Use, as may be amended from time to time, that was issued by the Office of the Attorney General for the State of California or subject to the provisions of California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 (Compassionate Use Act of 1996) or California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.7 to 11362.83 (Medical Marijuana Program Act). 
(b)  "Marijuana cultivation" means growing, planting, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, trimming, or processing of marijuana, except as authorized under Health and Safety Code Section § 11362.1(3). 
(c)  "Marijuana distribution facility" means any facility or location, whether fixed or mobile, where a primary caregiver, a person with identification cards, a qualified patient, or other person makes available, dispenses, distributes, exchanges, sells, transmits, gives, delivers, or otherwise provides marijuana to any person for any reason, including two or more primary caregivers, persons with identification cards or qualified patients, as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq., or any facility where qualified patients, persons with identification cards and primary caregivers meet or congregate collectively and cooperatively to cultivate or distribute marijuana for medical purposes under the purported authority of California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq., including dispensaries. 
"Marijuana distribution facility" shall not include the following uses, so long as such uses comply with this code, Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq., and other applicable law: 
(1)  A clinic licensed pursuant to Chapter 1 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(2)  A health care facility licensed pursuant to Chapter 2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(3)  A residential care facility for persons with chronic life-threatening illness licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.01 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(4)  A residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to Chapter 3.2 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(5)  A hospice or a home health agency, licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 of Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 2257 N.S., § 1, 7-26-2017)  
9.16.030 - Prohibited activities. 
Marijuana cultivation, marijuana delivery, and marijuana distribution facilities, as defined in this chapter, are declared to be unlawful and prohibited uses in all zoning districts in the city of Morgan Hill. The city shall not issue or approve any permit, variance, building permit, or any other entitlement, license, or permit, whether administrative or discretionary, for the activities of marijuana cultivation or marijuana delivery, or the establishment or operation of a marijuana distribution facility in the city, and no person shall otherwise establish or conduct such activities in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2257 N.S., § 1, 7-26-2017)  
9.16.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
(a)  Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the enforcement remedies set forth in Title 1, at the discretion of the city. 
(b)  Each violation of this chapter and each day of violation of this chapter shall be considered as separate and distinct violations thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2257 N.S., § 1, 7-26-2017)  
9.16.050 - Public nuisance. 
Any use or condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be abated by the city pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 1.18. 
(Ord. No. 2257 N.S., § 1, 7-26-2017)  
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters:  
Chapter 10.04 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.04.010 - Definitions generally. 
A.  The following words and phrases, when used in this title, shall for the purpose of this title have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter. 
B.  Whenever any words or phrases used in this title are not defined, but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state and amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.04.020 - Central traffic district. 
"Central traffic district" means all streets indicated on the central traffic district map on file in the office of the city clerk and portions of streets within the area. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.04.030 - Curb. 
"Curb" means the lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb is marked by curbing construction, or not so marked. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.04.040 - Divisional islands. 
"Divisional island" means a dividing section of not less than two feet in width, either unpaved or delineated by curbs, lines or other markings on the roadway, and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.04.050 - Holidays. 
"Holidays" means New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. In the event any such day shall fall upon a Sunday, the next succeeding Monday shall be a holiday. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.04.060 - Loading zone. 
"Loading zone" means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.04.070 - Official time standard. 
"Official time standard" means standard time or daylight savings time as may be in current use in the city. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.04.080 - Parkway. 
"Parkway" means that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.04.090 - Passenger loading zone. 
"Passenger loading zone" means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.04.100 - Police officer. 
"Police officer" means every officer or auxiliary of the police department, or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.04.110 - Stop. 
"Stop" where required, means complete cessation of movement. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.04.120 - Vehicle Code. 
"Vehicle Code" means the Vehicle Code of the State. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
Chapter 10.08 - TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 
Sections: 
 
10.08.010 - Police department—Enforcement of traffic regulations. 
It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the street traffic regulations of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate traffic accidents and to cooperate with the city transportation engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws, and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the department by this chapter. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.08.020 - City transportation engineer—Designated. 
The city engineer is designated as the city transportation engineer. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.08.030 - City transportation engineer—Powers and duties. 
It shall be the general duties of the transportation engineer to determine the installation and proper timing of traffic-control devices, to conduct engineering analysis of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to plan the operation of traffic on the streets of the city, and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic and transportation conditions in the city and to carry out the additional duties imposed by this title. Whenever, by the provisions of this title a power is granted to or a duty imposed upon the city transportation engineer, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by a person authorized by the transportation engineer. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.08.040 - City transportation engineer—Determinations—Appeal procedure. 
Any decision of the city transportation engineer under this title may be appealed to the city council by any interested person. The appeal shall be in writing, shall state the reasons for the appeal, and shall be filed with the city clerk within thirty days after the decision of the engineer has been implemented in such a manner as to become visible to the public. At the time of filing the appeal the applicant shall pay a fee in the amount established by resolution of the city council. The action of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.08.050 - Public works department—Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the public works department to install, under the direction of the city transportation engineer, and maintain city traffic-control devices and to carry out the additional duties imposed by this title. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.08.060 - Parking violations—Civil penalties. 
All violations of Chapter 10.40 are civil violations to be handled by citation followed by an administrative process set out in Section 10.08.063. 
(Ord. 1130 N.S. § 1 (part), 1993)  
10.08.061 - City to set penalties. 
Penalties for violation of Chapter 10.40 shall be set and periodically revised by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 1130 N.S. § 1 (part), 1993)  
10.08.062 - Collection of penalties. 
Penalties shall be collected by the city or a private agency with which the city may contract. 
(Ord. 1130 N.S. § 1 (part), 1993)  
10.08.063 - Hearing process. 
Any appeal of a citation by an interested party under this title may be made through the following administrative process: 
A.  Within thirty days of the issuance of a citation for violation of any provision of Chapter 10.40, or ten days following the mailing of the notice of parking violation thereunder, the person desiring a hearing must advise the issuing agency he/she wishes to contest the citation. This request must be made in writing. 
B.  The issuing agency must then investigate the contestant's allegations within fifteen working days. The results of the investigation will be mailed by first class mail to the person requesting the hearing. 
C.  If the person disputes the conclusion set out in the investigation report, he/she may, within thirty days of the mailing of the results of the investigation, deposit the full amount of the parking penalty and request an administrative hearing. The request must include a written explanation of the reason for contesting the citation. 
1.  The person contesting the citation may elect to appear at the administrative hearing in person or request a written review of documents pertaining to the citation only. 
2.  If the person is a minor, the person may appear at the administrative hearing or admit, in writing, responsibility for the violation. Appointment of a guardian will not be required for this person. 
D.  The administrative hearing shall be conducted before an examiner designated to conduct the hearing by the city manager or his/her designate. 
1.  The administrative hearing shall be conducting in accordance with a written procedure to be established by the issuing agency which shall insure fair and impartial hearing of contested parking citation. 
2.  The agency's final decision may be delivered personally, or may be mailed first class, to the person requesting the administrative hearing at the address set out on the citation or request for hearing. 
(Ord. 1130 N.S. § 1 (part), 1993)  
10.08.064 - Appeal process. 
If the contestant is not satisfied with the decision rendered in the administrative hearing process, he may, within thirty days after the mailing of, or personal delivery of, the final decision, seek review of the decision in the municipal court. The review shall be a trial de novo. (reference CVC 40230) 
A.  A copy of the notice of appeal shall be served by personal service, or by first-class mail, upon the issuing agency. 
B.  The filing fee for the review is twenty-five dollars, which shall be refunded, along with the penalty deposit, to the contestant if he/she is successful. 
C.  These reviews are subordinate judicial duties. They may be heard by traffic commissioners and other subordinate judicial officials. 
(Ord. 1130 N.S. § 1 (part), 1993)  
Chapter 10.12 - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
10.12.010 - Police officer authority. 
Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided, that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.12.020 - Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 39, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 39, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 10.12.020 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 10.12.020 pertained to violation deemed infraction and derived from Ord. 504 N.S., § A(part), adopted in 1979.  
10.12.030 - Applicability to public employees. 
The provisions of this title apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, the state, or any county, city, district or other public entity or corporation, and it is unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter except as otherwise permitted in this title or by the Vehicle Code of the state. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.12.040 - Applicability to persons riding bicycles and driving animals. 
Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a highway has all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.12.050 - Exempt vehicles. 
A.  The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of the police or fire department, or any public utility vehicle or private ambulance which has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle when any vehicle mentioned in this title is operated in the manner specified in the Vehicle Code of the state in response to an emergency call. 
B.  Such exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his wilful disregard of the safety of others. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department used for official city business, public utility while necessarily in the use for construction or repair work, or any vehicle owned by the United States while actually engaged in the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.12.060 - Vehicle removal conditions. 
Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the police department may remove or cause to be removed: 
A.  Any vehicle which has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway for seventy-two or more consecutive hours; 
B.  Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m. when such parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution and "tow away" signs are posted giving notice of such removal; and 
C.  Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway where the use of such street or highway, or a portion thereof, is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or for the installation of underground utilities, or where the use of the street or highway, or any portion thereof, is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic, or where the use of the street or highway, or any portion thereof, is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use of movement; provided, however, that "tow away" signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four hours prior to the removal. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.12.070 - Directing traffic by others. 
No person other than an officer of the police department or a person authorized by the city or a person authorized by law shall direct, or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as provided in this chapter, any mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the city transportation engineer. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.12.080 - Interference with police and authorized officers unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person to interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of the city in his enforcement of the provisions of this title. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of the city in connection with the enforcement of parking regulations of this title shall constitute such interference of obstruction. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
Chapter 10.16 - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES 
Sections: 
 
10.16.010 - Installation—Authority—Signposting. 
A.  The city transportation engineer shall direct the placement of official traffic-control devices when required to make effective provisions of this title, and may direct the placement of such additional official traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate, warn or guide traffic under this title or the Vehicle Code of the state. 
B.  No provisions of the Vehicle Code of the state or of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate signs giving notice of the provisions of the traffic laws are in place and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. 
(Ord. 780 N.S., 1986: Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.16.020 - Installation—Recommendations and determinations. 
A.  The city transportation engineer shall recommend to the city council the installation of official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard. 
B.  The city transportation engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by resort to field observation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent, and his determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the Traffic Manual issued by the California Department of Transportation. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.16.030 - Hours of operation. 
The city transportation engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic-control device shall be in operation or effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this title. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.16.040 - Marking traffic lanes. 
The city transportation engineer is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.16.050 - Removal or relocation determinations. 
The city transportation engineer is authorized to direct the removal or relocation of any traffic-control device not specifically required by state law or this title whenever it is determined that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.16.060 - Painting of streets or curbs—Authorization required. 
No person, unless authorized by the city, shall paint any street or curb surface. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
Chapter 10.20 - SPEED LIMITS 
Sections: 
 
10.20.010 - Designation—Signposting. 
The city council shall by resolution designate the speed limit on those streets where speed limits other than those prescribed by state law are necessary for the safe and orderly movement of traffic. These speed limits shall be based on an engineering and traffic study conducted by the city transportation engineer. Upon the adoption of such resolution, the city transportation engineer shall direct the installation of signs giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.20.020 - Speed regulation by traffic signals. 
The city transportation engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speed otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections, and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.20.030 - Speed limits on certain streets—Established. 
It is determined upon the basis of the city transportation engineers' engineering and traffic survey that the following speed limits set by city council resolution authorized by this chapter, will facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic, are reasonable and safe, and are declared the prima facie speed limit and shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon the street. 
(Ord. 1208 N.S. § 1, 1995: Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.20.090 - Speed limits are prima facie—Effect. 
The speed limits established by city council resolution are declared to be prima facie speed limits and anyone driving in excess of these speed limits shall have the burden of establishing by competent evidence that his actual speed at the time was reasonable and prudent having due regard for weather, visibility, the amount of traffic and surface and width of street, and, in no event, at a speed which endangered the safety of persons or property. 
(Ord. 1208 N.S. § 4, 1995: Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
Chapter 10.24 - TURNING MOVEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
10.24.010 - Placement of devices altering normal course for turns—Authority. 
The city transportation engineer is authorized to direct the placement of official traffic-control devices within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled so as indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.24.020 - Restricted turn determinations—Signposting—Authority. 
The city transportation engineer is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turn may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.24.030 - Right turns at signal-controlled intersections—Signposting. 
The city transportation engineer is authorized to direct the installation of appropriate signs where it is determined that the making of right turns against a traffic signal "stop" indication would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
Chapter 10.28 - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS 
Sections: 
 
10.28.010 - Designated—Signposting. 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the council or order of the city transportation engineer designates any one-way street or alley, the city transportation engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
Chapter 10.32 - STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.32.010 - Designation and installation—Authority. 
The city transportation engineer is authorized to direct the installation of stop signs, yield signs or other official traffic-control devices to designate through streets or to designate intersections at which vehicular traffic on one or more of the roadways should yield or stop and yield before entering the intersection. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
Chapter 10.36 - OBSTRUCTION TO VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.36.010 - Visibility obstruction—prohibited. 
On property at any corner formed by intersecting streets, it is unlawful to install, set out or maintain, or to allow the installation, setting out or maintenance of any sign, hedge, shrubbery, natural growth or other obstruction to the view, higher than three feet above the level of the center of the adjacent intersection within that triangular area between the property line and a diagonal line joining points on property lines twenty-five feet from the point of their intersection, or in the case of rounded corners, the triangular area between the tangents to the curve and a diagonal line joining points on such tangent twenty-five feet from the point of their intersection. The tangents referred to are those at the beginning and at the end of the curve at the corner. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.36.020 - Visibility obstruction—Exceptions. 
The provisions of Section 10.36.010 of this chapter shall not apply to permanent buildings, public utility poles, trees trimmed (to the trunk) to a line at least eight feet above the level of the intersection; saplings or plant species of open growth habits and not planted in the form of a hedge, which are so planted and trimmed as to leave at all seasons a clear and unobstructed cross-view; supporting members of appurtenances to permanent buildings existing on the date the ordinance codified in this chapter becomes effective; official warnings signs or signals; to places where the contour of the ground is such that there can be no cross-visibility at the intersection; to signs mounted ten feet or more above the ground and whose supports do not constitute an obstruction as defined in Section 10.36.010 of this chapter or at an intersection controlled by traffic signals or stop signs on all approaches to the intersection. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.36.030 - Visibility obstruction—Investigation and enforcement. 
The enforcement of Sections 10.36.010 and 10.36.020 of this chapter shall be under the direction of the city transportation engineer. The city transportation engineer shall investigate reported violations of Sections 10.36.010 and 10.36.020 and shall perform such duties in connection with the enforcement of Sections 10.36.010 and 10.36.020 as may be required. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.36.040 - Visibility obstruction—Declared public nuisance—Initiation of abatement proceedings. 
Any obstruction maintained in violation of Section 10.36.010 of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance. The city transportation engineer shall initiate abatement proceedings to remove the obstruction. The proceedings shall be instituted by the following notices: 
A.  Written notice by personal service or certified mail to the owner of record of the affected property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. Service by mail shall be completed at the time of deposit; 
B.  The city transportation engineer shall post upon the premises a notice to abate the nuisance. This notice shall be signed by the city transportation engineer. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.36.050 - Visibility obstruction—Removal by city—Costs—Liability. 
If after twenty days after mailing and posting notice the obstruction is not removed, such representatives of the city transportation engineer as he may so authorize may enter upon the premises and remove or eliminate the obstruction. When the city has performed this work, or has caused it to be performed, the actual cost thereof plus reasonable overhead charges as determined by the city transportation engineer, plus accrued interest at the rate of six percent per annum from the date of completion of the work if not paid, shall be charged to the owner of the affected property and shall constitute a special assessment against the property to be collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of municipal taxes. The cost of such abatement shall, in addition, be a personal obligation against the owner of the premises upon which the nuisance was maintained, recoverable by the city in an action before any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
Chapter 10.40 - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
Sections: 
 
10.40.010 - Certain places—Authority to establish—Signposting—Noncompliance unlawful. 
A.  The city transportation engineer is authorized to direct the establishment of all no stopping zones, no parking areas, and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in Sections 10.40.010 through 10.40.130 of this chapter. 
B.  No prohibition or restriction relating to stopping, standing or parking imposed under Sections 10.40.010 through 10.40.130 of this chapter shall be effective unless appropriate signs or markings required by the Vehicle Code are in place. 
C.  It is unlawful for any operator of a vehicle to disobey the provisions of Sections 10.40.010 through 10.40.130 of this chapter when appropriate signs or markings are in place. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.40.020 - Applicability. 
A.  The provisions of Sections 10.40.010 through 10.40.130 prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times, or at those times specified in this section, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device. 
B.  The provisions of this section or other regulations imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code of the state or the regulations of the city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.40.030 - Location restrictions. 
No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park or leave standing such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or other authorized officer, or traffic sign or signal: 
A.  Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings; 
B.  In any area where the city transportation engineer determines that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
C.  In any area established by ordinance or resolution of the council or order of the city transportation engineer as a no parking area; 
D.  At any place within twenty feet of a crosswalk at an intersection in any business district except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop; 
E.  Within twenty feet of the approach of any traffic signal, stop sign or official electric flashing device; 
F.  On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway, or a portion thereof, is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities, or where the use of the street or highway, or any portion thereof, is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic, or where the use of the street or highway, or any portion thereof, is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size or movement; provided, however, that signs giving notice of such parking are erected or placed at least twenty-four hours prior to the effective time of such no parking restrictions. 
G.  1.  Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel with and within eighteen inches of the right-hand curb, except motorcycles shall be parked with at least one wheel or fender touching the right-hand curb. 
2.  Applies to prohibiting commercial vehicles from stopping, parking or standing on one side of a roadway in a business district with the wheels of such vehicle more than eighteen inches from the curb. This subsection shall be effective only if signs are placed in the areas to which it is applicable clearly indicating the prohibition. 
H.  No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle whether attended or unattended, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or official traffic control or device, in any of the following places: 
1.  In front of a public or private driveway, except that a bus engaged as a common carrier, school bus, or a taxicab may stop to load or unload passengers. 
(Ord. 1138 N.S., 1993; Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.40.040 - Exemptions. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 10.40.010 through 10.40.130 of this chapter, the city transportation engineer may grant permission to organizations and individuals to park vehicles, materials or equipment in public parking places for special occasions. Applications for such special permission shall be made on the forms required by the city transportation engineer. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.40.050 - Parking on hills. 
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway upon any grade exceeding three percent within any business or residential district without blocking the wheels of such vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.40.060 - Parking on narrow streets. 
The city transportation engineer is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty-eight feet, or upon one side of a street when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty-six feet, or upon any other roadway where, in the opinion of the city transportation engineer, no parking is required for the proper control of traffic. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.40.070 - Emergency parking signs. 
A.  Whenever the city transportation engineer or the chief of police determines that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for other reasons, the city transportation engineer or the chief of police shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the city transportation engineer or the chief of police shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency, and the city transportation engineer or the chief of police shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter. 
B.  When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.40.080 - Standing in parkways. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.40.090 - Leaving keys in vehicles unlawful. 
It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to leave the ignition key of such vehicle in any unconcealed place within such vehicle while parked on any public street or in any public or private parking lot. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.40.100 - Storing vehicles on streets. 
No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two hours. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.40.120 - Washing and polishing vehicles on streets. 
No person shall wash, or cause to be washed, or polish or cause to be polished, any vehicle or part thereof upon any public street within the central traffic district, or in front of any business establishment within the city, or on any street within the city where a charge is made for such service. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.40.130 - Repairing or greasing vehicles on streets. 
No person shall construct, or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, or grease or cause to be greased, any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in the city. Temporary emergency repairs, however, may be made upon a public street. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.40.140 - Certain streets—Authority to establish—Signposting—Noncompliance unlawful. 
A.  The city transportation engineer is authorized to direct the establishment of all no stopping zones, no parking areas and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in Sections 10.40.140 through 10.40.200 of this chapter. 
B.  No prohibition or restriction relating to stopping, standing or parking imposed under Sections 10.40.140 through 10.40.200 of this chapter, shall be effective unless appropriate signs or markings required by the Vehicle Code of the state are in place. 
C.  It is unlawful for any operator of a vehicle to disobey the provisions of Sections 10.40.140 through 10.40.200 of this chapter, when appropriate signs or markings are in place. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.40.150 - Parking—Time limitation—Compliance required. 
When authorized signs have been determined by the city transportation engineer to be necessary and are in place, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for a period longer than designated on the sign. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.40.160 - Parking—Unimproved streets. 
No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the roadway when it is practicable to stop, park or leave the vehicle off such portion of the street, but in every event an unobstructed width of the street opposite a standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles and a clear view of the stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of two hundred feet in each direction upon the street. The provisions of this section shall not apply upon a street where the roadway is bounded by adjacent curbs. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.40.170 - Parking—Space markings. 
A.  The city transportation engineer is authorized to direct the installation of parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where authorized parking is permitted. 
B.  When such parking space markings are placed in the highway, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.40.180 - Parking for disabled persons—Designated—Design specifications—Special license required. 
A.  The city transportation engineer is authorized to designate special on-street parking spaces for the exclusive use of any vehicle which displays either a distinguishing license plate or a placard issued pursuant to the California Vehicle Code Section 22511.5 or 22511.9. 
B.  The special parking spaces shall be indicated by blue print on the curb or edge of the paved portion of the street adjacent to the space. In addition, the space shall also be indicated by signs or other suitable means. 
C.  No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in a stall or space designated for disabled persons or disabled veterans unless the vehicle displays either a distinguishing license plate or a placard issued pursuant to Section 22511.5 or 22511.9 of the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 888 N.S. § 1, 1988: Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.40.190 - Diagonal parking. 
A.  Whenever any regulation of the city designates and describes any street or portion thereof upon which angle parking shall be permitted, the city transportation engineer shall mark or sign such street indicating the angle at which vehicles shall be parked. 
B.  When signs or markings are in place indicating angle parking as provided in this section, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of such allotted space, with the front wheel nearest the curb within six inches of the curb. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.40.200 - Parking commercial vehicles in residential areas. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 10.40.140, no person shall stop, stand or park a commercial vehicle having a gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand pounds or more on any street, except those streets which are bounded by industrial zones on all sides or when the commercial vehicle is making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on the restricted street or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon the restricted street for which a building permit has previously been obtained. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.40.210 - Parking oversized vehicles on public streets in residential areas. 
A.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 10.40.140, no person shall stop, stand or park an oversized vehicle on a public street or highway located immediately adjacent to real property located in a residential zone, as shown on the official zoning map of the city as may be amended from time to time, except for the purpose of loading or unloading food, supplies, equipment or cargo or due to a temporary and unplanned inoperability. Such exemption period shall not exceed ten consecutive hours. 
B.  For the purposes of this section, the term "oversized vehicle" shall mean any vehicle or combination of vehicles that exceeds twenty-two feet in length or seven feet in height, exclusive of any projecting lights or devices allowed by the provisions of the California Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. No. 2165 N.S., § 1, 10-7-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2165 N.S., § 1, adopted Oct. 7, 2015, amended § 10.40.210 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 10.40.210 pertained to parking oversized vehicles in residential areas, and derived from Ord. 1434 N.S., § 1, adopted in 1999.  
10.40.220 - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon any street within the city identified in the city General Plan as an arterial roadway for the primary purpose of displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(Ord. 1433 N.S. § 1, 1999)  
Chapter 10.44 - OFF-STREET PARKING* 
Sections: 
 
10.44.010 - Regulation—Authority—Signposting. 
A.  The city transportation engineer or, where appropriate, the city fire chief, is authorized to prohibit, restrict or regulate the parking, stopping or standing of vehicles in any off-street parking facility which: 
1.  Is owned or operated by the city; or 
2.  Is a privately owned off-street parking facility designated by the city as generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular parking. 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the provisions of this section shall not apply to any off-street parking facility unless the owner or operator has caused to be posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance to that off-street parking facility a notice not less than one inch in height to the effect that the off-street parking facility is subject to public traffic regulations and control. 
C.  When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place, giving notice thereof, no persons shall park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions or provisions of such signs. 
(Ord. 959 N.S. § 1 (part), 1989)  
10.44.020 - Parking for disabled persons—Designated—Design specifications. 
A.  The city transportation engineer and any person in lawful possession of an off-street parking facility is authorized to designate parking spaces in an off-street parking facility owned or operated by the city or said person for the exclusive use of any vehicle which displays either a distinguishing license plate or a placard issued pursuant to Section 22511.5 or 22511.9 of the Vehicle Code. 
B.  Design specifications for the designation of a parking space for the exclusive use of the disabled as defined in subsection A shall be as set forth in the California Vehicle Code Section 22511.8. 
C.  No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in a disabled person's parking space unless the vehicle bears a special license or displays a special placard issued under Vehicle Code Section 22511.9 or 22511.5. 
(Ord. 959 N.S. § 1 (part), 1989)  
10.44.025 - Removal of unauthorized vehicles from disabled person's designated parking areas. 
A.  If posted in accordance with subsection B of this section, the local authority or private owner owning or operating an off-street parking facility, after notifying the police or sheriff's department, may cause the removal of a vehicle in the parking facility from a space designated pursuant to Section 10.44.020 to the nearest public garage unless a distinguishing license plate or placard issued pursuant to Section 22511.5 or 22511.9 of the Vehicle Code is displayed on the vehicle. 
B.  The posting required for an off-street parking facility owned or operated either privately or by a local authority shall consist of a sign not less than seventeen by twenty-two inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height which clearly and conspicuously states the following: 
 Unauthorized vehicles not displaying distinguishing placards or license plates issued for physically handicapped persons will be towed away at owner's expense. Towed vehicles may be reclaimed at towing company (to be designated from time to time) or by telephoning ________. 
This sign shall be posted as specified in Vehicle Code Section 22511.8(d). 
C.  If the parking facility is privately owned and public parking is prohibited by the posting of a sign meeting the requirements of paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) of Section 22658, the requirements of subsection A of this section may be met by the posting of a sign immediately adjacent to and visible from each stall or space indicating that a vehicle not displaying a distinguishing license plate or placard pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 22511.5 or 22511.9 will be removed at the owner's expense and containing the telephone number of the local traffic law enforcement agency. 
(Ord. 959 N.S. § 1 (part), 1989)  
10.44.030 - Parking lots—Speed restrictions. 
The operator of any vehicle shall not exceed a speed of ten miles per hour while driving within any municipal parking lot or privately owned off-street parking lot which meets the requirements of Section 10.44.010. 
(Ord. 959 N.S. § 1 (part), 1989)  
10.44.040 - Parking lots—Taking shortcuts unlawful. 
It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive across a municipal parking lot or privately owned off-street parking lot which meets the requirements of Section 10.44.010 as a means of effecting a shortened route between or along public streets. 
(Ord. 959 N.S. § 1 (part), 1989)  
Chapter 10.48 - LOADING AND BUS ZONES 
Sections: 
 
10.48.010 - Loading zones and passenger loading zones—Authority to establish—Signposting. 
A.  The city transportation engineer is authorized to determine the location of loading zones and passenger loading zones and direct the installation of appropriate signs or markings at these locations. 
B.  No restriction relating to loading or unloading imposed under Sections 10.48.010 through 10.48.040 of this chapter shall be effective unless appropriate signs or markings are in place. 
C.  It is unlawful for any operator of a vehicle to disobey the provisions of this Sections 10.48.010 through 10.48.040 of this chapter when appropriate signs or markings are in place. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.48.020 - Bus zones—Authority to establish—Restrictions. 
A.  The city transportation engineer is authorized to direct the establishment of bus zones opposite curb space for the loading and unloading of buses. 
B.  No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle except a bus in a bus zone, and no bus shall utilize a bus zone except as authorized by the city transportation engineer. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.48.030 - Passenger loading zone standing restrictions—Exceptions. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox in any place marked as a passenger loading zone between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes, except as follows: 
A.  When a zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox the restrictions shall apply at all times; 
B.  When such zone is in front of a theater the restrictions shall apply at all times except when such theater is closed; 
C.  When a sign has been installed which designates the period during which the loading zone is in effect, the restrictions shall apply only during the period designated on the sign. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.48.040 - Loading zone standing restrictions—Exceptions. 
A.  No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than a commercial vehicle for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of property carried in the cargo area of the vehicle in any place marked as a commercial loading zone between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays and then only for a period not to exceed twenty minutes. 
B.  The driver of a vehicle may stop temporarily at a loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any vehicle which is waiting to enter or about the enter such zone to load or unload property and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes. 
C.  When a sign has been installed which designates the period during which the loading zone is in effect, the restrictions shall apply only during the period designated on the sign. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
Chapter 10.52 - PEDESTRIANS AND CROSSWALKS 
Sections: 
 
10.52.010 - Installation—Authority. 
The city transportation engineer is authorized to direct the installation of marked crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway whenever the city transportation engineer determines the marked crosswalks are required to safely direct pedestrian movements, subject to the limitations contained in Section 10.52.020 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.52.020 - Midblock crosswalks—Location restrictions. 
Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than four hundred feet in length, and such crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at midblock. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.52.030 - Signposting of restricted crosswalks. 
The city transportation engineer may place signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall not cross in the crosswalk so indicated. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.52.040 - Jaywalking. 
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in the central traffic district or in any business district. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.52.050 - Standing in roadways. 
A.  No person shall stand in any roadway other than in a safety zone or in a crosswalk if such action interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any public officer or employee, or employee of a public utility when necessarily upon a street in line of duty. 
B.  Within the central traffic district, no person shall stand upon the paved surface of the street within that area delineated by curbs except when necessary to enter or exit from a vehicle or to load or unload a vehicle. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.52.060 - Vehicles entering intersections and crosswalks. 
It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
Chapter 10.56 - BICYCLES 
Sections: 
 
10.56.070 - Riding on sidewalks and crosswalks. 
A.  No person shall ride or operate a bicycle on any sidewalk in the city except as permitted in this section. 
B.  Juveniles under the age of thirteen years may ride and operate their bicycles upon the sidewalks and crosswalks, except such sidewalks as are in front of stores or buildings used for business purposes. Juvenile bicycle riders on a sidewalk or crosswalk shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing any pedestrian. 
C.  Any person may ride or operate a bicycle on sidewalks or crosswalks designated as bicycle paths by the city transportation engineer. Bicycle riders on a sidewalk or crosswalk bicycle path shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing any pedestrian. 
(Ord. 1610 N.S. § 2, 2003: Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.56.080 - Abandoned bicycles—Disposition. 
All abandoned bicycles and unidentified bicycles remaining in the possession of the chief of police may, at the end of three months, be sold at auction. 
(Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
10.56.100 - Tampering with serial number unlawful. 
A.  No person shall buy, sell, receive, dispose of or conceal any bicycle or bicycle equipment from which the manufacturer's nameplate, serial number or any other distinguishing mark has been removed, defaced, covered, altered or destroyed. 
B.  If the serial number of any bicycle is obliterated or defaced, and the possessor has satisfactory proof of ownership, the chief of police is authorized to place a police department serial number thereon. 
(Ord. 1610 N.S. § 3, 2003: Ord. 504 N.S. § A (part), 1979)  
Chapter 10.60 - TRUCK ROUTE AND PARKING ORDINANCE 
Sections: 
 
10.60.010 - Enactment. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted pursuant to the California Vehicle Code, Division 11, Chapters 9 and 10, commencing with Section 22500 and Division 15, Chapter 5, Article 4 commencing with Section 35700. 
(Ord. 1387 N.S. § 2 (part), 1998)  
10.60.020 - Definitions. 
The following definitions are based on the state of California Vehicle Code and are to be used in administering this chapter. All other definitions as contained in the state of California Vehicle Code are included by reference: 
"Commercial vehicle" means a vehicle of a type required to be registered under the California Vehicle Code and used or maintained for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation or profit, or designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
"Semitrailer" means a vehicle designed for carrying persons or property used in conjunction with a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon, or is carried by another vehicle. 
"Trailer" means a vehicle designed for carrying persons or property on its own structure and being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon any other vehicle. 
"Truck tractor" means a motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing another vehicle and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
"Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway. Trailers, semitrailers and truck tractors are considered vehicles. 
(Ord. 1387 N.S. § 2 (part), 1998)  
10.60.030 - Truck routes—Designated. 
A.  The following streets and portions of streets are designated and established as commercial vehicle truck routes: 
1.  Monterey Highway from the southerly city limits to Tennant Avenue and from the northerly city limits to Cochrane Road. 
2.  Cochrane Road from SR101 to Monterey Highway. 
3.  Tennant Avenue from SR101 to Monterey Highway. 
B.  Appropriate signs shall be erected indicating the streets affected. Such signs shall read "TRUCK ROUTE" in letters not less than four inches in height and shall be erected at all intersections of truck routes and at all intersections of designated routes with the boundary lines of the city. 
(Ord. 1387 N.S. § 2 (part), 1998)  
10.60.040 - Prohibition on commercial vehicles traveling off truck routes. 
When truck routes are established pursuant to this chapter and designated by appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of eleven thousand pounds (five and one-half tons) shall drive said vehicle only on such routes and none other except for the following: 
A.  Commercial vehicles coming from a truck route having ingress and egress by direct route to and from a restricted street when necessary for the purpose of providing a direct service requiring the utilization of such vehicles or making pickups and deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on the restricted street or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon the restricted street for which a building permit has previously been obtained; 
B.  Any vehicle owned by a public utility or a licensed contractor while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility; 
C.  Vehicles as may be reasonably necessary: 
1.  For the purpose of transporting farm or ranch supplies, produce, or animals to and from ranches or farms situated along a street otherwise forbidden to be used by such vehicles, and 
2.  For the purpose of transporting a trailer used for recreation or noncommercial purposes and/or boat to and from locations along a street otherwise forbidden to be used by such vehicles. 
(Ord. 1387 N.S. § 2 (part), 1998)  
10.60.050 - Commercial vehicle parking prohibition. 
In order to maintain the quiet residential neighborhood atmosphere within the community and in the interest of public safety and welfare (per California Vehicle Code Section 390) commercial vehicles having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of eleven thousand pounds (five and one-half tons) or more, are prohibited from parking on any street or portion thereof not designated as a truck route, except with respect to making pickups or deliveries from or to any building or structure, or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure located off the designated truck route. This section shall not be effective with respect to any city street until appropriate signs have been erected by the city in accordance with the California Vehicle Code, at the entryways to the city along the truck routes indicating the vehicles' weight limitations and parking prohibitions discussed herein. 
(Ord. 1387 N.S. § 2 (part), 1998)  
10.60.060 - Unattached trailer and semitrailer parking prohibition. 
A person shall not park any trailer or semitrailer upon any highway, street, alley, public way or public place unless the trailer or semitrailer is, at all times while so parked, attached to a vehicle capable of moving the trailer or semitrailer in a normal manner upon the highway, street, alley, public way or public place. This section shall not apply to trailers or semitrailers in the process of being loaded or unloaded, nor shall it apply to any trailer or semitrailer which is disabled in such a manner and to such an extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the disabled trailer or semitrailer on that portion of the highway, street, alley, public way or public place ordinarily used for vehicular parking. A disabled trailer or semitrailer shall not be temporarily parked along a public right-of-way for more than twenty-four hours. 
(Ord. 1387 N.S. § 2 (part), 1998)  
Chapter 10.64 - MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC RESTRICTIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.64.010 - Driving or riding on sidewalks. 
It is unlawful for any person to ride, drive, propel or cause to be propelled, any motor vehicle or animal across or upon any sidewalk excepting over permanently constructed driveways and excepting when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk. Such sidewalk area shall be adequately protected by wooden planks, and written permission therefor shall be previously obtained from the city transportation engineer. Such wooden planks shall not be permitted to remain upon such sidewalk area during the hours of six p.m. to six a.m. 
(Ord. 504 § A (part), 1979)  
10.64.020 - Driving or riding on new pavement or freshly painted surfaces. 
No person shall ride or drive any animal or vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted marking in any street when a barrier, sign, cone marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when a sign is in place stating that the street or any portion thereof is closed, or where barricades have been erected. 
(Ord. 504 § A (part), 1979)  
10.64.030 - Limited access roadways. 
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority. 
(Ord. 504 § A (part), 1979)  
10.64.040 - Motor vehicles prohibited on certain easements. 
When the authorized signs hereinafter described are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall drive, park or stop any motor vehicle, dune buggy, motorized bicycles or any other motor or engine propelled vehicle upon any riding or hiking trail, or other unpaved easement such as an open space easement, where the recorded dedication for such riding trail or easement prohibits the use of motorized vehicles thereon. The signs for the enforcement of this chapter shall state "No Motorized Vehicles Permitted—Per Ordinance No. 404, N.S." and shall be placed at all major entrances to such easements. The words "No Motorized Vehicles Permitted" shall be at least three inches in height and the sign itself shall be at least two hundred square inches in size. 
(Ord. 504 § A (part), 1979)  
10.64.050 - Erection and placement of signs or barriers. 
No public utility or public agency shall erect or place in any street any barrier or sign except of a type approved by the city transportation engineer. It is unlawful for any operator or pedestrian to disobey the instructions of any such approved barrier or sign. 
(Ord. 504 § A (part), 1979)  
10.64.060 - Roller skates, skateboards, scooters and similar devices prohibited in certain districts. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person riding upon or by any means of roller skates, skateboards, scooters or similar devices to go upon any roadway, or upon any street or paved surface in any area zoned for commercial use within the city. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person riding upon or by any means of roller skates, skateboards, scooters and similar devices to go upon any commercial or municipal structure or lot which is designated or used to accommodate the parking of motorized vehicles, excepting the parking of bicycles in such structures or lots where permitted by designated bicycle parking zones. 
(Ord. 1610 § 4, 2003: Ord. 504 § A (part), 1979)  
Chapter 10.72 - TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT* 
Sections: 
 
10.72.010 - Implementation of requirements. 
Within the city of Morgan Hill, the implementation of trip reduction and travel demand requirements pursuant to Government Code Section 65089.3 shall be satisfied through the administration, implementation and enforcement by the Bay Area Air Quality Management District of District Regulation 13, Rule 1 ("Trip Reduction Requirements for Large Employers"). 
(Ord. 1177 N.S. § 1(a), 1994)  
10.72.020 - Annual certification. 
The city of Morgan Hill shall certify annually to the congestion management agency that the ordinance codified in this chapter remains in effect. 
(Ord. 1177 N.S. § 1(b), 1994)  
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES  
Chapter 12.02 - STREET AND SIDEWALK DEVELOPMENT 
 
12.02.010 - City council findings as to need and purpose. 
In enacting this chapter, the city council of the city of Morgan Hill finds as follows: 
Since its settlement and until its incorporation, Morgan Hill was an agricultural community. Its street pattern was designed originally for light traffic. Since its incorporation in 1906, Morgan Hill has grown from a small town to a city of over twenty-five thousand persons. Land uses have changed from agricultural to residential, commercial and industrial. As a direct result, previously existing streets and highways are inadequate in width and development to provide acceptable service capacities to the community. Inadequate streets deny minimum standards for safe, convenient automobile and pedestrian travel within and without the city. The problem is aggravated because city development has not been contiguous nor centralized but peripheral. Consequently, more street development has been necessary to provide an adequate traffic circulation pattern. In addition, each development increases the traffic to and from that development so that development itself imposes ever-increasing traffic burdens on local streets and highways and upon available community resources. 
Funds to provide for street and highway development in a relatively new community have always been limited and are now even more restricted. Revenues from taxes are limited by law for general law cities such as Morgan Hill. Recent changes in the law have further restricted street and highway development through city's ability to finance street and highway development through bond measures. Available tax dollars must be shared with the other important community needs of police and fire protection, health and safety, parks and recreation and public administration. While financing of street improvements is available through assessment district proceedings, such proceedings are costly, time consuming and complex and their availability may depend upon the consent of landowners or citizens, which consent cannot always be obtained. 
Since a given development creates traffic which, in turn, creates the need for improved streets and highways, and since a given development directly benefits from improved streets and highways by being more accessible, the city council finds it is appropriate to require a contribution toward street improvement when a parcel of land develops, to help offset the burden the development creates and to compensate the community at large for the benefit the development receives. 
The city council finds that unless measures are taken to provide for the orderly and systematic increase in width, capacity and improvement of streets and highways when and as the development of land takes place, the economic welfare, public convenience and general prosperity of the community and its citizens will suffer. These provisions are, therefore, intended to define the requirements, policies and procedures for the acquisition of public right-of-way easements and for the construction of public improvements in connection with the development of land. It is intended to extend the basic requirements under the Subdivision Map Act and Titles 17 and 18 of this code to apply to land development in which no subdivision is involved. It is intended to fairly spread the cost of required public improvements upon abutting properties. It is intended to prevent the dissipation of the city's funds by preventing faulty or substandard installations. It is intended to help the city meet the important and competing demands for public service without unduly increasing the cost of government or the tax burden upon the taxpayer of the community. It is intended to protect the public safety, living standards and common welfare of the city and the citizens of Morgan Hill. 
This chapter is enacted to require any person who proposes to erect, construct, alter, enlarge, repair, move or maintain any building or structure for which any city permit is required on or upon any land adjacent to an unimproved street or who seeks to change the use of any land which includes or is adjacent to an unimproved street to improve or agree to improve that street as required by this chapter through the dedication of lands for street and public utility use and the installation of such of the following improvements including but not limited to, as may be necessary: curbs, gutters, driveways, sidewalks, storm drains, street paving, street lighting, medians, traffic signals, signing and striping, bus stops, street trees, walkways, landscaping, sewer lines, water lines, undergrounding existing overhead services and non-access facilities. In enacting this chapter, the city council intends that said improvement or agreement for improvement shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of any permit required by the city. 
(Ord. 1279 N.S. § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 982 N.S. § 1 (part), 1990)  
12.02.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
"Developer" is synonymous with the term "permittee." 
"Development permit" applies to any of the following: 
1.  Building permit pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 15.08 of this code; 
2.  Use permit, variance or special approval pursuant to Title 18 of this code. 
"Permittee" means any individual, partnership, association, corporation, trust, governmental body or unit or agency (other than the city of Morgan Hill) or any other entity owning or occupying land adjacent to an improved street or unimproved streets in the city desiring to erect, construct, alter, convert, enlarge, move or maintain any building or structure upon said land, or who is required to obtain a use permit or variance or special approval to change the use of land in the city or who seeks to rezone the land in the city. 
"Person" is synonymous with the term "permittee." 
"Street light" means electroliers, fixtures and lamps wholly owned by the city; it shall not include street lights suspended from brackets attached to wooden poles or other devices which are not owned by the city or which are leased by the city from any public utility. 
"Unimproved street" means any street or highway in the city which is less in width from property line to property line than the width prescribed for said street by this chapter or which lacks one or more of the following improvements, including but not limited to: curbs, gutters, driveways, sidewalks, storm drains, complete paving to curb, street lighting, medians, traffic signals, signing and striping, bus stops, street trees, walkways, landscaping, sewer lines, water lines, undergrounding existing overhead services and non-access facilities. 
(Ord. 1279 N.S. § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 982 N.S. § 1 (part), 1990)  
12.02.030 - Application of chapter—Subdivision of land. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to apply to a subdivision of land as the term "subdivision" is defined in Chapter 17.08 of this code. 
(Ord. 1279 N.S. § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 982 N.S. § 1 (part), 1990)  
12.02.040 - Application of chapter—Chapter not limiting to the power of the city council. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to limit the power or authority of the city council of the city of Morgan Hill to impose requirements and conditions upon the rezoning of land, in addition to those authorized by this chapter. The city council of the city of Morgan Hill declares that in enacting this chapter, it expressly reserves the right to impose reasonable requirements and conditions upon the rezoning of land (regardless of whether the same are described herein) and the enactment of this chapter is not intended to be a limitation upon said power. 
(Ord. 1279 N.S. § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 982 N.S. § 1 (part), 1990)  
12.02.050 - Dedication and improvements required as a condition precedent to issuance of development permit. 
As a condition precedent to obtaining a development permit from the city, any permittee shall dedicate land and make the improvements required by this chapter, or at the election of the city and pursuant to the provisions of Section 12.02.110 of this chapter, shall dedicate land and pay a sum in lieu of improvements. 
(Ord. 1279 N.S. § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 982 N.S. § 1 (part), 1990)  
12.02.060 - Rezoning to "agricultural" classification. 
The rezoning of a parcel of land under the provisions of Title 17 of this code to "open space (OS)" classification will not require either the dedication or improvement of land pursuant to this chapter, but said dedication and improvement shall be postponed until a development permit or rezoning to a classification other than "open space (OS)" is subsequently sought for said land. 
(Ord. 1279 N.S. § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 982 N.S. § 1 (part), 1990)  
12.02.070 - Rezoning initiated by city. 
The rezoning of a parcel of land initiated by city without application by the owner of said land will not require the dedication or improvement of land pursuant to this chapter but said dedication or improvement shall be postponed until development permit or rezoning is subsequently sought for said land. 
(Ord. 1279 N.S. § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 982 N.S. § 1 (part), 1990)  
12.02.080 - Requirements for dedication of land. 
Any permittee required to dedicate land shall make such dedications as are necessary to conform to and comply with the provisions of this section. 
A.  Procedure. Any street or highway contiguous to or passing through any portion of land for which a rezone or development permit is sought, shall conform in width to the requirements of this chapter and in alignment to that shown on the land use diagram of the Morgan Hill General Plan. Rights-of-way for any such street or highway shall be dedicated as required by the planning commission. 
B.  Width of Streets and Highways. 
1.  For the purposes of this chapter, the streets and highways within the city shall be deemed to have the width set forth in the city standards for the classification of streets as shown on the land use diagram of the Morgan Hill general plan. 
2.  The dedication of any land for street right-of-way purposes shall not be required to exceed a strip of land of the following dimensions: 
a.  Length shall be the length of the property line abutting the street for which dedication is required; 
b.  Width shall not exceed one-half the street width throughout the entire length of the strip dedication, but in no event shall result in a paved width less than that required for safe travel as determined by the city engineer. 
C.  Rear or Side Lines. When the rear or side lines of any lots border any major or secondary streets, highway or parkway, the permittee may be required to execute and deliver to the city an instrument deemed sufficient by the city attorney prohibiting the right of ingress and egress to such lots across the sidelines of such streets or highways. 
D.  Granting of Public Utility and Drainage Easements. The permittee shall grant easements for public utility and drainage purposes along the rear lot lines, along side lot lines and adjacent to street frontages wherever necessary. The planning commission shall prescribe the width of such easement. Dedication of easements shall be for the purposes of installing utilities and for other public purposes as may be ordered or directed by the planning commission. 
E.  Dedication of Right-of-Way for Storm Drainage. The permittee shall, subject to existing water rights, dedicate a right-of-way for storm drainage purposes conforming substantially with the lines of any watercourse or channel, stream or creek that traverses the development; or provide by dedication further and sufficient easements or construction, or both, to dispose of such surface and storm water. 
(Ord. 1279 N.S. § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 982 N.S. § 1 (part), 1990)  
12.02.090 - Improvements required. 
When improvements are required hereunder, said improvements shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
A.  Specifications. Improvements required shall be made in accordance with the specifications and standards drawings of the city, current at the time said improvements are made. When a required improvement is not provided for by standard specifications of the city, the nature and type of improvement shall be approved by the city engineer. 
B.  Improvements on Streets. Said permittee shall provide for the improvement of said unimproved street by the installation, at the permittee's sole cost, including but not limited to all of the following improvements as required in the city standards which said unimproved street shall lack: curbs, gutters, driveways, sidewalks, storm drains, complete paving to curb, street lighting, medians, traffic signals, signing and striping, bus stops, street trees, walkways, landscaping, sewer lines, water lines undergrounding existing overhead services and non-access facilities. 
C.  Improvements on One-Half of Right-of-Way. Permittee shall be required to provide improvements in that one-half width of right-of-way adjacent to said land and between the property line and the street center line; but, in no event shall result in a paved width less than that required for safe travel as determined by the city engineer and the corresponding right-of-way street width to accomplish the aforementioned paved width approved by the city engineer. 
D.  Service Road and Access Improvements. The improvement of service roads (referred to in Section 12.02.080(C)) and walkways and access (referred to in Section 12.02.020(F)) shall be improved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1279 N.S. § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 982 N.S. § 1 (part), 1990)  
12.02.100 - Dedication and improvements when more than one unimproved street is involved. 
Without limitation to any other provision of this chapter, the regulations herein contained are expressly declared to be applicable to any parcel of land which is abutted on more than one side by a street, one or more of which is unimproved. Permittee shall have a separate obligation for the dedication and improvement of each of said streets in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1279 N.S. § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 982 N.S. § 1 (part), 1990)  
12.02.110 - Payment in lieu of dedication or improvement or both. 
A.  Requirement. Where a permittee seeks a development permit, and the city council determines (after notice, hearing and findings made in accordance with this chapter) that improvements should be deferred, the city council in its sole discretion may, as a condition precedent to the issuance of said development permit: 
1.  Require dedication of land from the permittee in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; and 
2.  Require payment from the permittee in accordance with the provisions of this chapter in lieu of improvements. 
B.  Notice, Hearing and Findings. The requirement set forth in subsection A of this section shall not be imposed before: 
1.  The permittee has been given ten days' prior written notice (by certified mail or in person at the address shown on the development permit application) of the time, date and place for the hearing before the city council; and 
2.  A hearing is held before the city council; 
3.  The city council finds: 
a.  That the present installation of said improvements would impose a health or safety hazard, or 
b.  That the present installation of said improvements is uneconomical and that said improvement can hereafter be installed more efficiently and economically as a portion of a larger installation of improvements, or 
c.  The risk of deterioration of said improvement if presently installed and the need for maintenance and upkeep is such that either the permittee or city would benefit by deferring installation of said improvements, or 
d.  For other good cause as set forth in said findings. 
C.  Amount of Payment in Lieu of Improvement. The amount of payment required in lieu of improvement shall be equivalent to the cost of said improvements in accordance with a resolution of costs of improvements adopted by the city council. It shall be the duty of the director of public works to present to the city at least once each twelve months its calculation of the reasonable cost of improvements at that time in Santa Clara County as the basis for the review of said costs and the adoption and revision of any said resolution relating to said costs. Nothing herein contained, however, shall invalidate any action of the city council or invalidate the imposition of any charge upon a permittee under the provisions of this chapter for payment in lieu of improvements as a result of any failure on the part of the director of public works to present said costs to the city council to revise any resolution of costs once adopted. 
(Ord. 1279 N.S. § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 982 N.S. § 1 (part), 1990)  
12.02.115 - Deferral of payment of undergrounding utility in lieu fees. 
Payment of utility undergrounding in lieu fees, when authorized by the city council pursuant to Section 12.02.110, shall be as provided for in this chapter, except when a deferral is requested and certain conditions, as set forth by resolution of the city council, are met. 
(Ord. 1761 N.S. § 3, 2006)  
12.02.120 - Improvement preceding permits. 
A.  Intent. The city council finds and declares that in some instances the public welfare and convenience and the greatest economy and safety can be accomplished by the installation of improvements on unimproved streets prior to the time that an abutting property owner or owners shall seek a development permit. Such owners or their successors in title should be required to contribute their fair share to the street improvements in such areas (just as permittee who seek a permit prior to the installation of improvements are required to do) when their property develops or when they seek a development permit. 
B.  Payment to the City for Improvements. In instances where improvements have been installed in the city, it is the intent of the city council that as a condition precedent anyone requesting a development permit shall pay to the city such sum as the city, other property owner or other public entity on behalf of the city has paid to acquire the land and shall make payments to the city for the improvements which the city or other property owner or public entity has installed on the streets abutting or included in the property of the permittee. In the event that the Morgan Hill redevelopment agency has paid for improvements, infrastructure or rights-of-way, the reimbursement is not mandatory. The reimbursement may be waived upon approval of a request for waiver by the redevelopment agency. Improvements shall include but are not limited to all of the following improvements as required in the city standards which said unimproved street shall lack: curbs, gutter, driveways, sidewalks, storm drains, completed paving to curb, street lighting, medians, traffic signals, signing and striping, bus stops, street trees, walkways, landscaping, sewer lines, water lines, undergrounding existing overhead services and non-access facilities. Said payments shall be made at or before the time the permit is issued and shall be in addition to any other requirements of this chapter. 
C.  Procedure Where Partial Improvements Made. If the improvements installed by city or others prior to the issuance of the permit shall be less than the improvements required by or authorized to be required by this chapter, permittee shall make or agree to make such other improvements, all as required by this chapter. It is the intent of this chapter that a permittee who obtains his permit after improvements have been made by city or others in whole or in part shall be required to provide (in money or improvements or both) the equivalent of what he would have been required to provide had his permit predated the improvements. The provisions of this section are, therefore, not in derogation of any other provision of this chapter. 
Payment in lieu of improvements under this section shall be an amount equal to what the improvements cost at the time they were made. Said cost shall be computed under the resolution of cost of improvements adopted under Section 12.02.110(C) in force at the time the improvements were made; if there was no resolution of cost of improvements in force at the time improvements were made, costs will be computed in accordance with the resolution of cost improvements first adopted following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
D.  Acquisition of Land by City Before Its Dedication is Required. In the event city required land for right-of-way before said land shall be subject to dedication under this chapter, city may at its sole discretion, purchase said land or any interest in exchange for an agreement that the owner (and his successors in interest) shall not be required to make repayment for said land under this section and/or one or more of the improvements (or payment in lieu of said improvement or improvements) required by this chapter. This section is intended to authorize a land owner to transfer land to city in advance of the date the dedication thereof would be required under this chapter. In consideration of early transfer, city is empowered to waive the repayment for land and/or one or more of the improvements otherwise required by this chapter for the land or interest so transferred as may constitute equitable and just consideration for advance transfer. 
(Ord. 1279 N.S. § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 982 N.S. § 1 (part), 1990)  
12.02.130 - Credit for past work. 
Whenever the owner of a parcel of land under the jurisdiction of this chapter has paid for any of the improvements required by this chapter (by special assessment or otherwise) after the date of the city's incorporation, the extent of such improvements (at the estimated value thereof at the time the land was dedicated or the improvements were made) shall be credited against the obligation created by this chapter. 
(Ord. 982 N.S. § 1 (part), 1990)  
12.02.140 - Application procedure. 
A.  Legal Description. A true and accurate legal description of the property to be developed along with a property sketch, plot plan or vicinity plan required for an accurate description of land to be dedicated shall accompany the application for approval to develop. 
B.  Time for Dedication and Improvement or Payment or Agreement in Lieu Thereof. Prior to the issuance of any development permit or the second reading of any rezoning ordinance, the permittee shall make such dedications and install such improvements as are required under this chapter or in lieu of improvements, shall make such cash payments as are required or execute such agreements and securities as are required. 
(Ord. 982 N.S. § 1 (part), 1990)  
12.02.150 - Agreements. 
Prior to the issuance of a development permit or second reading of a zoning ordinance, if the permittee is not proceeding pursuant to subsection B of Section 12.02.140, the permittee shall execute an agreement with the city to install the improvements required by city pursuant to this chapter at the permittee's sole cost within such time as said agreement shall require. Said agreement shall contain such covenants and conditions as are required by the city, including, but not limited to, the following: 
A.  No work shall be undertaken by the permittee until all plans and specifications have been submitted to the director of public works and approved in writing; 
B.  All improvements shall be constructed under and subject to inspection by the director of public works; 
C.  The permittee shall pay the city's costs and expenses in connection therewith; 
D.  Completion of the improvements shall be prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or the expiration of the agreement term, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. 982 N.S. § 1 (part), 1990)  
12.02.160 - Security for agreement. 
To assure the permittee's full and faithful performance of the agreement, the permittee shall concurrently file security for such sum as is sufficient to cover one hundred percent of the cost of said improvements and other costs and, in addition, such security as is sufficient to cover one hundred percent of all labor and materials costs required to construct the improvements. The amount of such security shall be determined by the director of public works and the form of such security shall be approved by the city attorney. Such security shall be one or more of the following: 
A.  A bond issued by a surety company authorized to transact a surety business in the state; 
B.  A letter of credit issued by a savings and loan institution or by a bank authorized to transact business in the state; 
C.  The deposit of cash funds in a savings account in any savings and loan or bank maintaining an office in Santa Clara County, with an assignment of said account to the city for payment upon said account; provided, further, that the permittee and the bank or savings and loan shall execute such written documents as shall be required by the city attorney and as shall be approved by him as to form to insure the availability of said sums upon demand to the city and provided further, that there shall be delivered to the city a certificate or passbook representing said account, together with said assignment, in a form satisfactory to the city attorney; 
D.  Cash or a cashiers check drawn upon a bank or savings and loan institution maintaining an office in Santa Clara County. 
(Ord. 982 N.S. § 1 (part), 1990)  
12.02.170 - Release of security. 
No release of any security required under this chapter shall be made except upon the certification by the director of public works that work covered thereunder has been satisfactorily completed and upon approval of the city council, provided, however, that progress payments may be made to the permittee upon approval of the city council in accordance with the provisions of his agreement with the city. Said security or any portion thereof, may be retained by the city until the end of any express warranty or guarantee period provided for in the agreement secured or until any claim period established by law or agreement has expired. No interest shall be paid by the city upon any security deposited by the permittee with the city, any interest earned by the permittee from any bank or savings and loan institution upon an account assigned to the city (if not called upon to satisfy the permittee's obligations pursuant to his written agreement) shall be released to the permittee when the principal sum on deposit is released to the permittee. 
(Ord. 982 N.S. § 1 (part), 1990)  
12.02.180 - Indemnification and reimbursement. 
In the event that the permittee shall fail to complete all improvement work in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or shall fail to pay for all labor and materials, all as required by this chapter, agreement or law, the city shall be entitled to resort to the security furnished by the permittee to complete said improvement work, pay for said labor and materials and pay for such other costs as shall have been incurred by the city. Resort to said security shall not preclude the city from proceeding against a permittee for breach of contract and damages for failure to provide improvement work, labor or materials or to pay other costs in excess of the amount of said security. 
(Ord. 982 N.S. § 1 (part), 1990)  
12.02.190 - Exceptions. 
A.  The planning commission may recommend that the city council authorize conditional exceptions to any of the requirements and regulations set forth in this chapter provided that the following facts are found: 
1.  That there are special circumstances and conditions affecting the subject property; 
2.  That the exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the developer; 
3.  That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which said property is situated. 
B.  1.  In recommending such exceptions, the planning commission shall act to otherwise substantially secure the objectives of the regulations which exceptions are requested and shall act to protect the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare; 
2.  In recommending the authorization of any exception under the provisions of this section, the planning commission shall report to the city council its findings with respect thereto and all facts in connection therewith and shall specifically and fully set forth the exceptions recommended and the conditions designated. 
C.  Upon receipt of such report, the city council may approve the development permit with or without the exceptions and conditions recommended by the planning commission and with such other exceptions, if any, as the city council deems necessary to substantially secure the objectives of this chapter. 
D.  The improvement of any existing building or structure which does not increase the total floor area of such building or structure to an extent of twenty-five percent or more within any five-year period shall be excepted from application of the provisions of this chapter but this subsection is not applicable to the cases described in subsection G of this section. 
E.  In cases where the improvement of an existing building or structure or improvements does not increase the total floor area of such building to an extent of twenty-five percent or more within any five-year period but where such improvements during any twelve-month period exceeds fifty percent of the value of such building, the requirements of this chapter shall apply. 
F.  For purposes of this section, the value of a building, structure or improvement shall be determined to be the current market value thereof as determined by the director of public works. In determining said market value, the city shall consider the most recent appraised value as shown upon the records of the county appraiser as well as other appraisal data as the director of public works shall deem pertinent. In the event that the director of public works determines that the value exceeds fifty percent, the permittee shall receive written notice by mail, postage prepaid, and dispatched to the permittee at his address as shown upon his permit application, of such determination and shall be entitled to appeal such determination in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
G.  It is the intent of the city council that the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the extension of an existing building or structure on the same or adjoining parcels as that on which an existing building or structure is located and to the installation of a new or additional building or structure on the same or on an adjoining parcel of land under the same ownership and to the extension of an existing use to an adjoining parcel of land under the same ownership. It is the intent of the city council that the provisions of this chapter shall apply to any land abutting on a street held in the same ownership as other land abutting on that street for which a development permit has been previously granted. 
H.  The conversion of an existing single family residence from a residential use to a primarily commercial use located on property within a CC-R zoning designation (i.e., central commercial-residential district) shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. This exemption shall expire three years from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
I.  In cases where the commercial improvements of any existing building or structure located on property within a CC-R zoning designation increases the total floor area of such building to an extent of twenty-five percent or more but the increase in the total floor area is less than one thousand five hundred square feet within any ten year period, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply. This exemption shall expire three years from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1636 N.S. § 1, 2003; Ord. 982 N.S. § 1 (part), 1990)  
12.02.200 - Relinquishment of dedication and improvement or payment in lieu thereof. 
A.  If the city council shall determine that land dedicated, improvements made or money contributed in lieu of improvements under and pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall, in any given case, no longer be necessary because of a change in street plan lines, street plans or improvement requirements, and if the city council further determines that it is equitable and reasonable to do so, the city council shall be empowered to direct the conveyance by quit claim deed of said dedicated land and improvements and the refund without interest of any money paid in lieu of improvements to the present owner (at the time of said conveyance or refund) of the land adjoining the dedicated land. 
B.  The city council finds and determines that said conveyance and refund should be made to the present owner for the following reasons: to quit claim to one other than the present owner could leave the present owner's adjoining land without access and landlocked; subsequent owners receive the benefit of a prior owner's compliance with the provisions of this chapter; and therefore, subsequent owners should receive the benefit of any relinquishment by the city; presumably the cost of dedication and improvement is included in the price with the present owner paid to the prior owner; the tracing of title from present owner to prior owner or owners is costly, burdensome and time consuming and would often outweigh the value of property conveyed or the refund made; the intent of this chapter is that improvements, once made, run with the land and requirements under this chapter once met, need not be repeated on each change of ownership. 
C.  The city council finds and determines that no interest should be paid on refunds for the following reasons: as the city derives no benefit from improvements until they are made, the city should be entitled to retain any interest on payments in lieu of improvements to compensate the city for the inability to use the improvements. The city has not had the unlimited use of funds paid in lieu of improvements under the provisions of this chapter and therefore should not be required to make payment therefor in the form of interest. 
D.  As used in this section, the phrase "land adjoining the dedicated land" refers to the land out of which the dedication is made and which adjoins the dedicated land. 
(Ord. 982 N.S. § 1 (part), 1990)  
12.02.210 - Appeal of decision. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision of any officer, department or commission of the city under the provisions of this chapter may appeal said decision to the city council in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.20 of this code. 
(Ord. 982 N.S. § 1 (part), 1990)  
12.02.220 - Permits issued in violation are void. 
All departments, officials and employees of the city vested with the duty or authority to issue permits shall conform to the provisions of this chapter and shall not issue any permit, certificate or license for use of building or for purposes in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. Any such permit, certificate or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void. 
(Ord. 982 N.S. § 1 (part), 1990)  
12.02.230 - Violation a public nuisance. 
Any building or structure erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved or maintained or any use of land contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be, and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city attorney shall, upon the order of the city council, commence action or proceedings for the abatement and removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner prescribed by law. 
(Ord. 982 N.S. § 1 (part), 1990)  
12.02.240 - Violation grounds for refusal of approval of utility connection. 
The building official shall deny final approval and acceptance and shall refuse to allow final public utility connections to any building or structure erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved or maintained or upon any land used contrary to the provisions of this chapter unless and until the provisions of this chapter are met. 
(Ord. 982 N.S. § 1 (part), 1990)  
12.02.250 - Remedies cumulative. 
The remedies contained in this chapter shall be cumulative in addition to such other remedies as provided by law and without limitation to the right to institute such legal action as may be necessary to enforce this chapter or the agreements described in this chapter or to recover damages for the breach thereof against the principal or surety. 
(Ord. 982 N.S. § 1 (part), 1990)  
12.02.260 - City manager—Promulgation of rules and regulations. 
The city manager shall have the power to establish rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of its administration and enforcement. 
(Ord. 982 N.S. § 1 (part), 1990)  
12.02.270 - Effective date. 
This chapter shall be applicable to any development permit issued after the effective date of the ordinance codified herein, provided, however, that in computing requirements under this chapter for a given parcel of land, credit shall be given to a permittee for payments in lieu of improvements made by said permittee or his predecessor in interest prior to the effective date of this chapter. 
(Ord. 982 N.S. § 1 (part), 1990)  
Chapter 12.04 - SIDEWALK ENCROACHMENT 
 
12.04.010 - Impermissible sidewalk encroachment; exemptions. 
It is unlawful for any person or persons, in connection with or in furtherance of a commercial purpose, to place or permit to be placed any articles or things upon the sidewalks of the city except as provided in this chapter. This chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Goods or merchandise in actual course of transit, including receipt, delivery or removal; 
B.  Lamp posts or hydrants erected with the permission of the director of public works; 
C.  Ornamental trees planted along the outer line of the sidewalk and within the curb, and barriers for protection of the same, which have been installed with the permission of the director of public works; 
D.  Materials used in the construction or repair of any building during the actual time of duly permitted construction or repair, and which do not, in the opinion of the director of public works, pose a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the community; 
E.  Parking and directional signs erected by the department of public works; 
F.  News racks for which a permit has been obtained from the city; 
G.  Special sales events which: 
1.  Involve the display, exhibition, advertisement or sale of merchandise upon a portion of the public sidewalk in such a fashion as to not prevent or render hazardous the passage of pedestrians, and not exceeding fifty percent of the width of each sidewalk; and 
2.  Are held in the central commercial (CC-R) zone of the city; and 
3.  Are consented to by a majority of the proprietors of the businesses within each zone, and which are sponsored solely by a majority of such proprietors or an organization to which they belong; and 
4.  Are held pursuant to a duly issued encroachment and/or special events permit; and 
5.  Do not exceed three consecutive days nor occur in the same block more than twice in one calendar year. 
H.  The installation or maintenance of irrigation systems and controls within landscaped areas between the curb and sidewalk or between the sidewalk and the right-of-way used primarily by vehicles for which a permit has been issued by the city; 
I.  The installation or maintenance of curb outlets and drain pipes under the sidewalk for drainage purposes for which a permit has been issued by the city; 
J.  The installation of a structure or any part thereof for which a permit has been issued in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 32 of the Uniform Building Code, "Construction in the Public Right of Way," excepting therefrom Section 3203 of Chapter 32 pertaining to space below the sidewalk. 
(Ord. 1507 N.S. § 2 (part), 2001)  
12.04.020 - Commercial sidewalk encroachment permit—General criteria. 
The director of public works or his or her designee may grant a revocable permit to an owner, for a period not to exceed three years, to construct a structure in the sidewalk, or to do other such work, when in his or her opinion the construction and maintenance thereof would not interfere with any city facilities and would not be detrimental to the best interest of the city. The director of public works shall promulgate regulations for the implementation and administration of the permit process. Such permit would be subject to revocation at any time by the director of public works or his/her designee, and would be subject to such terms and conditions as the director of public works or his/her designee may consider reasonable for the protection of the best interests of the city, including but not limited to provisions that the permittee shall hold the city, its officers, agents and employees free and harmless from any liability for injuries to persons or property resulting from the construction or maintenance of such encroachment, and that the removal of the structure when so requested by the director of public works or his/her designee shall be at the permittee's expense. Such permit may also provide that upon failure of the permittee to remove such structure within a reasonable time after notice from the director of public works or his/her designee, the same may be abated and removed by the city and the cost thereof made a lien upon the property pursuant to the provisions of this code. Other conditions of approval may be imposed on commercial sidewalk encroachment permits where they are deemed appropriate for the maintenance of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. 1507 N.S. § 2 (part), 2001)  
12.04.030 - Commercial sidewalk encroachment permit—Specific criteria. 
A.  In addition to satisfaction of the general criteria enumerated above, permits may be granted for commercial sidewalk encroachments, in accordance with the following specific criteria and procedures, for: 
1.  Outdoor sales and display areas of flower and plant shops; 
2.  Outdoor eating areas of eating and drinking establishments; and 
3.  Displays of merchandise commonly sold within the adjacent business establishment, which shall not exceed seven days' duration. 
B.  Commercial sidewalk encroachments shall be permitted only on public sidewalks in areas of the city zoned central commercial (CC-R) and only for businesses in buildings which front on Monterey Road and adjacent side streets for a depth of one city block, south of West Main Avenue and North of West Dunne Avenue; 
C.  Commercial sidewalk encroachments shall be permitted only on public sidewalks immediately adjacent to the frontage of the business which is granted a permit for such encroachment; 
D.  Commercial sidewalk encroachments shall be visibly designated as such by a placard or other such identification which clearly identifies the holder of the permit, the permit number and its date of expiration; 
E.  No commercial sidewalk encroachment shall be located in a manner that: 
1.  Impedes access to any city inspection, maintenance and operation devices or controls; 
2.  Blocks curbside access to a loading zone; or 
3.  Impedes pedestrian access from curbside vehicles to the adjacent sidewalk. 
F.  No commercial sidewalk encroachment shall be permitted: 
1.  Without a minimum sidewalk clearance width of five feet, measured between the building and fixed objects (such as building walls and utility poles), planter wells and/or curbs; or 
2.  On a public sidewalk within a distance of ten feet from corner curb lines and corner crosswalks. 
G.  All commercial sidewalk encroachments shall be removed whenever the adjacent business which owns the encroachment is closed for business, unless specifically exempted by the director of public works. 
(Ord. 1507 N.S. § 2 (part), 2001)  
12.04.040 - Commercial sidewalk encroachment permit—Application. 
A.  Application. Application for a commercial sidewalk encroachment permit shall be made to the director of public works or his/her designee, by the owner or lessee, with the consent of the owner of the property adjacent to the sidewalk area to be encroached upon. Such application shall contain all information necessary for a determination on the application including, but not limited to: 
1.  A statement of intended use, a map showing location and clearance distances and a sketch of the proposed encroachment showing dimensions and color; 
2.  A fee, as set forth in the municipal fee schedule; and 
3.  A certificate of insurance and a hold harmless and indemnity agreement in favor of the city in a form to the satisfaction of the city attorney. 
B.  Review and Action on Application. A completed application for a commercial sidewalk encroachment permit shall be reviewed by city staff for a determination as to whether such application complies with the regulations contained in this chapter. Such review shall include a referral to the design staff of the department of community development for review and comment. The design of the commercial sidewalk encroachment shall be evaluated as to whether it is reasonably compatible in scale, design and color with the character of adjacent and nearby building facades and public spaces. The director of public works or his/her designee shall grant or deny the application. 
(Ord. 1507 N.S. § 2 (part), 2001)  
12.04.050 - Commercial sidewalk encroachment permit—Revocation. 
The director of public works, or his/her designee, may revoke a commercial sidewalk encroachment permit if he or she determines that the conditions of the permit or any provision of this chapter are being violated, or if municipal use of the area is required for reasons of public health, safety, welfare or convenience. In the case of a revocation, the permittee shall be notified and shall be entitled to a hearing before the director of public works or his/her designee in accordance with the written guidelines, rules and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. 1507 N.S. § 2 (part), 2001)  
12.04.060 - Commercial sidewalk encroachment permit—Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to violate any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 41, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 41, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 12.04.060 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 12.04.060 pertained to commercial sidewalk encroachment permit—penalty and citation for violation and derived from Ord. 1507 N.S., § 2(part), adopted in 2001.  
Chapter 12.08 - EXCAVATIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS 
 
12.08.010 - Purpose. 
It is declared to be in the public interest that improvements or encroachments within any public right-of-way in the city by persons other than the city be regulated in order to protect and preserve public property and public rights-of-way, to assure the maintenance and restoration of public property and public rights-of-way damaged as a result of such improvements or encroachments, to provide appropriate safeguards to assure the protection of life and property, to establish rules and regulations which will enable officials of the city to accomplish the foregoing objects and to meet the variety of engineering, construction, traffic and related problems imposed by various improvements or encroachment work. The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed so as to give full effect to the accomplishment of the foregoing. 
(Ord. 88 N.S. § 1, 1958)  
12.08.020 - Short title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Street Excavation and Encroachment Ordinance," and may be cited as such. 
(Ord. 88 N.S. § 2, 1958)  
12.08.030 - Definitions. 
The definitions given in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter and its application, unless otherwise apparent from the context. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
A.  "Applicant" means any person making written application to the superintendent of public works for a permit under this chapter. 
B.  "City" means the city of Morgan Hill. 
C.  "City council" or "council" means the city council of the city of Morgan Hill. 
D.  "Contractor" means a contractor licensed by the state of California to do work covered by this chapter. 
E.  "Encroachment" means privately owned construction, facilities or structures of any kind in the public right-of-way or in or upon other public property which is constructed for the use and convenience of the owner or occupant of the adjacent property. 
F.  "Grade" means the official elevations and cross-sections established for the finished surface of a public right-of-way. 
G.  "Improvement" means any construction, structure or facility in the public right-of-way. 
H.  "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership or corporation and their heirs, assigns or agents. 
I.  "Public right-of-way" means any street, highway, sidewalk, alley or other public way or public grounds in the city or any setback or plan line established or ordinance or resolution for the future widening or enlarging of any street, highway, sidewalk, alley or other public way or public grounds. 
J.  "Sports accessory structures" means privately owned structures of any kind that are used for sporting activities which include but are not limited to basketball hoops, skateboard ramps, and street hockey goals. 
K.  "Superintendent" means the superintendent of public works of the city. 
(Ord. 1435 N.S. § 1, 1999; Ord. 88 N.S. § 3, 1958)  
12.08.040 - Permit—Required. 
A.  No person shall do or cause to be done any improvement or encroachment work of any kind in any public right-of-way within the city without first having obtained a permit as required in this chapter. 
B.  No person shall place or maintain or cause to be placed or maintained obstructions or structures of any kind not related to encroachment work listed in subsection A of this section, including sports accessory structures, in any public right-of-way within the city. 
C.  A permit fee shall be charged by the director of public works for the issuance of a permit which shall be in addition to all other fees for permits or charges relative to any proposed construction work. The amount of such permit shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 1435 N.S. § 2, 1999: Ord. 88 N.S § 6, 1958)  
12.08.050 - Liability of city. 
This chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the city or any official or employee of the city any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured by the performance of any work for which a permit is issued under this chapter; nor shall the city or any official or employee thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspections authorized under this chapter, the issuance of any permit or the approval of any work. 
(Ord. 88 N.S. § 5, 1958)  
12.08.060 - Exemptions—Government agencies and other organizations. 
The following persons shall be exempted from the requirements of section provisions of this chapter set opposite their names, but shall comply with the other requirements and sections of this chapter: 
Name 	Sections Exempted From 
A. United States, state, or any political subdivision of the state 	12.08.040(B), 12.08.090 
and 12.08.100 
B. Any public utility provided such public utility has been granted a franchise by the city to use public streets 	12.08.090 and 12.08.100 
C. Any person engaged or employed to undertake work in the public right-of-way by the United States, state or any political subdivision of the state 	12.08.040(B), 12.08.090 
and 12.08.100 
D. Any owner of real estate in the city repairing or engaging another to repair the sidewalk adjoining his property 	12.08.040(B), 12.08.090 
and 12.08.100 
 
(Ord. 1155 N.S., 1993; Ord. 88 N.S. § 12, 1958)  
12.08.070 - Exemptions—City employees or contractors. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to any work under the direction of competent city authorities by employees of the city or by any contractor of the city performing work for and on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. 88 N.S. § 4, 1958)  
12.08.080 - Permit—Application—Contents. 
No permit shall be issued unless a written application for the issuance of a permit is submitted to the superintendent. The written application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the nature, location and purpose of the work, the date of commencement and date of completion of the work, and other data as may reasonably be required by the superintendent. The application shall be accompanied by plans showing the extent of the proposed work, the dimensions and elevations, property lines and easements, the location and purpose of the work, and such other information as may be prescribed by the superintendent. Any application may be reviewed by other departments of the city to check compliance with the laws and ordinances under their jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 88 N.S. § 7, 1958)  
12.08.090 - Surety bond or cash deposit. 
A.  Whenever that portion of an encroachment within a public right-of-way exceeds the cost of five hundred dollars, as estimated by the superintendent, then the applicant shall file with the superintendent a surety bond or in lieu thereof shall deposit a cash deposit as provided herein. 
B.  The required surety bond must be given by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state and approved by the city attorney as to form. It shall, by its terms extend for a period of one year following the completion of the work. If a cash deposit is given, this shall be retained for a period of one year following completion of the work. The amount of the cash deposit or penal sum of the bond shall be set by the superintendent. 
C.  The condition of any surety bond or the condition upon which any cash deposit is made hereunder shall be that the permittee shall comply with the provisions of this and other applicable ordinances of the city and with the terms of his permit and shall complete the work authorized by the permit within the time limits therein specified and shall fill up, restore and place in good and safe condition to the satisfaction of the superintendent all openings and excavations made in or damage caused to the public right-of-way, and to maintain any public right-of-way where work has been done in as good condition for a period of twelve months after the work has been done as it was in before such work shall have been commenced. 
D.  A surety bond may be filed for a specific job, or an annual and continuing bond may be filed covering several jobs. The amount of an annual bond shall be set by the superintendent and may be increased at any time if in the opinion of the superintendent, the current bond is insufficient to protect the city because of additional work undertaken by the permittee. 
E.  In the event of any default under the conditions of any surety bond or the conditions upon which any cash deposit is made, the superintendent may, after ten days notice in writing of such default to the permittee and his surety, if any, cause the required work to be completed for and on behalf of the permittee and his surety, if any. The permittee and his surety, if any, shall be liable for the cost of completing the work, for any costs, claims or damages arising from default and from any liability arising out of or in any way connected with the work so performed by the city or contractor employed by the city (for which the permittee and his surety, if any, agree to hold the city harmless.) In the event that the penal sum of any surety bond or the cash deposit on hand shall be insufficient to satisfy the foregoing costs, claims, damages or liabilities, the permittee agrees to pay any deficiency therefor within ten days or written demand therefor from the city. In the event that any legal action by the city is necessary to enforce the foregoing costs, claims, damages, liabilities or deficiency, the permittee and his surety, if any, agree to pay a reasonable attorney's fee to be fixed by the court. The remedy provided by the provisions of this subsection for the city shall not be exclusive, but the city shall be empowered to institute such other remedies as are provided by law. 
(Ord. 88 N.S. § 9, 1958)  
12.08.100 - Liability insurance. 
A permittee, prior to the commencement of work under this chapter, shall furnish the superintendent satisfactory evidence in writing that the permittee has in force and will maintain in force during the performance of the work and the period of the permit public liability insurance of not less than fifty thousand dollars for any one person and one hundred thousand dollars for any one accident and property damage insurance of not less than five thousand dollars duly issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state. 
(Ord. 88 N.S. § 10, 1958)  
12.08.110 - Encroachment agreement. 
The superintendent may require that applications for permits involving encroachment upon the public right-of-way be accompanied by an encroachment agreement signed by the property owner and acknowledged by a notary. This agreement shall contain the following covenants with the city, together with such other covenants as the superintendent may require: 
A.  The encroachment shall be abandoned, removed or relocated upon demand in writing by the superintendent. 
B.  The encroachment shall be installed and maintained in a safe and sanitary condition at the sole cost, risk and responsibility of the owner and successor in interest, who shall hold the city harmless with respect thereto. 
C.  The agreement is made for the direct benefit of the property owner's land described in the agreement and the covenants therein shall run with such property and shall be binding on the assigns and successors of owners. The property owner must remove or relocate an encroachment within thirty days after notice or the superintendent may cause such work to be done, and the cost thereof may be imposed as a lien upon such land. 
D.  Encroachment agreements for approved encroachment permits may be recorded at the option of the city in the office of the county recorder as an encumbrance upon the land involved. 
(Ord. 88 N.S. § 11, 1958)  
12.08.120 - Permit placard—Display. 
The superintendent shall provide each permittee at the time a permit is issued under this chapter a suitable placard on which the following words are printed or written in letters at least one inch high: "City of Morgan Hill Permit No._______, Expires _______." The superintendent shall fill in the blank spaces with the appropriate permit number and expiration date. Any person receiving a permit under this chapter shall keep this placard posted in a conspicuous place at the site of the work. No person shall exhibit at or about any work not covered by such permit, nor misrepresent the number of the permit or its date of expiration. 
(Ord. 88 N.S. § 8, 1958)  
12.08.130 - Permit—Denial, suspension or revocation—Stop work orders. 
A.  The superintendent may deny the issuance of a permit under this chapter or in writing suspend or revoke a permit issued under this chapter whenever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information in the application, or in violation of this chapter or any rule or regulation under this chapter or whenever he finds that any work authorized by the permit is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation under this chapter. 
B.  Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation under this chapter, the superintendent may also order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in the doing of such work or causing the work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the superintendent to proceed. 
C.  Upon such denial or suspension or revocation of a permit or issuance of a stop order, the applicant or permittee may file a written request with the superintendent for a hearing before the city council within thirty days of such denial, suspension or revocation of the permit or issuance of the stop order. The superintendent shall set the matter for hearing before the city council within thirty days of such written request and shall give the applicant or permittee ten day's notice in writing by registered mail of the time and place of such hearing. At the hearing, the city council shall hear the evidence and shall make its findings and decision. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. 88 N.S. § 14, 1958)  
12.08.140 - Conformance required. 
Any improvement or encroachment work of any kind in any public right-of-way within the city shall be done in conformance with each of the terms and conditions of the permit therefor and in accordance with the drawings, specifications and general conditions made applicable to such work by the superintendent and in conformance with all applicable federal, state and municipal statutes, ordinances, resolutions or rules or regulations promulgated thereby or by any agency thereof including, without limitation, the provisions of this chapter, the rules and regulations adopted under this chapter, the building, electrical and plumbing codes of the city, and ordinances and resolutions adopting or establishing standard plans and specifications and official grade lines for the city. Nothing contained in the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be construed to relieve any person from compliance with any other ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. 88 N.S. § 13, 1958)  
12.08.150 - Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 42, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 42, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 12.08.150 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 12.08.150 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 88 N.S., § 15, adopted in 1958; Ord. 1192 N.S., § 17, adopted in 1994; and Ord. 1320 N.S., § 12, adopted in 1997.  
Chapter 12.12 - UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS 
 
12.12.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  "Commission" means the Public Utilities Commission of the state. 
B.  "Person" means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and their agents and employees. 
C.  "Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures" means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. 
D.  "Underground utility district" or "district" means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 12.12.030 of this chapter. 
E.  "Utility" means and includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. 
(Ord. 245 N.S. § A (part), 1968)  
12.12.020 - Initiation—Public hearing by council. 
The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least fifteen days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 776 N.S. § 1, 1986: Ord. 245 N.S. § A (part), 1968)  
12.12.030 - Designation by council resolution. 
If, after such public hearing, the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and the city or a public utility has voluntarily agreed to pay over fifty percent of all costs of conversion, excluding costs of users' connections to underground electric or communications facilities, such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
(Ord. 776 N.S. § 2, 1986: Ord. 245 N.S. § A (part), 1968)  
12.12.040 - Notification procedures to property owners and utility companies. 
A.  Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.12.030 of this chapter, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by the resolution of the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. 
B.  Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.12.030 of this chapter, together with a copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. 
(Ord. 245 N.S. § A (part), 1968)  
12.12.050 - Utility company responsibilities. 
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.12.030 of this chapter, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. 
(Ord. 245 N.S. § A (part), 1968)  
12.12.060 - Notice to property owner. 
The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner's name appears, and must be addressed to such owner's last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to general delivery, city of Morgan Hill. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the city engineer shall, within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(Ord. 245 N.S. § A (part), 1968)  
12.12.070 - Property owners' responsibilities. 
Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall perform construction and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 12.12.050 of this chapter and the termination facility on or within such building or structure being served, all in accordance with applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 12.12.030 of this chapter, the city engineer shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten days after receipt of such notice. 
(Ord. 245 N.S. § A (part), 1968)  
12.12.080 - Notice to perform work. 
The notice given by the city engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if such work is not completed within thirty days after receipt of such notice, the city engineer will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon such property. 
(Ord. 245 N.S. § A (part), 1968)  
12.12.090 - City to perform work when—Costs. 
If upon the expiration of the thirty-day period, the required underground facilities have not been provided, the city engineer shall, forthwith, proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the city engineer shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to such property. Upon completion of the work by the city engineer, he shall file a written report with the city council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessments of the cost of such work upon such premises, which time shall not be less than ten days thereafter. 
(Ord. 245 N.S. § A (part), 1968)  
12.12.100 - Assessment of costs—Hearing. 
The city engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fired, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment. 
(Ord. 245 N.S. § A (part), 1968)  
12.12.110 - Consideration of report. 
Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there are any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment. 
(Ord. 245 N.S. § A (part), 1968)  
12.12.120 - Unpaid assessments—Lien on property. 
If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the city engineer, and the city engineer is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of the properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of such assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which the assessment was not paid. The assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as the property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per annum. 
(Ord. 245 N.S. § A (part), 1968)  
12.12.130 - City's responsibility. 
The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 12.12.030 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 245 N.S. § A (part), 1968)  
12.12.140 - Unlawful acts. 
Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 12.12.030 of this chapter, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as the overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 12.12.070 of this chapter, and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 245 N.S. § A (part), 1968)  
12.12.150 - Exceptions to chapter provisions—Emergency service procedures. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, without authority of the council in order to provide emergency service. The council may grant special permission, on such terms as the council may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. 
(Ord. 245 N.S. § A (part), 1968)  
12.12.160 - Exemptions. 
This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.12.030 of this chapter, shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities: 
A.  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer; 
B.  Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting; 
C.  Overhead wires, exclusive of supporting structures, crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited; 
D.  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred volts; 
E.  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street; 
F.  Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services; 
G.  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts; 
H.  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(Ord. 245 N.S. § A (part), 1968)  
12.12.170 - Time extensions. 
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.12.030 of this chapter cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(Ord. 245 N.S. § A (part), 1968)  
12.12.180 - Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 43, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 43, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 12.12.180 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 12.12.180 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 245 N.S., § A(part), adopted in 1968; Ord. 1192 N.S., § 18, adopted in 1994; and Ord. 1320 N.S., § 13, adopted in 1997.  
Chapter 12.16 - EVENTS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY 
 
12.16.010 - Purpose—Definitions. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use of streets, parks, playgrounds, dedicated open space, recreation, and public buildings and grounds of the city, in order that all persons may enjoy and make full use of them, and to protect the rights of persons living and working in the surrounding areas. Whenever the following words and phrases are used in this chapter they shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
A.  "City" refers to the city of Morgan Hill, California. 
B.  "Park" means a park, playground, recreation center or any other area, building or grounds in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
C.  "City manager" means the city manager or designee. 
D.  "Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
E.  "Vehicle" means any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered or drawn, except for wheelchairs and vehicles in the service of the city. 
(Ord. 1439 N.S. § 2 (part), 1999)  
12.16.020 - Permit—Required—Activities designated. 
It is unlawful for any person to conduct a meeting, assembly, parade, procession or any similar display of any kind, or to use a sound amplifying system, or to serve and/or sell alcohol, or cause or permit the same upon any public street, alley, park, dedicated open space, or any other public building or grounds in the city unless there has first been obtained from the city manager a special event permit to do so, and such permit shall be carried by the person heading or leading such activity. 
(Ord. 1439 N.S. § 2 (part), 1999)  
12.16.030 - Permit—Required—Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Meetings, parades and other events subject to this chapter, where the total anticipated attendance, counting all persons present, including spectators, can reasonably be expected to be less than fifty persons; 
B.  Funeral processions; 
C.  Students of the schools going to and from classes or when constituting a part of their educational activities under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; or 
D.  A governmental agency within the scope of its functions. 
(Ord. 1439 N.S. § 2 (part), 1999)  
12.16.040 - Permit—Application. 
Any person desiring to conduct or manage a meeting, assembly, parade, procession or similar display (herein after referred to as "special event") on public property as set forth in Section 12.16.020 of this chapter, or to use a sound amplifying system, or to serve and/or sell alcohol shall, not less than sixty days nor more than one year before the date on which it is proposed to conduct such special event, file with the city manager a verified application on a form furnished by the city setting forth all of the following information: 
A.  The name of the person or responsible organization requesting a permit to conduct the special event or activity, use a sound amplifying system, or to serve and/or sell alcohol; 
B.  If the special event or activity is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and the authorized and responsible head of such organization; 
C.  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the chairperson of the special event or activity and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
D.  The name, address and telephone number of the person or organization to whom the permit is desired to be issued; 
E.  The date when the special event or activity is to be conducted; 
F.  The location or the route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point; 
G.  The approximate number of persons, and the number and nature of any animals and vehicles, which will participate in the special event or activity; 
H.  The time when such special event or activity will start and terminate; 
I.  Whether such special event or activity will occupy all or a portion of the width of any street proposed to be traversed; 
J.  The location by streets of any assembly area or areas for the special event or activity; 
K.  The time at which units of the special event or activity will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas; 
L.  The names of individuals and/or corporations duly registered in the state who will agree in writing to hold the city harmless and indemnify city, its officials, officers, employees, agents and representatives from any and all liability for injuries to persons or property occurring as a result of the activity for which a permit is sought, and also agreeing to pay the city for any and all damage to real and personal property owned by the city which results from the special event or activity for which the permit is sought; 
M.  Such other information as may be required by the city to enable the city manager to make adequate and appropriate arrangements for proper policing of the proposed special event or activity or public use of a sound amplifying system, or service and/or sale of alcohol. 
(Ord. 1439 N.S. § 2 (part), 1999)  
12.16.050 - Permit—Issuance conditions. 
The city manager shall issue a permit as provided for under this chapter when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, she/he finds that: 
A.  The conduct of such special event or activity will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movements of pedestrian or vehicle traffic, particularly the traffic contiguous to its route; 
B.  The conduct, nature or location of such special event or activity will either not require the dedicated use of police personnel as determined by the chief of police, or the applicant provides for the required police personnel and/or private security personnel, licensed by the state of California, that the chief of police determines is necessary to ensure the proper movement of traffic and preserve the safety and security of the community including those attending or participating in the event; 
C.  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of a parade or at the location of the other special event or other activity will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or emergency medical response to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas and locations; 
D.  The conduct of such special event or activity or use of a sound amplifying system will not have an undue adverse affect upon schools, hospitals, churches, businesses or residents in the vicinity of such activity; 
E.  The conduct of such special event or activity will not unduly interfere with the movement of firefighting or other emergency equipment en route to an emergency; 
F.  The applicant has applied for or obtained all required permits, licenses, insurance coverages, or other authorizations or entitlements required for the special event or activity. No permit will be issued by the city, or if first issued any issued permit will be revoked, if any required permit, license, policy or other authorization or entitlement is not obtained or is revoked after initially being issued; 
G.  The conduct of such special event or activity is not reasonably likely to cause injury to person or property or to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; 
H.  Such special event or activity is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising the goods, wares or merchandise of a particular business establishment or vendor without also having the purpose of promotion of the common good and welfare of the city; 
I.  The applicants have entered into a hold harmless agreement for the protection of city as specified in subsection L of Section 12.16.040 of this chapter; 
J.  Payment, if applicable, of any and all related deposits and/or fees. 
(Ord. 1439 N.S. § 2 (part), 1999)  
12.16.060 - Permit—Terms. 
The permit, if issued by the city manager, shall set forth the pertinent information required by Section 12.16.040 of this chapter, and shall be signed by the chairperson or other person who will be responsible for the conduct of the special event or activity. 
(Ord. 1439 N.S. § 2 (part), 1999)  
12.16.070 - Permit—Notice of rejection. 
The city manager shall act upon the application for a parade permit within ten days after the filing thereof. If the city manager disapproves the application, the city manager shall mail to the applicant within ten days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of the disapproval, including a statement of the reasons for the denial. Such notice shall be mailed to the applicant at his/her address as given on his/her application. 
(Ord. 1439 N.S. § 2 (part), 1999)  
12.16.080 - Right to appeal. 
Any person who has been denied a permit by the city manager may appeal to the city council by filing a written notice of such appeal within five days after the mailing by the city manager of the notice of disapproval. The city council shall have a hearing on the appeal at its next regular meeting if the notice of appeal is filed at least two days prior to that regular meeting date. If the notice of appeal is filed within two days of the next regular meeting, the hearing shall be held at the following regular meeting. The applicant may present all evidence, testimony and information relevant to the application at the hearing. The city council shall either affirm the denial of the application or direct the city manager to issue a permit as applied for at its public meeting, subject to the reasonable terms and conditions permitted under Section 12.16.060 of this chapter. The decision of the city council shall be final and binding and no further appeal can be taken. 
(Ord. 1439 N.S. § 2 (part), 1999)  
12.16.090 - Notification of city officials. 
Immediately upon the granting of a permit under this chapter, the city manager shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
A.  The chief of the police department; 
B.  Any other public official responsible for functions deemed likely to be affected by the special event or activity; 
C.  Any public transportation or other utility, the regular routes of whose vehicles will be affected by the route of the special event or activity. 
(Ord. 1439 N.S. § 2 (part), 1999)  
12.16.100 - Late application approval. 
The city manager shall have authority, in his/her discretion, to consider any application for a permit to conduct a special event or activity which is filed less than sixty days before the date such special event or activity is proposed to be conducted. 
(Ord. 1439 N.S. § 2 (part), 1999)  
12.16.110 - Interference. 
No person shall join or participate in a special event or activity without the consent of the permittee, nor in any manner interfere with its progress or orderly conduct. 
(Ord. 1439 N.S. § 2 (part), 1999)  
12.16.120 - Prohibited activities. 
No person shall engage in any activities in the park which are prohibited in Chapter 12.20. 
(Ord. 1439 N.S. § 2 (part), 1999)  
12.16.130 - Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter or to fail to follow any of the prescribed terms under which the permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 44, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 44, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 12.16.130 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 12.16.130 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 1439 N.S., § 2(part), adopted in 1999.  
Chapter 12.20 - ACTIVITIES ON CITY PARKS, STREETS, PARKING FACILITIES, AND PUBLIC FACILITIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2260 N.S., § 3, adopted Sep. 27, 2017, amended the title of Ch. 12.20 to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 12.20 was titled, "City Parks and Recreation Buildings." 
 
12.20.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever the following words and phrases are used in this chapter they shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
A.  "City" refers to the city of Morgan Hill, California. 
B.  "Park" means a park, playground, open space area, trail, or any other area, or grounds in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation including parking lots constructed directly in and around the park to serve the customers of the park. 
C.  "Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
D.  "Vehicle" means any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered or drawn except for wheelchairs and vehicles in the service of the city. 
E.  "Unmanned aircraft" means an aircraft weighing less than fifty-five pounds, including everything that is onboard or otherwise attached to the aircraft, that can be flown without the possibility of direct human intervention from within or on the aircraft. 
F.  "FAA" refers to Federal Aviation Administration. 
G.  "Public building and facility" means city-owned buildings including general governmental buildings, recreation centers, public service centers and any other building used by the city for public purposes including parking lots constructed directly around the city-owned building to serve the customers of the building. 
H.  "Recreation center" means a public building primarily dedicated for recreation purposes. 
I.  "Public parking lots and parking facilities" means a city-owned parking lot or parking facility constructed to provide parking to a general area of the city that isn't primarily a "park" or "public building" as defined. 
(Ord. 1439 N.S. § 2 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 2260 N.S., § 4, 9-27-2017)  
12.20.020 - General provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all parks, public facilities, and public places in the city to provide opportunities for individuals to pursue and enjoy leisure activities and to assume the general welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 2260 N.S., § 5, 9-27-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2260 N.S., § 5, adopted Sep. 27, 2017, amended § 12.20.020 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 12.20.020 pertained to park use—general provisions and derived from Ord. 1439 N.S., § 2(part), adopted in 1999.  
12.20.030 - Park hours established. 
All park facilities shall remain closed between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m. 
(Ord. 1439 N.S. § 2 (part), 1999)  
12.20.040 - Closing sections of parks authorized. 
Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by the city or by a police officer, at any time, and for any interval of time, as may be reasonably found necessary. 
(Ord. 1439 N.S. § 2 (part), 1999)  
12.20.050 - Closing areas of parks due to repair. 
The city may close any section or part of a park that is deemed to be in need of repair or unsafe to the public. These areas shall either be posted as "Closed to the Public" or staked and roped off or otherwise identified as closed. 
(Ord. 1439 N.S. § 2 (part), 1999)  
12.20.060 - Conduct in parks—Generally. 
No person in a park shall do any of following: 
A.  Damage to Park Property. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, signs, markers, monuments, trash receptacles, paving or paving materials, water lines, or other public utilities or part or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal; 
B.  Use of Restrooms. If over the age of six years, use restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex, unless disabled or handicapped and in need of assistance; 
C.  Removal of Vegetation. Dig or remove any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, down timber or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency; 
D.  Damage to Vegetation. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant, or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant. Nor shall any person attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant. No person shall dig in, or otherwise disturb any grass area, or in any way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any areas; 
E.  Climbing, Standing Sitting. Climbing, standing or sitting on trees, monuments, buildings or walls, vases, fountains, railing, fence or upon any other property not designated or customarily used for such purposes; 
F.  Hunting Animals, Reptiles or Birds. Hunt, molest, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; nor shall any person remove or have in his/her possession the young of any animal, or the eggs or nest or young of any reptile or bird; 
G.  Drinking of Alcoholic Beverages. Drink alcoholic beverages in parks except where a special permit for this activity has been issued by the City; 
H.  Glass Bottles. Bring and/or dispose of glass bottles into the park unless specifically authorized in a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 12.16 of this code; 
I.  Under the Influence of Alcohol or Drugs. Enter or remain in a park while under the influence of an intoxicating liquor or any drug; 
J.  Unauthorized Gambling. Play, bet at or against, or wager on for money, chips, shell, credit or any other representative of value any game that is prohibited by the Penal Code of the state of California; 
K.  Possession of Firearms, Weapons. Use, carry or possess firearms of any description, or air rifles, spring guns, bows and arrows, slings, or any other forms of weapons potentially dangerous to wildlife or human safety. Shooting into park areas from beyond park boundaries is prohibited; 
L.  Pollution of Waters. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of such waters; 
M.  Disposal of Waste, Rubbish. Dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, refuse or trash on the grounds thereof. Such items shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; and where such receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere; 
N.  Public Bathing, Swimming. Swim, bathe, wade in or pollute the water of any fountain, pond, lake or stream not specifically provided for that purpose and so posted. Swimming in the nude or nude sunbathing is prohibited anywhere in a park. For the purposes of this section, "nude" means exposure of any part of the genitals or full exposure of the breast in the case of women; 
O.  Overnight Camping. Camp or park overnight except under conditions provided for under Section 12.20.080 of this chapter; 
P.  Possession of Fireworks. Bring, possess or set off, or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn, any firecrackers, torpedoes, rockets or other fireworks or explosives of flammable material or discharge them or throw them into any such area from land or any roadway adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture or articles that, in conjunction with any other substance or compound, would be dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints. This prohibition also includes fireworks that may otherwise be legal to possess within this state; 
Q.  Fires. Make or kindle a fire for any purpose except at places provided for such purpose; 
R.  Animals. Except as otherwise regulated by law, lead, ride, drive, keep or let loose any animal, reptile or fowl of any kind on any park facility unless under proper control by the animal's owner or attendant. The owner shall be responsible for any damage or injury that may be caused by the animal; 
S.  Powered Model Airplanes, Watercraft, or Rockets. Use powered model airplanes, watercraft, or rockets at any time; 
T.  Powered Aircraft, Cars, or Trucks. Use powered aircraft (that are not airplanes), cars, or trucks in a manner that is dangerous, negligent, careless, reckless or that otherwise poses a risk of harm, danger or injury to life or property or in a manner which may interfere, in any way, with another person or entity's right to privacy, right to quiet enjoyment of his/her property, business operations or recreational activities; 
U.  Unmanned Aircraft. Use unmanned aircraft in a manner that is inconsistent with the state or federal law, including FAA regulations, or at a park not designated for unmanned aircraft use by the city manager. Takeoff and/or land unmanned aircraft before eight a.m. or after sunset. Operate unmanned aircraft within the city to capture, record, or transmit any visual image or audio recording of any persons or private real property located in the city under circumstances in which the subject person or owner of the subject real property has a reasonable expectation of privacy (including, but not limited to, inside a private residence or office, inside a hotel room, and inside of an enclosed yard); 
V.  Golf or Archery. Play or practice or use golf clubs or practice archery; 
W.  Feed Nondomestic Animals. Feeding nondomestic animals any food, including breads, seeds, nuts or other foods as many cause unintentional harm, illness, or death; 
X.  Use of Illegal Drugs. Use any controlled substance in a manner that is prohibited under state or federal law; 
Y.  Smoking. Engage in smoking activities as defined by Section 8.44.020 (11) of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 1439 N.S. § 2 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 2260 N.S., § 6, 9-27-2017)  
12.20.062 - Conduct in public buildings and facilities. 
No person at a public building or facility shall do any of following: 
A.  Damage to Property. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, signs, markers, monuments, furniture, trash receptacles, paving or paving materials, water lines, or other public utilities or part or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal; 
B.  Removal of Vegetation. Dig or remove any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, down timber or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency; 
C.  Damage to Vegetation. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant, or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant. Nor shall any person attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant. No person shall dig in, or otherwise disturb any grass area, or in any way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any areas; 
D.  Climbing, Standing, Sitting. Climbing, standing or sitting on trees, monuments, buildings or walls, vase, fountain, railing, fence or upon any other property not designated or customarily used for such purposes; 
E.  Hunting Animals, Reptiles or Birds. Hunt, molest, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; nor shall any person remove or have in his/her possession the young of any animal, or the eggs or nest or young of any reptile or bird; 
F.  Drinking of Alcoholic Beverages. Drink alcoholic beverages in facilities except when the consumption is approved as part of a facility rental or permit; 
G.  Use of Illegal Drugs. Use any controlled substance in a manner that is prohibited under state or federal law; 
H.  Smoking. Engage in smoking activities as defined by Section 8.44.020 (11) of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code; 
I.  Unauthorized Gambling. Play, bet at or against, or wager on for money, chips, shell, credit or any other representative of value any game that is prohibited by the Penal Code of the state of California; 
J.  Possession of Firearms, Weapons. Use, carry or possess firearms of any description, or air rifles, spring guns, bows and arrows, slings, or any other forms of weapons potentially dangerous to wildlife or human safety. 
K.  Pollution of Waters. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of such waters; 
L.  Disposal of Waste, Rubbish. Dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, refuse or trash on the grounds thereof. Such items shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; and where such receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the facility by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere; 
M.  Public Bathing, Swimming. Swim, bathe, wade in or pollute the water of any fountain, not specifically provided for that purpose and so posted. Swimming in the nude or nude sunbathing is prohibited anywhere in the facility. For the purposes of this section, "nude" means exposure of any part of the genitals or full exposure of the breast in the case of women; 
N.  Overnight Camping. Camp or park overnight except under conditions provided for under Section 12.20.080 of this chapter; 
O.  Possession of Fireworks. Bring, possess or set off, or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn, any firecrackers, torpedoes, rockets or other fireworks or explosives of flammable material or discharge them or throw them into any such area from land or any roadway adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture or articles that, in conjunction with any other substance or compound, would be dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints. This prohibition also includes fireworks that may otherwise be legal to possess within this state; 
P.  Fires. Make or kindle a fire for any purpose except at places provided for such purpose; 
Q.  Animals. Except as otherwise regulated by law, lead, ride, drive, keep or let loose any animal, reptile or fowl of any kind at any facility unless under proper control by the animal's owner or attendant. The owner shall be responsible for any damage or injury that may be caused by the animal; 
R.  Animals at Recreation Centers. Possess animals within the indoor areas of any recreation center, within the fenced areas of the aquatics center, or within the fenced areas of the outdoor sports center except for service animals or when the possession of the animal is approved as part of a facility rental or permit; 
S.  Powered Model Airplanes, Watercraft, or Rockets. Use powered model airplanes, watercraft, or rockets at any time; 
T.  Powered Aircraft, Cars, or Trucks. Use powered aircraft (that are not airplanes), cars, or trucks in a manner that is dangerous, negligent, careless, reckless or that otherwise poses a risk of harm, danger or injury to life or property or in a manner which may interfere, in any way, with another person or entity's right to privacy, right to quiet enjoyment of his/her property, business operations or recreational activities; 
U.  Unmanned Aircraft. Use of unmanned aircraft except when approved as part of a facility rental or permit; 
V.  Golf or Archery. Play or practice or use golf clubs or practice archery; 
W.  Feed Nondomestic Animals. Feeding nondomestic animals any food, including breads, seeds, nuts or other foods as many cause unintentional harm, illness, or death. 
X.  Ride-on Wheeled Vehicles. Ride or use bicycles, skateboards, roller skates, in-line skates, or scooters. 
(Ord. No. 2260 N.S., § 7, 9-27-2017)  
12.20.064 - Conduct in city public parking lots and parking facilities. 
No person at a city public parking lot or parking facility shall do any of following: 
A.  Damage to Property. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, signs, markers, monuments, trash receptacles, paving or paving materials, water lines, or other public utilities or part or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal; 
B.  Loitering. Remain present in a city parking lot for any other purpose than to travel to and from a vehicle parked within the parking lot; 
C.  Climbing, Standing, Sitting. Climbing, standing or sitting on walls, ledges, railings, rooftops, parapets, fences or upon any other property not designated for such purposes; 
D.  Ride-on Wheeled Vehicles. Ride or use bicycles, skateboards, roller skates, in-line skates, or scooters; 
E.  Hunting Animals, Reptiles or Birds. Hunt, molest, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; nor shall any person remove or have in his/her possession the young of any animal, or the eggs or nest or young of any reptile or bird; 
F.  Drinking of Alcoholic Beverages. Drink alcoholic beverages except when the consumption is approved as part of a facility rental or permit; 
G.  Use or Consumption of Illegal Drugs. Use any controlled substance in a manner that is prohibited under state or federal law; 
H.  Smoking. Engage in smoking activities as defined by Section 8.44.020 (11) of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code; 
I.  Unauthorized Gambling. Play, bet at or against, or wager on for money, chips, shell, credit or any other representative of value any game that is prohibited by the Penal Code of the state of California; 
J.  Possession of Firearms, Weapons. Use, carry or possess firearms of any description, or air rifles, spring guns, bows and arrows, slings, or any other forms of weapons potentially dangerous to wildlife or human safety. 
K.  Pollution of Waters. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to any parking lot or facility or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of such waters; 
L.  Disposal of Waste, Rubbish. Dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, refuse or trash on the grounds thereof. Such items shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; and where such receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the facility by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere; 
M.  Overnight Camping. Camp overnight except under conditions provided for under Section 12.20.080 of this chapter; 
N.  Possession of Fireworks. Bring, possess, or set off, or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn, any firecrackers, torpedoes, rockets or other fireworks or explosives of flammable material or discharge them or throw them into any such area from land or any roadway adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture or articles that, in conjunction with any other substance or compound, would be dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints. This prohibition also includes fireworks that may otherwise be legal to possess within this state; 
O.  Fires. Make or kindle a fire for any purpose except at places provided for such purpose; 
P.  Animals. Except as otherwise regulated by law, lead, ride, drive, keep or let loose any animal, reptile or fowl of any kind at any facility unless under proper control by the animal's owner or attendant. The owner shall be responsible for any damage or injury that may be caused by the animal; 
Q.  Powered Model Airplanes or Rockets. Use powered model airplanes or rockets at any time; 
R.  Powered Aircraft, Cars, or Trucks. Use powered aircraft (that are not airplanes), cars, or trucks in a manner that is dangerous, negligent, careless, reckless or that otherwise poses a risk of harm, danger or injury to life or property or in a manner which may interfere, in any way, with another person or entity's right to privacy, right to quiet enjoyment of his/her property, business operations or recreational activities; 
S.  Unmanned Aircraft. Use unmanned aircraft except when approved as part of a facility rental or permit; 
T.  Golf or Archery. Play or practice or use golf clubs or practice archery; 
U.  Removal of Vegetation. Dig or remove any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, down timber or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency; 
V.  Damage to Vegetation. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant, or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant. Nor shall any person attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant. No person shall dig in, or otherwise disturb any grass area, or in any way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any areas. 
(Ord. No. 2260 N.S., § 8, 9-27-2017)  
12.20.067 - Conduct on city public streets and sidewalks. 
No person on a public street or sidewalk shall do any of following: 
A.  Damage to Property. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, signs, markers, monuments, trash receptacles, paving or paving materials, water lines, or other public utilities or part or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal; 
B.  Removal of Vegetation. Dig or remove any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, down timber or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency; 
C.  Damage to Vegetation. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant, or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant. Nor shall any person attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant. No person shall dig in, or otherwise disturb any grass area, or in any way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any areas; 
D.  Climbing, Standing Sitting. Climbing, standing or sitting on trees, monuments, buildings or walls, vase, fountain, railing, fence or upon any other property not designated or customarily used for such purposes; 
E.  Hunting Animals, Reptiles or Birds. Hunt, molest, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; nor shall any person remove or have in his/her possession the young of any animal, or the eggs or nest or young of any reptile or bird; 
F.  Drinking of Alcoholic Beverages. Drink alcoholic beverages except where a special permit for this activity has been issued by the city manager; 
G.  Glass Bottles. Bring and/or dispose of glass bottles unless specifically authorized in a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 12.16 of this code; 
H.  Under the Influence of Alcohol or Drugs. Enter or remain while under the influence of an intoxicating liquor or any drug; 
I.  Unauthorized Gambling. Play, bet at or against, or wager on for money, chips, shell, credit or any other representative of value any game that is prohibited by the Penal Code of the state of California; 
J.  Possession of Firearms, Weapons. Use, carry or possess firearms of any description, or air rifles, spring guns, bows and arrows, slings, or any other forms of weapons potentially dangerous to wildlife or human safety. Shooting onto street or sidewalk areas from other areas is prohibited; 
K.  Pollution of Waters. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to a public street or sidewalk or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of such waters; 
L.  Disposal of Waste, Rubbish. Dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, refuse or trash on the grounds thereof. Such items shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; and where such receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away by the person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere; 
M.  Public Bathing, Swimming. Swim, bathe, wade in or pollute the water of any fountain, pond, lake or stream not specifically provided for that purpose and so posted. Swimming in the nude or nude sunbathing is prohibited anywhere on public streets and sidewalks. For the purposes of this section, "nude" means exposure of any part of the genitals or full exposure of the breast in the case of women; 
N.  Overnight Camping. Camp overnight except under conditions provided for under Section 12.20.080 of this chapter; 
O.  Possession of Fireworks. Bring, possess or set off, or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn, any firecrackers, torpedoes, rockets or other fireworks or explosives of flammable material or discharge them or throw them into any such area from land or any roadway adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture or articles that, in conjunction with any other substance or compound, would be dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints. This prohibition also includes fireworks that may otherwise be legal to possess within this state; 
P.  Fires. Make or kindle a fire for any purpose except at places provided for such purpose; 
Q.  Animals. Except as otherwise regulated by law, lead, ride, drive, keep or let loose any animal, reptile or fowl of any kind unless under proper control by the animal's owner or attendant. The owner shall be responsible for any damage or injury that may be caused by the animal; 
R.  Powered Model Airplanes, Watercraft, or Rockets. Use powered model airplanes, watercraft, or rockets at any time; 
S.  Powered Aircraft, Cars, or Trucks. Use powered aircraft (that are not airplanes), cars, or trucks in a manner that is dangerous, negligent, careless, reckless or that otherwise poses a risk of harm, danger or injury to life or property or in a manner which may interfere, in any way, with another person or entity's right to privacy, right to quiet enjoyment of his/her property, business operations or recreational activities; 
T.  Unmanned Aircraft. Use unmanned aircraft except when approved as part of a facility rental or permit; 
U.  Golf or Archery. Play or practice or use golf clubs or practice archery; 
V.  Feed Nondomestic Animals. Feeding nondomestic animals any food, including breads, seeds, nuts or other foods as many cause unintentional harm, illness, or death. 
(Ord. No. 2260 N.S., § 9, 9-27-2017)  
12.20.070 - Use of bicycles and vehicles in parks, city parking lots and city facilities. 
No person shall do any of the following in a park, city parking lot, or city facility: 
A.  Compliance with Vehicle Code. Fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the Vehicle Code of the state in regard to equipment and operation of vehicles, together with such regulations as are contained in this chapter and any other ordinances of the city regulating traffic; 
B.  Obedience to Traffic Officers, Peace Officers and Their Designees Authorized to Enforce The Vehicle Code, Or Park Employees. Fail to obey all traffic officers, peace officers and their designees, and park employees who are hereafter authorized and instructed to direct traffic in the parks, city parking lot and city facilities, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and such supplementary regulations as may be issued by the city; 
C.  Observance of Traffic Regulations. Fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping or parking, and all other signs posted for proper control and to safeguard life and property; 
D.  Excessive Speed. Ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding fifteen miles per hour; 
E.  Parking Areas. Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking area, and such use shall be in accordance with the posted directions there, and with the instructions of any attendant who may be present; 
F.  Vehicle Driveways and Access Drive. Drive any vehicle on any area except paved roads or parking areas, or such other areas as may be designated as temporary parking areas by the city; 
G.  Bicycle Pathway. Leave a bicycle lying on the pathway or paving, or in any place or position where other persons may cause injury. 
(Ord. No. 2260 N.S., § 10, 9-27-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2260 N.S., § 10, adopted Sep. 27, 2017, amended § 12.20.070 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 12.20.070 pertained to use of bicycles and vehicles in parks and derived from Ord. 1439 N.S., § 2 (part), adopted in 1999.  
12.20.080 - Activities or actions requiring prior approval from the city. 
The following activities require prior approval and/or a special permit: 
A.  Picnic Area Reservations. Reservations for any portion of the picnic areas, or any of the park buildings or structures for the purpose of holding an activity to the exclusion of other persons, or for public admission; 
B.  Sale of Articles. Expose or offer for sale any article, service, or thing; nor shall she/he station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing; 
C.  Announcements, Advertisements of Articles for Sale. Announce, advertise or call to the public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire; 
D.  Post Signs. Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription; 
E.  Construct Temporary Building, Structure. Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any public service utility into, upon or across such lands; 
F.  Conduct, Advertise Professional Pyrotechnic Displays. Conduct, advertise, or plan for any professional pyrotechnic display; 
G.  Plan Activities After Operational Hours. Plan or conduct any activity that exceeds the operational hours of the park, parking lot, or public building; 
H.  Chemical Toilets. Temporary use of chemical toilets. 
(Ord. 1439 N.S. § 2 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 2260 N.S., § 11, 9-27-2017)  
12.20.090 - Enforcement—Compliance. 
The city, or any city staff person showing proper identification, shall encourage compliance with and shall cause the enforcement of this chapter and any such rule promulgated hereunder. 
(Ord. 1439 N.S. § 2 (part), 1999)  
12.20.095 - Use of skate park facility. 
A.  Definitions. "Skate park facility" means the fence and the entire fenced-in area surrounding and including the skate park amenities. 
B.  Regulations Governing Use. The following regulations shall apply within the designated skate park facility: 
1.  No person shall use, remain in or enter the skate park facility other than between the hours of 8:00 a.m. until sunset. At all other times the skate park facility shall be closed. The skate park facility may also be closed for any period of time at the sole discretion of the director of recreation and community services or the city manager for any reason, including but not limited to inclement weather, repair and maintenance, health and safety emergencies, violations by users of rules and regulations, graffiti, or defacement of property. 
2.  No person shall use the skate park facility for any purpose other than skateboarding or inline skating ; except as otherwise prohibited or permitted as designated and scheduled by the director of recreation and community services. 
3.  No person under the age of twelve may enter or use the skate park facility unless under the supervision of an adult. 
4.  Skateboarding, inline skating, bicycle jumping or any other use of the skate park facility not otherwise designated shall be considered hazardous recreational activities. No person may engage in any act that is reckless or that pose danger to other users or spectators, including, but not limited to, body flips; riding a skateboard facing entirely backwards; two or more individuals riding on the same skateboard; riding a skateboard on one's knees or while sitting or lying on the skateboard; causing the skateboard intentionally to shoot out away from the rider; tandem skating within three feet in front of or behind each rider; any acts that exceeds the skill level of the rider and presents a risk of serious injury to the rider or other persons, with the exception of those persons participating in special exhibitions or programs sponsored, operated and monitored by the recreation and community services department. 
5.  Persons using the skate park facility shall obey all signage, permanent or temporary and shall follow all instructions of city staff. 
6.  No person shall use the skate park facility or areas without wearing proper safety equipment including a helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads. 
7.  No person shall destroy, damage, deface, place graffiti upon, temper with, remove or relocate any part of the skate park facility, including signage notifying the hazardous nature of the activities in the skate park facility, rules and regulations and the requirement to wear a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads. 
8.  No person shall ride or cause bicycles to be on the skating surface of the skate park facility except at times designated and scheduled by the director of recreation and community services. 
9.  During times designated and scheduled for special use by bicycles, the skate park facility shall not be used for skateboarding, inline skating or any other purpose. 
10.  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage or drugs or use tobacco products of any kind, including, but not limited to, chewing tobacco, cigars and cigarettes, in or upon the skate park facility. 
11.  No person may remain in or loiter about the skate park facility when not using the skate park facilities for its permitted purposes. 
12.  No person shall skate on the curbs or driveways of the city-owned areas surrounding the skate park facility. 
13.  All persons using the skate park area must place trash in cans provided by the city or such persons shall be removed from the designated skate park areas. 
(Ord. 1484 N.S. § 1, 2000) 
(Ord. No. 1936 N.S., § 1, 6-3-2009)  
12.20.100 - Violation. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Anyone violating these provisions will be held financially responsible to the maximum extent provided by law for any and all damage caused. 
C.  In addition to fines, for any subsequent violations within any consecutive twelve-month period, the community services director may order the exclusion of the violator from the use of any park or skate park facility for a period of time as determined at his or her reasonable discretion. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 45, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 45, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 12.20.100 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 12.20.100 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 1439 N.S., § 2(part), adopted in 1999; and Ord. No. 1936 N.S., § 2, adopted June 3, 2009.  
Chapter 12.24 - NEWSRACK CONSOLIDATION 
 
12.24.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and welfare through the regulation of placement, appearance, number, size, and servicing of newsracks on the public right-of-way in Morgan Hill. It is not the intent of this chapter to in any way discriminate against, regulate, or interfere with the publication, circulation, distribution, or dissemination of any printed material that is constitutionally protected. 
(Ord. No. 2281 N.S., § 1, 9-26-2018)  
12.24.020 - Definitions. 
For this chapter, the following words are defined as follows: 
"Abandoned newsrack or newsrack space" is any newsrack or newsrack space which remains empty for thirty calendar days or more, except that a newsrack remaining empty due to labor strike or any temporary and extraordinary interruption of distribution or publication by the newspaper or other publication sold or distributed from that newsrack or newsrack space shall not be deemed abandoned. 
"Downtown Zone." The area of Morgan Hill generally known as Downtown which includes Monterey Road to the West, Depot Street to the Ease, Main Street to the north, and Dunne Avenue to the South. 
"Newsrack space" means the area within a newsrack accessed by one or more publications placed by publishers or distributors and intended for retrieval by customers or members of the public. 
"Newsrack(s)" means any self-service, coin-operated or credit card-activated box, container, storage unit, kiosk, or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the sale or distribution of newspapers, news periodicals, magazines, or other news or informational publications. 
"Sidewalk" means any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 2281 N.S., § 1, 9-26-2018)  
12.24.030 - Permit required. 
It is unlawful to place, install, maintain, or cause to be placed, installed, or maintained a newsrack on, within, or projecting into a public right-of-way or public property in the city of Morgan Hill without first receiving a permit therefor from the city manager and unless such newsrack is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter; and 
(Ord. No. 2281 N.S., § 1, 9-26-2018)  
12.24.040 - Placement of newsracks. 
A.  Each newsrack installed, used or maintained on a public sidewalk or parkway, or portion thereof, shall be of the modular type, or its equivalent. Each newsrack at a given location shall be part of a multi-unit configuration subject to standards set forth in this chapter. Each newsrack facility shall be located so as to maximize the public convenience, health, safety and welfare, both as to accessibility to the newsracks and the use of the public right-of-way as a thoroughfare, and the aesthetic appearance of the area. 
B.  No newsrack shall be installed, used or maintained in the public right-of-way in the R-1, R-2 or R-3 residential districts. 
C.  Newsracks shall be placed adjacent to the wall of a building and shall be parallel to such wall and not more than six inches from the wall. Newsracks may be placed near a curb at a location as approved by the city manager. Newsracks placed near a curb shall be placed not less than eighteen inches nor more than twenty-four inches from the edge of the curb. The City Manager may approve an exception to these locations for public access purposes. 
D.  No newsrack shall be placed on a sidewalk opposite another newsrack. 
(Ord. No. 2281 N.S., § 1, 9-26-2018)  
12.24.050 - Newsrack standards. 
Each newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any sidewalk or parkway shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  No newsrack shall exceed five feet in height, three feet in width, three feet in depth. 
B.  No newsrack may encroach onto the public right-of-way except as allowed under an encroachment permit issued by the city. 
C.  No newsrack shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any property not owned by the owner of the newsrack or to any permanently fixed object. 
D.  Newsracks may be chained or otherwise attached to one another; however, no more than three newsracks may be joined together in this manner, and a space of no more than one inch shall separate each group of three newsracks so attached. 
E.  No newsrack, or groups of attached newsracks allowed under subsection C. of this section, shall weigh, in the aggregate, more than five hundred pounds when empty. 
F.  No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained: 
1.  Within five feet of any marked or unmarked crosswalk; 
2.  Within five feet of any fire hydrant or other emergency facility; 
3.  Within five feet of any driveway; 
4.  Within five feet of any bus bench or sign marking a designated bus stop; 
5.  At any location whereby the clear space for the passage of pedestrians is reduced to less than five feet; 
6.  Within two feet of any area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs or trees or within two feet of any display window of any building abutting the sidewalk or parkway or in such manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window for display purposes. 
7.  At any location where the newsrack causes, creates or constitutes a traffic hazard; 
8.  At any location where the newsrack unreasonably obstructs or interferes with access to or the use and enjoyment of abutting property; 
9.  Where the newsrack will endanger persons or property; 
10.  Where the newsrack will unreasonably interfere or obstruct the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or access to parked vehicles on a highway; or 
11.  Within two hundred feet of any city-owned newsrack facility in the public right-of-way. 
G.  No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the newspaper or news periodical housed therein. No exterior signs, stickers, or advertising shall be permitted, other than the available front clear portion of the newsrack space. 
H.  Each newsrack shall be designed and constructed so that wind action will not cause papers to be blown from the rack 
(Ord. No. 2281 N.S., § 1, 9-26-2018)  
12.24.060 - Installation and maintenance. 
A.  Stands for newsracks shall be single or multi-unit pedestal. Such pedestal shall not exceed fifty-eight inches in height. 
B.  Newsrack mounts shall be painted RAL 7022 - Umbra Grey. 
C.  No newsrack shall be used for commercial advertising, signs, or publicity purposes, other than the available front clear portion of the newsrack space. 
D.  Each newsrack and newsrack space shall be maintained by the permittee in a clean and neat condition, free of graffiti, dirt, stickers, grease, and corrosion, and in good repair at all times. No newsrack shall be allowed to be chipped, faded, or cracked or shall contain broken or cracked plastic, glass, or structural parts. Adhesive labels, other than City-issued markers, or adhesive labels related to publications in the newsrack or newsrack space, shall not be displayed on newsracks. 
E.  Each permittee is responsible for placement of publications or other materials within newsracks. All work undertaken shall be the sole responsibility of the permit holder. Damage to city-owned newsracks resulting from the installation of the material into the newsrack shall be reported to the city immediately and repaired per city approval, at the expense of the permittee. Failure to make required repairs may result in city staff undertaking efforts to make such repairs. Cost of repairs shall be chargeable as a civil debt to the permit holder, owner or operator of the newsrack, and may be collected by the city in the same manner as it collects any other civil debt or obligation. 
(Ord. No. 2281 N.S., § 1, 9-26-2018)  
12.24.080 - Standards for installation and maintenance of newsracks on designated portions of Downtown Zone. 
Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, newsracks on public sidewalks, parkways, rights-of-way, and streets in the city's Downtown Zone, must be installed and maintained only within the specially constructed newsrack display support structures that are approved and installed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2281 N.S., § 1, 9-26-2018)  
12.24.090 - Abandoned or unauthorized use of newsrack or newsrack space. 
A.  Any newsrack installed, used or maintained in violation of this chapter may be summarily removed and stored in any convenient place by the city. The city shall take reasonable steps to notify the permittee, owner or other person responsible for its installation or maintenance. Upon failure of these persons to claim such newsrack and pay the expenses of removal and storage within thirty calendar days after such removal, the newsrack is deemed unclaimed property in possession of the city and may be disposed of by any means allowed by law. 
B.  The cost of removal and/or storage by the city of any newsrack publications subject to this chapter shall be chargeable as a civil debt to the owner thereof and may be collected by the city in the same manner as it collects any other civil debt or obligation. 
C.  Unauthorized publications or items placed in a newsrack space may be removed and disposed of by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2281 N.S., § 1, 9-26-2018)  
Chapter 12.28 - TREE PLANTING PLAN 
 
12.28.010 - Purpose. 
For the best interests of the city and of the citizens and public thereof a comprehensive plan for the planting and maintenance of trees in or which may overhang public streets within the city should be developed and established. This chapter is adopted therefor, for the purpose of developing and providing for a plan and program, and for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations relating to the planting, care and maintenance of such trees. 
(Ord. 150 N.S. § 1, 1963)  
12.28.020 - Definitions. 
A.  For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
1.  "City" means the city of Morgan Hill situated in the county of Santa Clara, California. 
2.  "Owner" means and includes the legal owner of real property fronting on any street of the city, and any lessee of such owner. 
3.  "Park superintendent" or "superintendent" means the public works superintendent of the city. 
4.  "Person" means and includes an individual, firm, association, corporation, copartnership and the lessees, trustees, receivers, agents, servants and employees of such person. 
5.  "Public streets" or "streets" means and includes all roads, streets, avenues, boulevards, alleys, parkways, public rights-of-way or any portion thereof, of the city. 
B.  Whenever used in this chapter the singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
(Ord. 150 N.S. §§ 2, 3, 1963)  
12.28.030 - Park superintendent—Authority. 
The park superintendent shall have the jurisdiction and control of the planting, setting out, location and placement of all trees in the public streets of the city, and shall likewise have supervision, direction and control of the care, trimming, removal, relocation and replacement thereof. 
(Ord. 150 N.S. § 6, 1963)  
12.28.040 - Master tree list—Determinations—Revisions. 
A.  The park superintendent is charged with the duty of promptly determining the types and species of trees suitable and desirable for planting and the areas in which and conditions under which such trees shall be planted in or which may overhang the public streets within the city. The determination shall be made by the park superintendent who may consult with those familiar with the subject of such plantings, such as landscape architects, arborists, nurserymen and park executives. When such determination has been made the park superintendent shall report his findings in writing to the city council. When approved by the city council the report shall be known as the master tree list, shall be placed on file in the office of the city clerk, and shall thereafter be the official determination of the superintendent. Revisions or changes in the master tree list may be made from time to time by the park superintendent, in the manner described in this chapter for the development, approval and filing of the original master tree list. 
B.  All trees hereafter planted in or which may overhang the public streets of the city must be on the master tree list, unless a written permit from the park superintendent shall have first been obtained to plant a tree not on the list. The permit may be granted by the superintendent only upon his obtaining approval therefor from the city council. 
(Ord. 150 N.S. § 5, 1963)  
12.28.050 - Prohibited trees and groundcovers—Designated. 
A.  Some types of trees and groundcovers, upon maturing, instead of becoming assets to the community, become liabilities due to structural weaknesses, disease or insect susceptibility, short life, destructive root systems, and rank growing branches requiring excessive maintenance. Due to one or more of these characteristics, it is unlawful to plant the following trees in or where they may overhang any public street: 
Prohibited Trees 	Common Name or Species 
Platanus Racemosa 	Western Sycamore 
Platanus Orientalis 	European Plane tree 
Ailanthur Glandulosa 	Tree of Heaven 
Eucalyptus 	All species 
Populas (Poplar tree) 	All species 
Juglans Regia 	English Walnut 
Juglans Hidsi 	American Black Walnut 
Juglans California 	California Black Walnut 
Robina Pseudocacacia 	Black Locust 
Ulmas Americana 	White Elm, American Elm 
Palms 	All species 
Sequoia Gigantea 	Redwood 
Pinus Padiata 	Monterey Pine (all species) 
Conifers 	All species 
Acacia 	All species 
Fruit trees 	All fruit bearing species 
Ceratonia Siliqua Carob 	St. John's Bread (Carob tree) 
Cinnamonum Camphora 	Camphor tree 
 
B.  Trees shall be planted a minimum of thirty feet apart. If the parkway is to be concreted, the area left for trees shall be nine square feet. 
C.  All shrubs which grow to a natural height of more than eighteen inches are prohibited and shall be removed at the violator's expense. It is unlawful to plant any groundcover in any public street, which groundcover is not on the master list of approved groundcovers approved by the superintendent of public works and such groundcover shall be removed at the violator's expense. 
(Ord. 272 N.S. § A (part), 1970: Ord. 150 N.S. § 7, 1963)  
12.28.060 - Tree care, planting, removing and replacement—Permit required. 
It is unlawful and prohibited for any person other than the park superintendent or his duly authorized agent or deputy to cut, trim, prune, spray, brace, plant, move, remove or replace any tree in any public street within the city, or to cause the same to be done, unless and until a written permit so to do shall have been first obtained from the park superintendent. Any such permit may be declared void by the superintendent if its terms are violated. 
(Ord. 150 N.S. § 8, 1963)  
12.28.070 - Permit issuance—Utility encroachments. 
Any person doing business as a public utility subject to the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of the state and any constituted public agency authorized to provide and providing utility service, shall be given a permit from the superintendent, valid for one year from the date of issuance, permitting such person to trim, brace, remove or perform such other acts with respect to trees growing adjacent to the public streets of the city or which grow upon private property to the extent that they encroach upon such public streets as may be necessary to maintain the safe operation of its business. 
(Ord. 150 N.S. § 9, 1963)  
12.28.080 - Permit issuance—Professional tree maintenance. 
No person other than an owner or public utility may do any act for which a permit is required under Section 12.28.060 of this chapter, except a person whose principal business is tree surgery, trimming or maintenance and who, in the opinion of the park superintendent, is qualified for such business, and who has obtained a permit to carry on such business in the city from the park superintendent. Permits issued pursuant to this section may be granted for a period of one year from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. 150 N.S. § 10, 1963)  
12.28.090 - Unlawful acts designated. 
It is unlawful for any person to break, injure, deface, mutilate, kill or destroy any tree or set fire or permit any fire to burn where such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree in any public street in the city, nor shall any person place, apply, attach or keep attached to any such tree or to the guard or stake intended for the protection thereof any wire, rope (other than one used to support a young or broken tree), sign, paint or any other substance, structure, thing or device of any kind or nature whatsoever, without having first obtained a written permit from the park superintendent to so do. 
(Ord. 150 N.S. § 11, 1963)  
12.28.100 - Enforcement authority. 
The park superintendent or his duly authorized representative shall be charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 150 N.S. § 4, 1963)  
12.28.110 - Declaration of public nuisance—Abatement procedures. 
The park superintendent may inspect any tree adjacent to or overhanging any public street in the city to determine whether the same or any portion thereof is in such a condition as to constitute a hazard or impediment to the progress or vision of anyone traveling on such public street. Any tree or part thereof growing upon private property but overhanging or interfering with the use of any street that in the opinion of the park superintendent endangers the life, health, safety or property of the public shall be declared a public nuisance. If the owner of such private property does not correct or remove such nuisance within ten days after receipt of written notice thereof from the park superintendent, the superintendent shall cause the nuisance to be corrected or removed and the cost shall be assessed to such owner. 
(Ord. 150 N.S. § 12, 1963)  
12.28.120 - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by any act or determination of the park superintendent in the exercise of the authority granted in this chapter shall have the right of appeal to the city council of the city, whose decision, after public hearing of the matter, shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 150 N.S. § 13, 1963)  
12.28.130 - Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate or to fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. In addition, the city shall assess the costs of removing the tree or ground cover that violates the provisions of this chapter to the person planting or maintaining the shrub or tree. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 46, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 46, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 12.28.130 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 12.28.130 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 150 N.S., § 14, adopted in 1963; Ord. 272 N.S., § A(part), adopted in 1970; Ord. 1192 N.S., § 20, adopted in 1994; and Ord. 1320 N.S., § 15, adopted in 1997.  
Chapter 12.32 - RESTRICTIONS ON REMOVAL OF SIGNIFICANT TREES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2205 N.S., § 1, adopted June 15, 2016, amended Ch. 12.32 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 12.32, §§ 12.32.010—12.32.150, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 535 N.S., § A (part), adopted in 1980; Ord. 691 N.S., § A, adopted in 1984; and Ord. No. 1935 N.S., § 4(Exh. B), adopted June 3, 2009. 
 
12.32.010 - Council determinations. 
The city council finds and declares: 
A.  The existing and future trees and tree communities located in the city are a valuable and distinctive natural resource. The trees and tree communities of the city augment the economic base through agricultural production, encouragement of tourism and enhancement of the living environment. These resources are a major component of both the highly localized and area-wide environment. 
B.  The following environmental consequences are among those which could result from the indiscriminate removal or destruction of trees and tree communities in the city: 
1.  Modification of microclimates; 
2.  Change or elimination of animal habitat, possibly including habitats of endangered species; 
3.  Change in soil conditions, resulting in modified biological activity and erosion of soils; 
4.  Creation of increased susceptibility of flood hazards; 
5.  Increased risk of landslides; 
6.  Increased cost of construction and maintenance of drainage systems through increased flow and diversion of surface waters; 
7.  Degradation of the human habitat; 
8.  Loss of environmental benefits of trees in neighborhoods, such as noise reduction, oxygen replacement, carbon dioxide reduction, interception of particulates and aesthetic qualities; and/or 
9.  Potential for irreparable wind damage to adjacent trees. 
C.  The preservation and replacement of significant tree communities on private and public property is necessary to protect the natural beauty of the area, protect property values, and prevent undesirable changes in the environment. 
D.  It is necessary to enact the ordinance codified in this chapter for the reasons stated in this section and to promote the public health, safety, general welfare and prosperity of the city, while respecting and recognizing individual rights to develop, maintain and enjoy private property to the fullest possible extent, consistent with the public interest, convenience and necessity. 
(Ord. No. 2205 N.S., § 1, 6-15-2016)  
12.32.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
A.  "City" means the city of Morgan Hill, California, acting by and through its authorized representatives. 
B.  "Community development director" means the community development director of the city, including his or her authorized or appointed representatives. 
C.  "Community of trees" means a group of trees of any size which are ecologically or aesthetically related to each other such that loss of several of them would cause a significant ecological, aesthetic, or environmental impact in the immediate area. 
D.  "Person" means an individual, public agency, including the city and its departments, firms, associations, and corporations, and their employees, agents, or representatives. 
E.  "Private property" means all property not owned by the city or any other public agency. 
F.  "Public property" means all property owned by the city, and any other city, county, city and county, special district, or other public agency in the incorporated area of the city. 
G.  "Ordinance Sized Tree" means any live woody plant rising above the ground with a single stem or trunk of a circumference of forty inches or more for nonindigenous species and eighteen inches or more for indigenous species measured at four and one-half feet vertically above the ground or immediately below the lowest branch, whichever is lower, and having the inherent capacity of naturally producing one main axis continuing to grow more vigorously than the lateral axes. All commercial tree farms, nonindigenous tree species in residential zones and orchards (including individual fruit trees) are exempted from the definition of tree for the purpose of this chapter. 
H.  "Street Tree" is a tree, of any size, situated within the public street right-of-way or publicly accessible private street (e.g., trees within a landscape park strip), or within five feet of a publicly accessible sidewalk adjacent to a public or private street in the case of a street without a landscape park strip. 
I.  "Indigenous tree" means any tree which is native to the Morgan Hill region. Such trees include, oaks (all types), California Bays, Madrones, Sycamore, and Alder. 
(Ord. No. 2205 N.S., § 1, 6-15-2016)  
12.32.030 - Permit—Required. 
It is unlawful for any person to cut down, remove, poison, or otherwise kill or destroy, or cause to be removed, any ordinance sized tree, street tree, or a community of trees on any city or private property without first securing a permit as provided in this chapter; provided, however, that a permit shall not be required for the following: 
A.  Developments which have been reviewed and approved by the planning commission or community development director and the tree removal conforms with the landscape plans of those developments. 
B.  Commercial tree farms. 
C.  Non-indigenous trees within a single-family residential zoning district that do not qualify as street trees. 
A permit shall otherwise be required for the removal of or pruning of which would reduce the canopy area by more than twenty-five percent of any trees as defined in subsection G. of Section 12.32.020 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2205 N.S., § 1, 6-15-2016)  
12.32.040 - Permit—Application. 
Any person desiring to cut down, remove, destroy, or cause to be removed any tree regulated in this chapter shall apply to the community development department for a tree cutting permit on forms provided by the department. The application shall be accompanied by such drawings, written material, photographs, and other information as are necessary to provide necessary data concerning trees within the affected area and which shall include: 
A.  The diameter and height of the tree; 
B.  The type of trees (e.g. coniferous, evergreen hardwood and deciduous hardwood); 
C.  A map or accurate sketch of location and trees proposed to be cut (showing other significant trees, shrubs, buildings or proposed buildings; photographs may be used to show the area); 
D.  Method for marking the tree proposed to be cut down, removed, or destroyed; 
E.  Description of method to be used in removing the tree; 
F.  Description of tree planting or replacement program; 
G.  Reasons for proposing removal of the tree; 
H.  Address where tree is located; 
I.  General health of tree to be cut down or removed; and 
J.  Other pertinent information which the community development director may require. 
(Ord. No. 2205 N.S., § 1, 6-15-2016)  
12.32.050 - Permit—Public notice procedures. 
Within five days after submission of a completed application, the applicant shall cause a notice of application on a form provided by the community development department to be posted in at least two conspicuous locations clearly visible to the public on or close to the property affected, indicating the date of the application, a brief description thereof, identification of the subject property, the address to which comments may be directed and from which further information may be obtained, and the final date for receipt of comments. No action shall be taken upon any application until the applicant has filed an affidavit that such posting has been done. 
(Ord. No. 2205 N.S., § 1, 6-15-2016)  
12.32.060 - Permit—Review and action. 
The community development director or his or her designee shall review the application and, if necessary, inspect the site, and shall determine on the basis of the information provided, the site inspection, and the criteria contained in this chapter whether to grant, grant with conditions, or deny the permit. Such action shall be taken within twenty days after receipt of the affidavit referred to in the preceding section. Upon taking action, the community development director or his or her designee shall provide the applicant with a written statement indicating the action taken, any conditions imposed, and the findings made in support thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2205 N.S., § 1, 6-15-2016)  
12.32.070 - Permit—Approval—Criteria. 
The community development director or any other person or body charged with determining whether to grant, conditionally grant, or deny a tree cutting permit may approve a permit only if one or more of the following findings are made: 
A.  Removal of the tree is warranted because the tree meets one of the following conditions: 
1.  Is diseased as demonstrated in a report provided by a qualified arborist or tree surgeon documenting the extent and nature of the disease and how the diseased conditions warrants the trees removal, 
2.  Could adversely affect the general public health and safety, 
3.  Could cause substantial damage, 
4.  Is a public nuisance, 
5.  Is in danger of falling, 
6.  Is too closely located to existing structures, 
7.  All practical design alternatives for site layout have been exhausted without being able to design around the tree(s), etc. 
8.  Interferes with utility service, 
9.  Acts as a host for a plant which is parasitic to another species of tree which is in danger of being infested or exterminated by the parasite, 
10.  Is a substantial fire hazard, 
11.  Is necessary for the continuing agricultural use of the property, or 
12.  Is a street tree that is not identified on a list of suitable street trees maintained by the community development director. 
B.  The required action is necessary: 
1.  To utilize the property in a manner which is of greater public value than any environmental degradation caused by the action, or 
2.  To allow reasonable economic or other enjoyment of the property. 
C.  The tree will be replaced by plantings approved by the community development director, unless special conditions indicate otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2205 N.S., § 1, 6-15-2016)  
12.32.080 - Permit—Approval—Conditions. 
In granting any permit as provided in this chapter, the community development director, planning commission, or city council may attach reasonable conditions to insure compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter including, but not limited to,: 
A.  Replacement of trees removed with plantings of trees acceptable to the community development director. In all cases, native trees shall be planted to replace native trees removed unless practical reasons preclude this option; 
B.  Use of measures to effect erosion control, soil and water retention and diversion or control of increased flow of surface waters; 
C.  Use of measures to insure that the contemplated action will not have adverse environmental effects relating to shade, noise buffers, protection from wind, air pollution and historic features; and/or 
D.  Posting of a bond to insure maintenance of substitute landscaping pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 18.74 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2205 N.S., § 1, 6-15-2016)  
12.32.090 - Application constitutes permission to enter property. 
Filing of an application for a tree cutting permit shall constitute a grant of permission for city personnel concerned with administering this part to enter the subject permit area during normal working hours from the date of application to the completion of any approved action for the purpose of inspecting the area for compliance with the provisions of this chapter and applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2205 N.S., § 1, 6-15-2016)  
12.32.100 - Inspection—Notification of violations. 
(Ord. No. 2205 N.S., § 1, 6-15-2016) 
The community development department may cause sufficient inspections to be made of the permit area to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the requirements of any applicable law. Upon completion of any inspection, the permittee shall be given a written notice of any violations observed at the time of inspection for correction thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2205 N.S., § 1, 6-15-2016)  
12.32.110 - Commencement of work—Time limitations. 
If work authorized by an approved permit is not commenced within a period of one (1) year from the date of approval, the permit shall be considered void. 
(Ord. No. 2205 N.S., § 1, 6-15-2016)  
12.32.120 - Emergencies. 
In case of emergency caused by the hazardous or dangerous condition of a tree and requiring immediate action for the safety of life or property, such necessary action may be taken to remove the tree or otherwise reduce or eliminate the hazard without complying with the other provisions of this chapter, except that the person responsible for the cutting or removal of the tree shall report such action to the community development director within five working days thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2205 N.S., § 1, 6-15-2016)  
12.32.130 - Appeal procedures. 
The applicant or any other person who is aggrieved by the issuance or nonissuance of the permit or any conditions thereof may appeal in the manner set forth in this section. A statement by the appellant shall be required indicating how the appellant is aggrieved or adversely affected by the decision. At the time the appeal is heard, the planning commission shall rule upon the appellant's standing as an aggrieved party. If the planning commission rules that the appellant is not aggrieved, all further proceedings shall be stayed except that the appellant may appeal the planning commission decision on standing to the city council as provided in this chapter. 
A.  Permits considered and acted upon by the community development director may be appealed to the planning commission by filing a written notice of appeal with the secretary of the planning commission within ten days of the issuance or denial of the permit. The planning commission shall hear such appeal within thirty days of the date of filing of the written protest or at a date selected by mutual consent of the appellant and the planning commission. The planning commission shall render a decision on the appeal within fifteen days of the public hearing. The community development director shall notify the affected parties of the action. 
B.  Permits considered and acted upon by the planning commission may be appealed to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the secretary of the planning commission within ten days from the decision of the planning commission. The city council shall hear such appeal within sixty days or at a date selected by mutual consent of the appellant and the city council and render a decision within fifteen days following such hearing. The decision of the city council shall be final. The action taken by the city council shall be reported to the affected parties. 
(Ord. No. 2205 N.S., § 1, 6-15-2016)  
12.32.140 - Removal or trimming without a permit unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any property owner, lessee, his or her agent, or representative to engage in tree cutting or removal or to conspire with another to engage in tree cutting or removal without a valid tree cutting permit. In addition, such party shall be liable to the city for a civil penalty in the amount of the cost of replacing the removed tree with a new tree as comparable to the removed tree as is reasonably feasible plus all attorney's fees. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 47, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 47, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 12.32.140 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 12.32.140 pertained to removal or trimming without a permit deemed a misdemeanor and derived from Ord. No. 2205 N.S., § 1, adopted June 15, 2016.  
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 13.04 - WATER SYSTEM 
Sections: 
 
13.04.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  "Person" means any natural person or persons, corporation, public or private entity, governmental agency or institution, or any other user of water provided by the city. 
B.  "Landscape irrigation system" means an irrigation system with pipes, hoses, spray heads, or sprinkling devices that are operated by hand or through an automated system. 
C.  "Single pass cooling systems" means equipment where water is circulated only once to cool equipment before being disposed. 
D.  "Potable water" means water which is suitable for drinking. 
E.  "Recycled water" means the reclamation and reuse of non-potable water for beneficial use as defined in Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations. 
F.  "Station" means an area of irrigated landscape controlled by a single irrigation valve. 
G.  "Superintendent" means the superintendent of water of the city, and any act in this chapter required or authorized to be done by the superintendent, may be done on behalf of the superintendent by an authorized officer or employee of the water department. 
(Ord. 30 N.S. §§ 2.01, 2.02, 1948) 
(Ord. No. 1932 N.S., § 4, 5-27-2009)  
13.04.020 - Connection—Required. 
Each building fronting upon a street and supplied with water by the water department which has a meter must have a direct service connection with the street main except that in cases where two or more such buildings, owned by the same person, are built upon a lot having a frontage of thirty feet, or less, such buildings may be served by one service pipe and one meter. 
(Ord. 30 N.S. § 4.05, 1948)  
13.04.030 - Application—Contents. 
Any person desiring to have premises connected with the water supply system of the city shall give a description of lot, block and addition or official house number on the premises on which water is desired, and shall make application therefor upon a printed form to be furnished for that purpose, which application shall contain the description of the premises where such water is desired, shall give the size of service pipe, and shall be signed by the owner of the premises to be served or his duly authorized agent, and shall be filed in the office of the superintendent, and at the time of filing such application, the applicant shall pay to the city water department and take its receipt therefor, the fees for installation of water service provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 30 N.S. § 2.03, 1948)  
13.04.040 - Application—Contract with city. 
A.  The application provided in Section 13.04.030 of this chapter shall contain a contract on the part of the person making the same, to pay for the water applied for at the rates in effect, and shall reserve to the city the right to charge and collect the rates and enforce the penalties provided for in this chapter, in the manner provided in this chapter, to change the rates at any time by ordinance, and shall specify that such contract is subject to all the provisions of this chapter and of any ordinance of the city relating to the subject, hereafter passed, and shall provide that the city shall not be held responsible for any damage by water or other cause resulting from defective plumbing or appliances on the premises supplied with water, installed by the owner or occupant of such premises, and that the fact that the agents of the city have inspected the plumbing and appliances shall not be pleaded as a basis of recovery in case of damage to the premises from defective plumbing or appliances installed by the owner or occupant of such premises, and shall provide that in case the supply shall be interrupted or fail by reason of accident or any other cause whatsoever, the city shall not be liable for damages for such interruption or failure, nor shall such failures or interruptions for any reasonable period of time be held to constitute a breach of contract on the part of the city or in any way relieve the consumer from performing the obligations of his contract. 
B.  All contacts shall take effect from the day they are signed and rates shall be charged from the date the premises are connected with the city's water supply. 
(Ord. 30 N.S. §§ 2.04, 2.05, 1948)  
13.04.050 - Connection with existing main. 
Upon the presentation at the office of the water department of the receipt for the installation fees and execution of the contract provided for in this chapter, the superintendent shall cause the premises described in the application, if the same abut upon a street upon which there is a city water main, to be connected with the city's water main by a service pipe extended at right angles from the main to the curbline and including a stopcock placed within the lines of the street curb, which service pipe and stopcock shall thereafter be maintained by and kept within the exclusive control of the city. In cases of application for water service on premises not abutting upon a street upon which there is a city water main, the city will lay its service pipe from the main toward the premises for a distance equal to the distance from the main to the curbline, such distance in no case to exceed forty feet, and permit connection therewith by means of a union and pipes laid at the expense of any maintained by the owner of the service, or may in the discretion of the superintendent, upon the payment of the actual cost thereof, extend the service to the premises of the applicant along and beneath any public street or avenue of the city, but not otherwise. 
(Ord. 30 N.S. § 3.01, 1948)  
13.04.060 - Connection with nonexisting main. 
Where there is a water main in front of any premises, every house supplied by city water must install its own separate service connection with the city main, and the premises so supplied will not be allowed to supply water to any other premises, except temporarily where there are no mains in the street; provided, that such restrictions shall not apply to services already installed unless in the judgment of the superintendent for the good of the service or to settle disputes, it is found necessary to enforce such provisions as to connections already made. 
(Ord. 30 N.S. § 3.02, 1948)  
13.04.070 - Service charge for new accounts. 
A nonrefundable service charge of five dollars shall be made each time a new water account is opened, or for each transfer of an old account to a new occupant or user. The charge shall be paid by the new user whether or not the water is actually turned off. This charge shall apply to all types of occupancies, and shall apply to both owners and lessees. The five-dollar service charge shall also be applicable if an employee of the city must go out to collect money due or turn off water for accounts delinquent more than thirty days. 
(Ord. 396 N.S. § A (part), 1975)  
13.04.080 - Deposit. 
A.  A returnable deposit as listed in this subsection shall be paid by any water customer upon opening or transferring a water account to his name: 
1.  Single-family and multifamily with separate meters, twenty dollars; 
2.  Commercial, thirty dollars; 
3.  Apartments, motels, mobile home parks and any other multi-residential use serviced by a single meter, ten dollars. 
B.  Upon closing of an account and paying all charges owed the city for sewer, water and garbage services, the deposit shall be returned upon request of the depositor or his duly authorized agent upon presentation of the receipt for such deposit; provided, however, that any such deposit which has not been claimed or requested to be refunded for a period of six months from the date of closing the account shall be forfeited to the city and transferred by the city to its general water fund. 
(Ord. 396 N.S. § A (part), 1975)  
13.04.090 - New accounts and deposits—Set by council resolution. 
Any future changes for all water rates and charges set forth in this chapter can be made by a written resolution duly adopted by the city council and shall have the same effect as a change by ordinance. 
(Ord. 396 N.S. § A (part), 1975)  
13.04.100 - Installation—Size specifications. 
No service connection less than three-fourths-inch in size shall be installed. 
(Ord. 30 N.S. § 4.01, 1948)  
13.04.110 - Installation—Fees. 
The fees for the installation of water services as provided in this chapter shall be as follows: 
A.  For three-fourth-inch service, fifteen dollars; 
B.  For one-inch service, twenty dollars; 
C.  For one and one-half-inch service, thirty dollars; 
D.  For two-inch service, forty dollars. 
(Ord. 30 N.S. § 4.02, 1948)  
13.04.120 - Installation—Excavation of streets. 
For sizes larger than two-inch, or where it becomes necessary to open paved street, the actual cost of labor and material in laying such a service and replacing the pavement shall be charged plus ten percent overhead. In such cases the cost of materials and labor shall be estimated by the superintendent and the estimated cost shall be paid to the city water department by the person applying for such installation before the work of connecting the main with the property is begun; provided, that whenever the estimated cost is not sufficient to cover the total expense for labor and material the deficit shall be charged to the property for which such installation was made and to the owner thereof; provided further, that any excess payment shall be returned to the person applying for the installation. 
(Ord. 30 N.S. § 4.03, 1948)  
13.04.130 - Meters—Required—Installation. 
A.  All customers of the municipal water supply system must have a water meter properly installed to accurately measure the amount of water consumed in any period of time. The city shall furnish the required meters and installation shall be made by employees of the city; provided, however, that the reasonable cost of the meter and installation shall be charged to the customer. 
B.  For the purposes of this section, "all customers" is defined to include both residential and commercial customers. 
1.  Residential customers include any and all residential developments including, but not limited to, single family homes, townhomes, condominiums, mobile home parks, each unit of multiunit residential developments, and each residential unit of mixed-use developments. 
2.  Commercial customers include any single nonresidential building, any landscape only account, and any segment or portion of a nonresidential building that can be individually owned. 
3.  The following types of customers are exempt from the requirements of this section if they have already been constructed or have received a building permit prior to June 1, 2005: Townhomes, condominiums, mobile home parks, each unit of multiunit residential developments, each unit of mixed-use developments, and any segment or portion of a nonresidential building that can be individually owned. 
C.  The owner of a multiunit residential development or a mixed-use development that includes habitable dwellings, may, upon compliance with the following, install separate submeters to each residential unit in lieu of installing separate meters directly to the municipal water system. 
1.  The owner must obtain a permit from the public works department for the submeter system. 
2.  Any submeters shall accurately and completely measure all water consumed from the municipal water system. 
3.  The owner shall agree to charge the tenant of each unit a water utility charge strictly based on the consumption by the occupants of the unit. 
4.  Installation, maintenance and monitoring of the submeter system shall be the responsibility of the owner, and in no circumstances shall the city be responsible therefore. 
5.  If any water conservation plan is implemented or imposed by the city, the owner shall be responsible for complying with any reductions required by such plan as measured by consumption on the meter(s) directly connected to the municipal water system. 
Failure to abide by the above conditions, and/or any other conditions the city may impose, may result in revocation of any permit issued and/or other action as authorized by law. 
(Ord. 1722 N.S. § 1, 2005: Ord. 338 N.S. § A (part), 1973)  
13.04.140 - Meters—Fees—Method of payment. 
A.  The total charge or cost for installing a three-quarter-inch meter shall be seventy-two dollars, if paid in cash and eighty dollars, if paid in installments. 
B.  The cost for installing a one-inch meter shall be one hundred five dollars, if paid in cash and one hundred fifteen dollars, if paid in installments. 
C.  Payment in full of the cost within thirty days of installation shall be considered a cash payment and any payment made beyond the thirty-day period shall be considered an installment payment at the installment rate set forth in this section. For customers electing to pay in installments, the charge shall be divided into twelve equal monthly installments and shall be paid with the monthly or bimonthly water bill as the customer is usually billed. 
(Ord. 338 N.S. § A (part), 1973)  
13.04.150 - Meters—Failure to install. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  If any customer fails to pay the charges for meter installation or any installment thereof when due, as set forth in this chapter, the superintendent shall give the customer ten days written notice of the city's intent to cut off water service, and at the end thereof, if the charges remain unpaid and any objections, in writing, claiming overcharges or charges for services not rendered have been overruled by the director of finance or if no objections have been received, the superintendent shall cut off the water service to that customer. Before reconnecting to the water system, the customer shall pay a penalty of ten dollars in addition to all other charges due the city for water services. The notice required by this subsection shall be provided by mailing the notice by certified mail to the customer's service address as shown on the customer records of the city. 
(Ord. 788 N.S. § 2, 1986: Ord. 338 N.S. § A (part), 1973) 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 48, 5-2-2018)  
13.04.160 - Meters—Effective date of required installation. 
Sections 13.04.130, 13.04.140 and 13.04.150 of this chapter shall go into effect thirty days after February 21, 1973, the date of final passage of the ordinance codified therein, and all persons and customers not having metered water service shall be required to accept a meter installation as soon as the city can do the work. With the consent of the customer, installation of the meter may be made prior to thirty days after final passage. 
(Ord. 338 N.S. § A (part), 1973)  
13.04.170 - Meters—Accuracy and testing procedures. 
A.  Where the accuracy of record of water meter is questioned, it shall be removed at the consumer's request and shall in his presence be tested in the shops of the water department by means of the apparatus there provided, and a report thereon duly made. Both parties to the test must accept the findings so made. If the test discloses an error against the consumer of more than three percent of the meter's registry, the excess of the consumption on the three previous readings shall be credited to the consumer's meter account, and the water department will bear the entire expense of the test, and the deposit required by this chapter shall be returned. On the other hand, where no such error is found, the person who has requested the test shall pay the charge fixed for such test. 
B.  Before making a test of any meter the person requesting such a test, shall at the time of filing his request with the superintendent, make a deposit with the city water department of the amount charged for such a test, subject to the condition herein stated, which charges are fixed as follows: 
1.  For testing one-half-inch meters, one dollar; 2. For three-quarter-inch meters, one dollar; 
3.  For testing one-inch meters, one dollar fifty cents; 
4.  For testing one and one-half-inch meters, one dollar fifty cents; 
5.  For testing two-inch meters, two dollars; 
6.  For testing three-inch meters, three dollars; 
7.  For testing four-inch meters, four dollars; 
8.  For testing six-inch meters, five dollars. 
C.  No meter shall be removed, or in any way disturbed, nor the seal broken, except in the presence of or under the direction of the superintendent. 
(Ord. 30 N.S. § 4.16, 1948)  
13.04.180 - Water commodity and service rates—Residential and nonresidential. 
The following water rates shall be effective with the August 1997 service: 
Monthly Service Charges: 
Meter Size 	Inside City 	Outside City 
5/8 ? 	$4.90 	$7.60 
¾? 	$4.90 	$7.60 
1? 	$4.90 	$7.60 
1 ½? 	$8.15 	$12.65 
2? 	$13.10 	$20.30 
3? 	$26.15 	$40.55 
4? 	$42.35 	$65.65 
6? 	$65.15 	$101.00 
8? 	$97.75 	$151.50 
10? 	$130.35 	$202.05 
Discounts: 
Low Income 	($2.95) 	($2.95) 
Commodity Rates: 
Single-Family Tier Rates (per Dwelling Unit) 
1—10 HCF 	$0.95/HCF 	$1.47/HCF 
11—30 HCF 	$1.90/HCF 	$2.95/HCF 
30+ HCF 	$2.85/HCF 	$4.42/HCF 
Multifamily Tier Rates (per Dwelling Unit) 
1/8 HCF 	$0.95/HCF 	$1.47/HCF 
9—16 HCF 	$1.90/HCF 	$2.95/HCF 
17+ HCF 	$2.85/HCF 	$4.42/HCF 
Nonresidential Uniform Rate 
All Use 	$1.55/HCF 	$2.40/HCF 
 
(Ord. 1344 N.S., 1997)  
13.04.190 - Water rates—Outside city limits. 
A.  Unless otherwise set forth in this chapter, the water rates to be charged and collected monthly from consumers of water where the service connection is located outside the city limits and who are supplied by the municipal water works of the city, are fixed, determined and established to be exactly one hundred sixty-five percent times the amounts charged for users whose connection is located inside the city limits. Further provided, however, that the senior rate shall not be applicable to users outside the city. 
B.  Effective July 1, 1993 and each July 1st thereafter until July 1, 2018, all rates set forth in this section shall decrease by exactly two percent, unless the council determines prior to July 1st that the decrease should be deferred, or a higher rate of decrease, or a lower rate of decrease is necessary. 
(Ord. 1103 N.S. § 2, 1992: Ord. 933 N.S. § 1, 1989; Ord. 172 N.S. § A (part), 1964: Ord. 30 N.S. § 4.29, 1948)  
13.04.200 - Water rates—Adjustment and rounding. 
To facilitate the computation of the monthly water charge, the rate charged any consumer may be adjusted to the nearest five cents and a table may be adopted carrying into effect the rates hereinabove set forth to the nearest five cents. 
(Ord. 172 N.S. § B, 1964)  
13.04.210 - Water rates—Amended by council resolution. 
The city council declares its intent to make any future changes in the water rates established in this chapter by setting forth the changes in a resolution duly adopted, and the adoption of such a resolution shall have the same force and effect as though the changes had been made by the adoption of an ordinance. 
(Ord. 172 N.S. § C, 1964)  
13.04.220 - Fire protection and fire line rates—Schedule. 
Service for fire protection only must be fitted with such fixtures as are needed for fire protection and entirely disconnected from those used for other purposes. Persons having such service shall be charged according to the following rates: 
A.  Cities rates: 
1.  For one-inch pipe, seventy-five cents per month; 
2.  For one and one-half-inch pipe, one dollar per month; 
3.  For two-inch pipe, one dollar seventy-five cents per month; 
4.  For three-inch pipe, three dollars per month; 
5.  For four-inch pipe, four dollars per month; 
6.  For six-inch pipe, six dollars per month. 
B.  In no case shall any tap be made upon any pipe installed and used for fire service purposes only, or any tank connected therewith, nor shall the use of any water be permitted through any fire service nor through any pipes, tank or other fixture therewith connected for any purposes except the extinguishing of fire on the premises. 
(Ord. 30 N.S. § 4.11, 1948)  
13.04.230 - Fire protection and fire line rates—Exemptions. 
No charge will be made for water used through fire protection service pipes or general service pipes in extinguishing fire if the owner or occupant of the premises where such fire occurs gives written notice to the office of the superintendent within thirty days from the time of such fire. 
(Ord. 30 N.S. § 4.12, 1948)  
13.04.240 - Payment of rates. 
Failure to receive mail will not be recognized as a valid excuse for failure to pay water rates when due. Change in occupancy of property supplied with the city water and changes in mailing addresses of consumers of city water must be filed in writing at the office of the superintendent on forms provided for that purpose. The superintendent may require payment in advance or the payment of a deposit for all water to be furnished consumers. 
(Ord. 30 N.S. § 4.18, 1948)  
13.04.250 - Extension of system fees. 
A.  Where the property for which service is applied for is located on a street in which there exists no water main in front of the premises, the water department may estimate the total cost of any extensions, and upon payment by the applicant of the charges estimated, the same may be installed by the water department under the rules as provided in this chapter. 
B.  All water systems connecting with or supplied with water from the water mains of the city, shall be constructed under the supervision and in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the superintendent of the water works and shall become and remain the property of the city. 
C.  A refund upon the cost of any such extension shall be made in accordance with either of the following plans, at the option of the water department: 
1.  Plan 1. Twenty-five percent of the gross receipts derived from such extension will be paid for a period of ten years, payable annually to the person having paid for such extension, but in no event will more than the original cost be refunded. 
2.  Plan 2. The applicant shall pay the whole cost of the extension less one hundred dollars for each service installed at the time of the installation of the extension. Refunds shall thereafter be made to the applicant each time a new service connection shall be installed as follows: 
a.  One hundred dollars for a five-eighths-inch meter; 
b.  One hundred twenty-five dollars for a three-quarter-inch meter; 
c.  One hundred fifty dollars for a one-inch meter; 
d.  Two hundred dollars for a one and one-half-inch meter; 
e.  Three hundred dollars for a two-inch meter; 
f.  Three hundred fifty dollars for a three-inch meter; 
g.  Four hundred fifty dollars for a four-inch meter; 
h.  Six hundred dollars for a six-inch meter. 
D.  When fifty percent of the frontage upon such extension has been connected therewith, the balance of the deposit shall be refunded to the applicant but no refund shall be made subsequent to ten years after the completion of the installation of the extension main, and in no event will more than the original cost be refunded. 
(Ord. 30 N.S. § 4.04, 1948)  
13.04.260 - Maintenance of service. 
All meters, unless otherwise authorized by the superintendent, shall be and remain the property of the city and will not be removed unless the use of water on the premises is to be entirely stopped or the service connection discontinued or abandoned. In all cases where meters or meter boxes are lost, injured or broken by carelessness or negligence of owners or occupants of the premises, they shall be replaced or repaired by or under the direction of the superintendent and the cost charged against the owner or occupant, and in the case of nonpayment the water shall be shut off as provided in the Section 13.04.290 of this chapter. In the event of the meter getting out of order or failing to register properly the customer shall be charged on an estimate made by the superintendent of the average monthly consumption during the last three months that the same was in good order or from what he may consider to be the most reliable data at his command. 
(Ord. 30 N.S. § 4.15, 1948)  
13.04.270 - Discontinuance of service. 
Whenever the owner or occupant of any premises connected with the city's water supply system desires to discontinue the use of water he shall make application to have the meter removed from the service. 
(Ord. 30 N.S. § 4.06, 1948)  
13.04.280 - Right of inspection. 
It is unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to give the superintendent and his duly authorized representatives free access at all reasonable hours to all parts of buildings or premises supplied with water from the city's mains for the purpose of inspecting the condition of pipes and fixtures, noting the amount of water used and the manner in which it is used. 
(Ord. 30 N.S. § 4.13, 1948)  
13.04.290 - Unpaid fees and charges—Shutoff notice. 
In case of any violation of this chapter, the superintendent may cause written notice thereof to be served on the owner or occupant responsible for the violation thereof, which notice shall require the payment of any charges unpaid or the compliance with any provisions of this chapter which have been violated, and if such charges are not paid or such provisions complied with within five days from the time of the serving of such notice, the water shall be turned off from such premises and a two-dollar penalty added for such violation. 
(Ord. 30 N.S. § 4.14, 1948)  
13.04.300 - Right to shut off service. 
The city reserves the right at any time to shut off the water supply because of repairs, extensions, nonpayment of rates or any other reason, and the city shall not be responsible for any damage such as bursting of boilers supplied by direct pressure, the breaking of any pipe or fixture, stoppage or interruption of water supply or any other damage resulting from the shutting off of water. 
(Ord. 30 N.S. § 4.09, 1948)  
13.04.310 - Rationing. 
The city water department in cases of emergency whenever the public safety, health or the equitable distribution of water so demands, may change, reduce or limit the time in which the water may be used or discontinue the use of water entirely during the emergency. 
(Ord. 30 N.S. § 4.07, 1948)  
13.04.320 - Use during declared emergency. 
It is unlawful for any person to use any water for irrigation or sprinkling during the process of any fire in the city, unless for the protection of property, and all irrigation and sprinkling shall be immediately stopped when an alarm of fire is sounded in any part of the city, and shall not be begun again until the fire is extinguished. 
(Ord. 30 N.S. § 4.08, 1948)  
13.04.330 - Wasting of water and drought emergencies. 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  The provisions of this chapter apply to any person in the use of any potable water in the city. 
2.  The provisions of this chapter do not apply to uses of water necessary to protect public health and safety or for essential government services, such as police, fire and other similar emergency services. 
3.  The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the use of recycled water, with the exception of subsection (B)(1) of this section. 
4.  The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the use of water by commercial nurseries and commercial growers to sustain plants, trees, shrubs, crops or other vegetation intended for commercial sale, to the use of water in a community garden providing garden plots to the public, or to home fruit and vegetable gardens less than two hundred square feet. 
5.  This chapter is intended solely to further the conservation of water. It is not intended to implement nor supersede any provision of federal, State, or local statutes, ordinances, or regulations relating to protection of water quality or control of drainage or runoff. 
B.  Prohibition Against Waste. The following water conservation requirements are effective at all times and are permanent. Violations of this section will be considered waste and an unreasonable use of water. 
1.  Limits on Watering Hours. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is prohibited between the hours of nine a.m. and seven p.m. Pacific Standard/Daylight Savings Time on any day, except by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system. Watering or irrigating within forty-eight hours after one quarter inch or more of precipitation is received is prohibited. 
2.  Limit on Watering Duration. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water using a landscape irrigation system or a watering device that is not continuously attended is limited to no more than fifteen minutes watering per day per station/valve/zone. This subsection does not apply to landscape irrigation stations/valves/zones that exclusively use drip type irrigation systems, soaker hoses, bubblers, or high efficiency sprinkler nozzles that have a precipitation rate of less than one inch per hour. However, at no time can any irrigation system be operated long enough to cause runoff. 
3.  Limit on Watering Days. During the months of April through October, watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to three days per week on a schedule established and posted by the city. During the months of November through March, watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to no more than one day per week on a schedule established and posted by the city. This provision does not apply to the following uses of water: 
a.  To landscape irrigation zones that exclusively use very low flow drip type irrigation systems when no emitter produces more than two gallons of water per hour; 
b.  To watering or irrigating by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system; 
c.  To landscape irrigation zones that are controlled by an activated weather-based irrigation controller; 
d.  To watering or irrigating a newly installed or significantly rehabilitated landscape for the first sixty days after the first plant is placed in the ground. For the purposes of this section, a significantly rehabilitated landscape is a landscape in which twenty-five percent or more of a property's landscape is replaced. 
4.  No Excessive Water Flow or Runoff. Watering or irrigating of any lawn, landscape or other vegetated area in a manner that causes or allows excessive water flow or runoff onto an adjoining sidewalk, driveway, street, alley, gutter or ditch is prohibited. 
5.  No Washing Down Hard or Paved Surfaces. Washing down hard or paved surfaces, including but not limited to sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios or alleys, is prohibited except when necessary to alleviate safety or sanitary hazards, and then only by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off device, a low-volume, high-pressure cleaning machine equipped to recycle any water used, or a low-volume high-pressure water broom. Washing down structures, fences, and hard surfaces expressly for the purposes of preparing a surface for the application of a surface coating is not prohibited provided it does not occur more than one time in any twelve-month period. 
6.  Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks or Malfunctions. Excessive use, loss or escape of water through breaks, leaks or other malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or distribution system for any period of time after such escape of water should have reasonably been discovered and corrected and in no event more than ten days of receiving written notice from the city, is prohibited. 
7.  Recirculating Water Required for Water Fountains and Decorative Water Features. Operating a water fountain or other decorative water feature that does not use recirculated water is prohibited. 
8.  Limits on Washing Vehicles. Using water to wash or clean a vehicle, including but not limited to any automobile, truck, van, bus, motorcycle, boat or trailer, whether motorized or not is prohibited, except by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device. This subsection does not apply to any commercial car washing facility that incorporates a recycled water system in its operation. 
9.  Drinking Water Served Upon Request Only. Eating or drinking establishments, including but not limited to a restaurant, hotel, cafe, cafeteria, bar, or other public place where food or drinks are sold, served, or offered for sale, are prohibited from providing drinking water to any person unless expressly requested. 
10.  Commercial Lodging Establishments Must Provide Guests Option to Decline Daily Linen Services. Hotels, motels and other commercial lodging establishments must provide customers the option of not having towels and linen laundered daily. Commercial lodging establishments must prominently display notice of this option in each bathroom using clear and easily understood language. 
11.  No Installation of Single Pass Cooling Systems. Installation of single pass cooling systems is prohibited in buildings requesting new water service. 
12.  No Installation of Nonrecirculating in Commercial Car Wash and Laundry Systems. Installation of nonrecirculating water systems is prohibited in new commercial conveyor car wash and new commercial laundry systems. 
13.  Restaurants Required to Use Water Conserving Dish Wash Spray Valves. Food preparation establishments, such as restaurants or cafes, are prohibited from using non-water conserving dish wash spray valves. 
14.  Commercial Car Wash Systems. Within one year of passage of this ordinance, all commercial conveyor car wash systems must have installed operational re-circulating water systems, or must have secured a waiver of this requirement from the city. 
15.  Construction Activities. Use of potable water for construction site dust control, compaction, and other site activities suitable for nonpotable water is prohibited if recycled water is available within five miles of the construction site. 
16.  Plumbing System Testing. Use of potable water for plumbing system testing is prohibited unless required by law or alternative testing procedures are determined to be unsuitable by city inspection staff. 
17.  Pool Covers. Constructing a pool without the inclusion of a pool cover is prohibited. All contracts for the construction of a new pool entered into after September 2, 2015 shall include the provision of a pool cover. 
C.  Level 1 Water Supply Shortage (eleven-percent to twenty-percent reduction). A level 1 water supply shortage exists when the city council determines, in its sole discretion, that due to drought, other water supply conditions, or as mandated by the State of California, a water supply shortage or threatened shortage exists and a eleven-percent to twenty-percent consumer demand reduction is necessary to make more efficient use of water and appropriately respond to existing water conditions. Upon the declaration by the city of a level 1 water supply shortage condition, the following mandatory water conservation requirements, in addition to the prohibited uses of water set forth in subsection B of this section, shall apply during such time that the level 1 water supply shortage is in effect. 
1.  Limits on Watering Days. During the months of April through October, watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to three days per week on a schedule established and posted by the city. During the months of November through March, watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to no more than one day per week on a schedule established and posted by the city. This provision does not apply to the following uses of water: 
a.  To landscape irrigation zones that exclusively use very low flow drip type irrigation systems when no emitter produces more than two gallons of water per hour; 
b.  To watering or irrigating by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system. 
2.  Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks or Malfunctions. All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or distribution system must be repaired within seventy-two hours of notification by the city unless other arrangements are made with the city. 
D.  Level 2 Water Supply Shortage (twenty-one-percent to forty-percent reduction). A level 2 water supply shortage exists when the city council declares, in its sole discretion, that due to drought, other water supply conditions, or as mandated by the State of California, a water supply shortage or threatened shortage exists and a twenty-one-percent to forty-percent consumer demand reduction is necessary to make more efficient use of water and appropriately respond to existing water conditions. Upon the declaration of a level 2 water supply shortage condition, the following mandatory water conservation requirements, in addition to the prohibited uses of water set forth in subsections B and C of this section, shall apply during such time that the level 1 water supply shortage is in effect. 
1.  Watering Days. During the months of April through October, watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to two days per week (as necessary to achieve reductions as determined in the discretion of the city manager) on a schedule established and posted by the city. During the months of November through March, watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to no more than one day per week on a schedule established and posted by the city. This provision does not apply to landscape irrigation zones that exclusively use very low flow drip type irrigation systems when no emitter produces more than two gallons of water per hour. This provision also does not apply to watering or irrigating by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system. 
2.  Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks or Malfunctions. All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or distribution system must be repaired within forty-eight hours of notification by the city unless other arrangements are made with the city. 
3.  Limits on Filling Ornamental Lakes or Ponds. Filling or refilling ornamental lakes or ponds with potable water is prohibited, except to the extent needed to sustain aquatic life, provided that such animals are of significant value and have been actively managed within the water feature prior to declaration of a supply shortage level under this section. 
4.  Limits on Washing Vehicles. Using potable water to wash or clean a vehicle, including but not limited to, any automobile, truck, van, bus, , boat or trailer, whether motorized or not, is prohibited except at a commercial car washing facility that utilizes a recirculating water system to capture or reuse water. This provision does not apply to bicycles and motorcycles. The use of potable water to clean the windshield, windows, or mirrors of a vehicle by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container is not prohibited. 
5.  Recirculating Water Required for Water Slides and Water Play Features. Operating a water slide or other water play feature that does not use recirculated water is prohibited. 
6.  Pool covering. Pools constructed after September 2, 2015 shall be covered at all times except when being actively used for recreational purposes or serviced. 
E.  Level 3 Water Supply Shortage—Emergency Condition (Greater than forty-percent reduction). A level 3 water supply shortage shall be referred to as a water shortage emergency. A level 3 condition exists when the city council declares, in its sole discretion or as mandated by the State of California, a water shortage emergency and notifies its residents and businesses that a greater than forty percent reduction in consumer demand is necessary to maintain sufficient water supplies for public health and safety, pursuant to Water Code Section 350 et seq. Upon the declaration of a level 3 water supply shortage condition, the following mandatory water conservation requirements, in addition to the prohibited uses of water set forth in subsections B, C and D of this section, shall apply during such time that the level 3 water supply shortage is in effect. 
1.  No Watering or Irrigating. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is prohibited. This restriction does not apply to the following categories of use, unless the city has determined that recycled water is available and may be applied to the use: 
a.  Maintenance of vegetation, excluding lawns, that is watered using a hand-held bucket or similar container, hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device; 
b.  Maintenance of existing landscape necessary for fire protection; 
c.  Maintenance of existing landscape for soil erosion control; 
d.  Maintenance of plant materials identified to be rare or essential to the well-being of protected species; 
e.  Maintenance of landscape within active public parks and playing fields, day care centers, golf course greens, and school grounds, provided that such irrigation does not exceed two days per week for no more than fifteen minutes watering per day per station and is prohibited between the hours of nine a.m. and seven p.m. Pacific Standard/Daylight Savings Time, according to the schedule established in subsection D(1) or this section. 
f.  Actively irrigated environmental mitigation projects. 
2.  Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks or Malfunctions. All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or distribution system must be repaired within twenty-four hours of notification by the city unless other arrangements are made with the city. 
3.  Limits on New Potable Water Service. Upon declaration of a level 3 water shortage emergency condition, the city may limit the issuance of building permits, new potable water services, temporary meters and/or statements of immediate ability to serve or provide potable water service (such as, will-serve letters, certificates, or letters of availability). The city may consider exemptions to the limitation that include, but are not limited to the following circumstances: 
a.  A valid, unexpired building permit has been issued for the project; or 
b.  The project is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare; or 
c.  The applicant provides substantial evidence of an enforceable commitment that water demands for the project will be offset prior to the provision of a new water meter(s) to the satisfaction of the city. 
d.  This provision does not preclude the resetting or turn-on of meters to provide continuation of water service or the restoration of service that has been interrupted for a period of one year or less. 
4.  Limits on Building Permits. Upon declaration of a level 3 water supply shortage emergency condition, the city manager is authorized to implement a program in his or her discretion to limit or withhold the issuance of building permits which require new or expanded water service, except to protect the public health, safety and welfare, or in cases which meet the city's adopted conservation offset requirements. 
5.  Discontinue Service. The city, in its sole discretion, may discontinue service to consumers who willfully violate provisions of this section. 
6.  No New Annexations. Upon the declaration of a level 3 water supply shortage condition, the city may suspend consideration of annexations to its service area. This subsection does not apply to boundary corrections and annexations that will not result in any immediate increased use of water. 
7.  Suspension of Swimming Pool Permit Issuance. The issuance of all permits for the initial construction of all swimming pools shall be suspended. Valid unexpired swimming pool construction permits issued prior to the declaration of level 3 water supply shortage shall remain valid if pool construction has begun prior to the declaration of the level 3 water supply shortage. 
8.  Construction Activities. Use of potable water for construction site dust control, compaction, and other site activities suitable for nonpotable water is prohibited if recycled water is available within forty miles of the construction site. 
F.  Procedures for Determination/Notification of Water Supply Shortage. The existence of level 1, level 2 or level 3 water supply shortage conditions may be declared by resolution of the city council adopted at a regular or special public meeting held in accordance with state law. The mandatory conservation requirements applicable to level 1, level 2 or level 3 conditions will take effect on the tenth day after the date the shortage level is declared. Within five days following the declaration of the shortage level, the city must publish a copy of the resolution in a newspaper used for publication of official notices. 
G.  Hardship Waiver. If, due to unique circumstances, a specific requirement of this chapter would result in undue hardship to a person using water or to property upon which water is used, that is disproportionate to the impacts to water users generally or to similar property or classes of water users, then the person may apply for a waiver to the requirement as provided in this section. 
1.  Application. Application for a waiver must be on a form prescribed by the city manager and accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee in an amount set by city council resolution. 
2.  Supporting Documentation. The application must be accompanied by photographs, maps, drawings, and other information, including a written statement of the applicant. 
3.  Required Findings for Waiver. The waiver may be granted or conditionally granted only upon a written finding of the existence of facts demonstrating an undue hardship to a person using water or to property upon which water is used, that is disproportionate to the impacts to water users generally or to similar property or classes of water use due to specific and unique circumstances of the user or the user's property. An application for a waiver will be denied unless the city manager finds, based on the information provided in the application, supporting documents, or such additional information as may be requested, and on water use information for the property as shown by the records of the city or its agent, all of the following: 
a.  That the waiver does not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other residents and businesses; 
b.  That because of special circumstances applicable to the property or its use, the strict application of this chapter would have a disproportionate impact on the property or use that exceeds the impacts to residents and businesses generally; 
c.  That the authorizing of such waiver will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent properties, and will not materially affect the ability of the city to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and will not be detrimental to the public interest; and 
d.  That the condition or situation of the subject property or the intended use of the property for which the waiver is sought is not common, recurrent or general in nature. 
4.  Approval Authority. The city manager must act upon any completed application no later than ten days after submittal and may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the waiver. The applicant requesting the waiver must be promptly notified in writing of any action taken. Unless specified otherwise at the time a waiver is approved, the waiver will apply to the subject property during the period of the mandatory water supply shortage condition. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. 1895 N.S. § 1, 2008: Ord. 30 N.S. § 4.10, 1948) 
(Ord. No. 1932 N.S., § 5, 5-27-2009; Ord. No. 2159 N.S., § 4, 9-2-2015; Ord. No. 2177 N.S., § 4, 11-18-2015; Ord. No. 2236 N.S., § 4, 6-7-2017)  
13.04.340 - Unlawful connections. 
It is unlawful for any person to make connections with any fixtures or connect any pipe with any water main or water pipe belonging to the municipal water supply system, without first obtaining permission so to do from the superintendent. In addition to all other available remedies, any person in violation of this section shall be held responsible for all past water charges. 
(Ord. 1320 N.S. § 16, 1997: Ord. 30 N.S. § 4.23, 1948) 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 48, 5-2-2018)  
13.04.350 - Reservoir prohibitions. 
It is unlawful for any person to bathe in, fish or throw any substance into any reservoir, or place any foreign substance upon any grounds belonging to, connected with or under the control of the municipal water supply system of the city. 
(Ord. 30 N.S. § 4.19, 1948)  
13.04.360 - Obstructing fire hydrants. 
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct the access to any fire hydrant by placing around or thereon any stone, brick, lumber, dirt or other material or to wilfully or carelessly injure the same, or to open or operate any fire hydrant, or to draw water therefrom, except as provided in Section 13.04.340 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 30 N.S. § 4.22, 1948)  
13.04.370 - Interference with supply system. 
It is unlawful for any person except when duly authorized by the superintendent, or who is a member of the fire department, to open, operate, close, turn on, turn off, interfere with, attach any pipe or hose to or connect anything with any pipe, fire hydrant, stop valve or stopcock belonging to the city. 
(Unnumbered Ord. dated 2/9/60: Ord. 30 N.S. § 4.20, 1948)  
13.04.380 - Interference with property. 
It is unlawful for any person, unless duly authorized by the superintendent, to disturb, interfere with or damage any water main, water pipe, machinery, tools, meters or any other appliances, buildings, improvements, lawns, grass plots, flowers, vines, bushes, trees or other property belonging to, connected with or under the control of the municipal water supply system of the city. 
(Ord. 30 N.S. § 4.21, 1948)  
13.04.390 - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the employees of the police, fire, community development, community services, and engineering and utilities departments to give vigilant aid to the city manager in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, and to this end they shall report all violations thereof which shall come to their knowledge, to the office of the city manager and it shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to report immediately to the city manager in case of fire in premises, having metered service for fire protection purposes that fire has occurred there. 
(Ord. 30 N.S. § 4.24, 1948) 
(Ord. No. 1932 N.S., § 6, 5-27-2009; Ord. No. 2159 N.S., § 5, 9-2-2015; Ord. No. 2236 N.S., § 5, 6-7-2017)  
13.04.400 - Violation. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to violate or cause or the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Any subsequent violations within any consecutive twelve months period shall be subject to installation of a water flow restrictor device of approximately one gallon per minute capacity for services up to one and one-half-inch size and comparatively sized restrictors for larger services after written notice of intent to install a flow restrictor for a minimum of forty-eight hours. 
C.  In addition to any other fines or penalties, a person who violates provisions of Section 13.04.330 shall be responsible for payment of the City of Morgan Hill's charges for installing and/or removing any flow restricting device and for disconnecting and/or reconnecting service per the city's schedule of charges then in effect. The charge for installing and/or removing any flow restricting device must be paid to the city before the device is removed. Nonpayment will be subject to the same remedies as nonpayment of basic water rates. 
D.  The first installation of a flow-restricting device shall remain in place for a minimum of three days and shall be removed by the city not more than ten days after installation. The second installation of a flow-restricting device, for continued violation of this chapter, shall remain in place for a minimum period of ten days before being removed by the city no later than thirty days thereafter. Normal water service shall not be restored until all installation and removal costs of flow-restricting devices have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 48, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 48, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 13.04.400 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 13.04.400 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 30 N.S., § 4.31, adopted in 1948; Ord. 73 N.S., § 1, adopted in 1957; Ord. 788 N.S., § 2(part), adopted in 1986; Ord. No. 1932 N.S., § 7, adopted May 27, 2009; and Ord. No. 2236 N.S., § 6, adopted June 7, 2017.  
Chapter 13.08 - WATER SYSTEM BACKFLOW PREVENTION 
Sections: 
 
13.08.010 - Statutory authority. 
A.  Title 17, Chapter V, Sections 7583 through 7622, inclusive of the California Administrative Code, entitled "Regulations Relating to Cross-Connections," sets forth rules and regulations governing cross-connections. 
B.  Title 17, Section 7583 of the California Administrative Code, states among other things, "The water purveyor has primary responsibility to prevent water from unapproved sources, or any other substance, entering the public water supply system." The city is a water purveyor within the meaning of Title 17. 
C.  In order to provide for an orderly and adequate means of protection of the city's water distribution system from backflow, the requirements set forth in this chapter are reasonable and necessary. The city adopts these requirements for the protection of the city's water distribution system from backflow. New water service connections shall be installed and existing water connections shall be modified to conform to these requirements as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 647 N.S. (part), 1983)  
13.08.020 - Adoption of state statutes. 
The regulations of the California Department of Health, Title 17, California Administrative Code, Sections 7583 through 7622, inclusive, referred to in this chapter as Title 17, are adopted, incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter, insofar as the same are applicable to the protection to city's water distribution system. 
(Ord. 647 N.S. (part), 1983)  
13.08.030 - Definitions. 
Words used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, are defined as follows: 
A.  "Auxiliary water supply" means any water supply on, or available to, the premises other than water supplied by the city. 
B.  "Backflow" means the reverse flow of water or any other fluid or substance or any combination or any mixture thereof from the customer's system into the city's water distribution system. 
C.  "Backflow prevention device" means a device which will prevent backflow into the city's distribution system. 
D.  "Certified tester" means a person who is certified as a backflow prevention device tester by the city. 
E.  "City" means the city of Morgan Hill, California. 
F.  "City engineer" means the city engineer for the city or his designate. 
G.  "City's water distribution system" means the water distribution system owned and operated by the city including the service connection to a water main. 
H.  "Cross-connection" means any connections, link or channel between the city's water distribution system and an auxiliary water supply, a pipe or piping system, plumbing fixture, appliance, container, receptacle, vessel or other devices of whatsoever nature, whether it may be possible for contaminated or used water or other fluid which in the city's opinion is of questionable or unsafe quality, or any other substance of whatsoever nature other than the water supplied by the city to enter any part of the city's water distribution system. 
I.  "Customer" means any person or organization who receives water from the city. 
J.  "Customer's system" means the water piping system located immediately downstream from a meter. 
K.  "Premises" means a piece of land together with such buildings and appurtenances located thereon. 
L.  "Service connection" means the water piping system and meter connecting the customer's system with the city's water main. 
(Ord. 647 N.S. (part), 1983)  
13.08.040 - General requirements. 
A.  Backflow prevention devices shall be required at the service connection, or at a location approved by the city engineer, for premises in the following described categories: 
1.  Premises having an auxiliary water supply; 
2.  Industrial/commercial premises on which any substance is handled under pressure in such a fashion as to permit possible entry into the city's distribution system, including water originating from the city's system which is boosted in pressure; 
3.  Industrial/commercial premises where customer's system has more than one service connection; 
4.  Industrial/commercial premises which, in the opinion of the city engineer, contain cross-connections or the potential for cross-connections which could result in the pollution or contamination of the city's water system in the event of backflow; 
5.  Premises which have Class 1 or Class 2 fire sprinkler systems as defined by the American Water Works Association Manual, M-14, Section 6.3, where in the opinion of the water and fire department said system is inadequate to protect against backflow due to special conditions found to exist. Special conditions are defined as those conditions which exist so as to cause an actual or potential for contamination to the city's domestic water supply from the user's connection. Special conditions include but are not limited to the following: 
a.  Underground fire sprinkler pipelines parallel to and within ten feet horizontally of sewer pipelines or other pipelines carrying significantly toxic materials; 
b.  Water being supplied to a site or an area from two or more services of a water utility, or from two different water utilities; 
c.  Occupancies (or changes in occupancies) which involve the use, storage or handling of types and quantities of materials in a manner which could present a significant health hazard to the domestic water supply; and 
d.  Premises with unusually complex piping systems where no approved backflow prevention device exists on their domestic service piping. 
B.  Backflow prevention devices shall be of a type and manufacture approved by the city. 
(Ord. 792 N.S. §§ 1, 2, 1987; Ord. 647 N.S. (part), 1983)  
13.08.050 - New service connections—Installation conditions. 
A.  At the time an application for a new water service is made by a potential customer, the city engineer will review such application to determine the need for a backflow prevention device on the customer's service. If a backflow prevention device is determined to be required it shall be the customer's responsibility at the customer's expense to provide for installation of the device in accordance with city standards and at a location approved by the city by one of the following methods: 
1.  Installation by City. A backflow prevention device may be installed by city personnel at the customer's expense. The customer shall deposit in advance the city's estimated cost of the device and installation. The final billing to the customer shall be the actual cost of the work. 
2.  Installation by Customer. A backflow prevention device may be installed by the customer provided the type and manufacturer of the device are approved by the city. Devices installed by the customer shall be tested at the customer's expense by the city by a certified tester. 
B.  Installation of a backflow prevention device, where required by the city shall be a condition of water service and meter installation. 
(Ord. 647 N.S. (part), 1983)  
13.08.060 - Existing service connections—Installation conditions. 
A.  The city will inspect the premises of existing service connections which in the opinion of the city engineer may require backflow prevention. If it is determined that a backflow prevention device is required, the installation of a backflow prevention device shall be a condition of continued water service. 
B.  Installation shall be accompanied by one of the two methods listed in Section 13.08.050 of this chapter. If a customer fails to provide for the installation of the backflow prevention device within a reasonable time limit set forth in a written notification from the city, the city may suspend water service to the property being served. Alternatively, at its option, and upon notification of the customer, the city may install the backflow prevention device and charge the customer the entire cost of the device and its installation. 
(Ord. 647 N.S. (part), 1983)  
13.08.070 - Upgrading existing devices. 
A.  An existing backflow prevention device which, in the opinion of the city engineer, is a type that does not provide adequate protection for the degree of potential hazard from backflow shall be upgraded at customer expense following the procedures in Section 13.08.060 of this chapter. 
B.  Upgrading may include complete replacement of the backflow prevention device, installation of additional devices, or correction of on-site cross-connection hazards. 
(Ord. 647 N.S. (part), 1983)  
13.08.080 - Ownership of installed or upgraded devices. 
Backflow prevention devices installed or upgraded either by the customer or by the city if paid for by the customer shall be and remain the property of the customer. 
(Ord. 647 N.S. (part), 1983)  
13.08.090 - Inspection and testing. 
The customer is responsible to provide for an annual testing and inspection of the backflow prevention device by one of the following methods: 
A.  Testing by Certified Testers. Customers who advise the city in writing may use a certified tester to inspect and test a backflow prevention device. The test shall be performed and results reported to the city within thirty days of written notice by the city. 
B.  Testing by City Personnel. 
1.  City personnel shall inspect and test the backflow prevention devices of customers who do not use private certified testers. Charges for inspection and testing by the city shall be set from time to time by the city council based on the size and type of the device. The customer will be notified by the city of the test results. 
2.  Devices which fail to pass inspection and testing by the city or private certified testers shall be maintained and repaired in accordance with Sections 13.08.100, 13.08.110 and 13.08.120 of this chapter. The city reserves the right to require more frequent testing or to perform additional testing with city personnel when the city determines it to be in the public interest. The customer shall bear the cost of additional tests if their device fails a test. 
(Ord. 647 N.S. (part), 1983)  
13.08.100 - Maintenance and repair—Time limitations. 
The customer shall be responsible for maintenance and repair of the backflow prevention device. The customer shall at all times maintain the device in proper working order as a condition of continued water service. If a backflow prevention device should fail to pass inspection and testing pursuant to Section 13.08.090 of this chapter, the customer shall, within thirty days after notification of test results, provide for repair of the device by one of the following methods set out in Sections 13.08.110 and 13.08.120 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 647 N.S. (part), 1983)  
13.08.110 - Maintenance and repair—Work performed by private parties. 
Backflow prevention devices may be repaired by private personnel. Repairs and satisfactory retest of devices by a certified tester shall be documented and submitted on a form provided by the city. Failure by the customer to repair a backflow prevention device within the time period allowed by the city shall result in termination of water service or city personnel performing the repairs at the customer's expense in conformance with Section 13.08.120 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 647 N.S. (part), 1983)  
13.08.120 - Maintenance and repair—Work performed by city personnel. 
Backflow prevention devices may be repaired by city personnel at customer expense. The customer shall be billed for the actual cost of the city's work. At its option, the city may require an advance deposit by the customer to cover the estimated cost of repair. Payment by the customer for all district repair costs shall be a condition of continued water service. 
(Ord. 647 N.S. (part), 1983)  
13.08.130 - Right to enter property. 
As a condition of water service for new customers and as a condition of continued water service for existing customers, the customer may be required to have a backflow prevention device installed on the private property of the customer. The customer shall permit the city to enter upon the customer's property within the normal working hours of the city, or in case of emergency, at any time, to test, inspect, service, maintain, repair or replace the backflow prevention device as set forth in other sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. 647 N.S. (part), 1983)  
13.08.140 - Termination of water service—Conditions. 
In addition to the rights granted the city in this chapter, the city may terminate water services to any premises served if a required backflow prevention device is removed by the customer or if the city finds evidence that an installed backflow prevention device has been bypassed, made or allowed to remain ineffective. 
(Ord. 647 N.S. (part), 1983)  
13.08.150 - Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person or persons, company, corporation or association to willfully fail to install or to willfully bypass, alter, or refuse to maintain a backflow prevention device. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 49, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 49, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 13.08.150 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 13.08.150 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 647 N.S. (part), adopted in 1983.  
Chapter 13.12 - WATER, SEWER AND DRAINAGE SYSTEM CHARGES 
Sections: 
 
13.12.010 - Short title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Service Connection Charge Ordinance," and may be cited as such. 
(Ord. 98 N.S. § 1, 1959)  
13.12.020 - Service connection charges set by resolution. 
The city council shall fix the rates, fees and charges to be paid to the city for the services hereinafter listed by written resolution and by amending resolutions from time to time. The resolutions shall include charges for installing water meters, extending or constructing water and sewer mains and/or laterals and services, installing storm drain facilities and connection fees for connection to the public water, sewerage or storm drainage facilities. 
(Ord. 98 N.S. § 3, 1959)  
Chapter 13.16 - SEWER RATES AND INTERIM GROWTH MANAGEMENT 
Sections: 
 
13.16.010 - Conditions which require connection. 
Every new building where persons reside, congregate or are employed which abuts a street, alley or easement in which there is an approved public sanitary sewer, or which is within three hundred feet of an approved public sanitary sewer, shall be connected to the sewer. 
(Ord. 425 N.S. § A, 1976)  
13.16.020 - Rates—General requirements. 
There is levied and assessed upon each lot, parcel of land, building or premises having any sewer connection with the sewerage system of the city or otherwise discharging sewage which ultimately passes through the city sewage system, a service charge or rental payable as provided and in amounts determinable as set out in Sections 13.16.030 through 13.16.120 of this article. 
(Ord. 267 N.S. § B (part), 1969)  
13.16.030 - Rates—Residential and nonresidential. 
A.  Rates for residential and nonresidential users shall be set by resolution, enacted under section 13.16.085. The residential sewer volume charge shall be based on the average measured volume of water usage for the three consecutive low water usage months between the months of November 1st and April 30th with a minimum of two HCF per dwelling unit. The three low water usage months shall be annually determined by the finance director based on the total water consumed by all customers. The sewer volume charge for nonresidential users shall be based on actual monthly water usage. 
B.  Residential and commercial sewer service customers served by one or more sewer lift station, shall pay the monthly surcharge established under Section 13.16.085. 
C.  New single-family dwelling units and single-family customers without past history of water usage during the designated months shall be assigned the calculated average single-family water use for the city, which is eight HCF, for billing purposes until the actual water usage for the designated months is measured and implemented with other rate changes in July. 
D.  New multifamily units and multifamily customers without past history of water usage during the designated months shall be assigned the calculated average multifamily water use for the city, which is four HCF, for billing purposes until the actual water usage for the designated months is measured and implemented with other rate changes in July. 
(Ord. 1345 N.S. (part), 1997) 
(Ord. No. 2302 N.S., § 1, 5-15-2019)  
13.16.035 - Rates—Low income. 
Customers residing in dwelling units which have individual city water meters may qualify for the low-income rate by presenting a copy of a utility bill indicating that they are receiving the "CARE" discount from PG&E and/or a "Lifeline" rate from GTE. The sewer service charge shall be the rate adopted by the city council under Section 13.16.085, less any approved low-income subsidy in effect at the time. The supplemental rate per HCF, and lift station surcharge shall apply in accordance with Section 13.16.030. 
(Ord. 1232 N.S. § 2, 1995) 
(Ord. No. 2302 N.S., § 2, 5-15-2019)  
13.16.040 - Rates—Mobile home units. 
For each mobile home park or trailer park, the sewer service charge shall be a base rate plus a supplemental rate for each one hundred cubic feet (HCF) of water used per dwelling unit based on the average measured volume of water usage for the months of December, January and February. In addition, for those areas served by one or more lift stations, there shall be a surcharge rate per month per mobile home park. 
(Ord. 1232 N.S. § 3, 1995) 
(Ord. No. 2302 N.S., § 3, 5-15-2019)  
13.16.055 - Rates—California Department of Forestry. 
The sewer service charge shall be a base rate equivalent to that of three single-family units plus a supplemental rate for pretreatment equivalent to that of a significant user, both charged on a monthly basis. 
(Ord. 1106 N.S. § 1, 1992)  
13.16.060 - Rates—Unspecified classifications. 
Sewer users not specified by the classifications of Sections 13.16.030 through 13.16.100 of this chapter shall be assigned by the city engineer and charged the same service charge as the classification which most nearly represents the sewage strength of the user. 
(Ord. 1096 N.S. § 5 (part), 1992; Ord. 791 N.S. § 1(j), 1986: Ord. 743 N.S. § 1(j), 1985: Ord. 637 N.S. § 1(j), 1983: Ord. 267 N.S. § B (part), 1969)  
13.16.070 - Rates—Sewer users without metered water service. 
Sewer users without metered water service shall be charged the same sewer charge as a similar user who is also a water customer. The charge shall be as determined by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 1096 N.S. § 5 (part), 1992; Ord. 791 N.S. § 1(k), 1986: Ord. 743 N.S. § 1(k), 1985: Ord. 637 N.S. § 1(k), 1983: Ord. 267 N.S. § B (part), 1969)  
13.16.080 - Rate increases—Effective when. 
The effective dates for any rate increase shall be set in the resolution adopted under Section 13.16.085. 
(Ord. 1345 N.S. (part), 1997) 
(Ord. No. 2302 N.S., § 4, 5-15-2019)  
13.16.085 - Rate increases—Amended by city council resolution. 
The city council shall make future changes to sewer rates established in this chapter by setting forth the changes in resolution duly adopted, and the adoption of such a resolution shall have the same force and effect as though the changes had been by the adoption of an ordinance. 
(Ord. 1286 N.S. (part), 1996)  
13.16.090 - Rates—Adjustment procedure—Appeal. 
Residential sewer users who by reason of special circumstances find that the foregoing rates are unjust or inequitable as applied to their premises, may make written application to the director of finance. Commercial sewer users who by reason of special circumstances find that the foregoing rates are unjust or inequitable as applied to their premises, may make written application to the director of public services. Such application shall state the circumstances and request a different basis of sewer service charge. If the director of finance or public services denies such application, the sewer user may appeal the decision to the city manager. 
(Ord. 1286 N.S. (part), 1996: Ord. 1232 N.S. § 8, 1995: Ord. 1096 N.S. § 5 (part), 1992; Ord. 637 N.S. § 3, 1983) 
(Ord. No. 2302 N.S., § 5, 5-15-2019)  
13.16.100 - Connection charges—Credits. 
Where a building where persons reside, congregate or are employed is constructed in place of an existing previously occupied building or structure connected to the city's sewage system, a credit for connection charges shall be given as follows: 
A.  For new residential dwelling units replacing existing residential dwelling units, credit shall be given on a unit-by-unit basis. 
B.  For new buildings to be occupied by uses other than residential, credit shall be given on the basis of the square footage of the building removed. 
(Ord. 1096 N.S. § 5 (part), 1992; Ord. 848 N.S. § 2, 1987)  
13.16.110 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  In the event that any person fails to pay any charge provided in this article when the same becomes due, the city may, in addition to any other remedies it has, cut off any of such services, including water service, and facilities referred to in this chapter, and shall not resume the same until all delinquent charges together with any charges necessitated by resumption of such services and facilities have been fully paid. 
B.  Each charge or rental levied by or pursuant to this article on property within the limits of the city is made a lien upon the corresponding lot, land or premises served by a connection to the city sewerage system. 
(Ord. 1096 N.S. § 5 (part), 1992; Ord. 267 N.S. § D, 1969)  
Chapter 13.20 - SEWERS AND INDUSTRIAL WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, adopted July 2, 2014, repealed the former ch. 13.20, §§ 13.20.010—13.20.460, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former ch. 13.20 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 819 N.S., § 1, adopted 1987; Ord. 819 N.S., § 1, adopted 1987; Ord. 870 N.S., adopted 1988; Ord. 906 N.S., §§ 1—11, adopted 1989; Ord. 1029 N.S., §§ 2, 3, adopted 1991; Ord. 1192 N.S., § 21, adopted 1994; Ord. 1492 N.S., § 1, adopted 2000; and Ord. 1058 N.S., §§ 2—4, adopted 1991 . 
 
13.20.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the city from the creation of public nuisances, menace to the public peace, health or safety, and damage or expenses resulting from the discharge or depositing of unpolluted waters or of industrial wastes into the public sewers and sewage treatment facilities of the city and to ensure the proper maintenance of private sewer facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.020 - Applicability and construction. 
This chapter applies to all persons discharging wastes (including domestic and industrial waste) into a public sewer prior to its enactment, and its enactment shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the liability or responsibility of any person for damages to life or property caused by the discharge of wastes; nor shall the city, nor any agent thereof, be held as assuming any liability by reason of performing its or his duties under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.030 - Definitions. 
The definitions given in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter and its application unless otherwise apparent from the context. 
1.  "Act" or "the Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq. 
2.  "Categorical standards" means National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or Pretreatment Standard. 
3.  "Domestic waste" means a combination of liquid or water carrying human or kitchen waste conducted away from residential, business or institutional buildings. 
4.  "Environmental Protection Agency" or "EPA" means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
5.  "Garbage," "refuse" and all other terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning given to them in Ordinance No. 129, New Series. 
6.  "Industrial waste" means a combination of liquid or water-carried waste resulting from the processes employed in commercial or industrial establishments, including the washing, cleaning or drain water from such processes. 
7.  "Inspector" means the authorized inspector or representative of the city engineer. 
8.  "Interceptor" means a device used to separate and retain from waste, deleterious or undesirable matter, including grease and sand. 
9.  "National Categorical Pretreatment Standard" or "pretreatment standard" means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
10.  "National Prohibitive Discharge Standard" or "prohibitive discharge standard" means any regulation developed under the authority of Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 Codified Federal Regulations (CFR), Section 403.5. 
11.  "New source" means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of proposed regulations prescribing a Section 307 (c) (33 U.S.C. 1317) Categorical Pretreatment Standard. 
12.  "Permittee" means the person to whom a permit has been issued pursuant to this chapter. 
13.  "Person" means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, or government agency, and their heirs, assigns or agents. 
14.  "Pretreatment" or "standard" means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutants' properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a publicly-owned treatment works (POTW). The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR Section 403.6(d). 
15.  "Pretreatment requirements" means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a National Pretreatment Standard imposed on an industrial user. 
16.  "Private sewer lateral" means the sewer pipeline from the plumbing of a building to a collection line, including portions that extend across public rights-of-way and the Saddle, wye or other physical connection to the collection line. Private sewer laterals are privately owned and maintained. 
16.  "Public sewer" means a main or collector sanitary sewer dedicated to public use. 
17.  "Significant industrial user" means any industrial user of the city's wastewater disposal system who (a) has a discharge flow of ten thousand gallons or more per average workday; or (b) has a flow greater than five percent of the flow in the city's wastewater treatment system; or (c) has wastes which are toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to Section 307 of the Act or State of California Statutes and rules; or (d) is found by the city, state control agency or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the system. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.040 - Administration and enforcement. 
A.  The city manager or designate shall enforce the provisions of this chapter, and for such purposes shall have the powers of a peace officer. Such powers shall not limit or otherwise affect the powers and duties of other city officials. 
B.  A power or duty of any city officer under this chapter may be exercised by a person authorized pursuant to law by said officer. 
C.  Any time limit provided for in this chapter may be extended by consent of the officer concerned. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.050 - Storm and unpolluted water connections prohibited. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters into any public sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.060 - Use of public sewers subject to reasonable rules. 
Permits to discharge into a public sewer any sewage will be granted only in accordance with, and in consideration of, the special conditions of each case, and shall be subject to reasonable rules, regulations and requirements to prevent excessive alkalinity or acidity of the influent or excessive discharge of organic or inorganic substances in solution or in suspension, whether liquid, semisolid or solid. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.070 - Property owner's ownership and obligation to inspect, maintain, repair and replace private sewer laterals. 
A.  Private sewer laterals not part of public sewer system. The private sewer laterals are the property of the property owner and are not part of the public sewer. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as changing the private nature of the private sewer laterals or incorporating them into the public sewer. 
B.  Property owner's obligation. Each property owner shall, at the property owner's expense, inspect, maintain in good working order, repair and replace, as necessary, the private sewer lateral so that it does not cause or contribute to any sewage overflow from either the private sewer lateral or the public sewer. The private sewer lateral shall be free of displaced joints, open joint, root intrusion, substantial deterioration of the line, cracks, leaks, inflow, infiltration of extraneous water, fats, oils and grease, sediment deposit or any other similar conditions, defects or obstructions likely to cause or contribute to blockage of the private sewer lateral or the public sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.080 - Prior approval required in certain cases. 
The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having any of the following characteristics shall be subject to the prior review and approval of the city: 
A.  A five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than three hundred parts per million by weight; or 
B.  Containing more than 300 parts per million by weight of suspended solids; or 
C.  Having an average daily flow greater than five percent of the average daily sewage flow of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.090 - Specific pollutant limitations. 
It unlawful for any user to discharge wastewater containing in excess of: 
1000 mg/L 	BOD 
1000 mg/L 	TSS 
* mg/L 	TDS 
100 mg/L 	Grease and oil as petroleum hydrocarbons 
40 degrees C. 	Temperature 
6.5 to 11.0 pH units 	pH 
1.1 mg/L 	Arsenic 
0.01 mg/L 	Cadmium 
5.1 mg/L 	Total chromium 
1.8 mg/L 	Copper 
1.8 mg/L 	Cyanide 
1.6 mg/L 	Lead 
0.03 mg/L 	Mercury 
2.7 mg/L 	Nickel 
4.2 mg/L 	Silver 
1.4 mg/L 	Zinc 
Trace mg/L 	Total identifiable chlorinated hydrocarbons 
Trace mg/L 	Toxic organic compounds (priority pollutants as defined by the EPA) 
 
Concentrations apply at the point where the industrial waste is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metals unless indicated otherwise. 
The administrator may impose mass limitations in addition to or in place of the concentration-based limitations above. 
*Note: a TDS limit to comply with the STPs and the TDS effluent limit is under evaluation by Montgomery Watson. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.100 - Matter that cannot be discharged into public sewer. 
A.  Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
1.  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel, oil or other inflammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; 
2.  Wastes having a temperature in excess of forty degrees centigrade (104 degrees Fahrenheit); 
3.  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded; 
4.  Wastes having a monitored pH lower than 6.5 or higher than 11.0, or having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel of the public sewer systems. Where the city engineer or authorized representative deems it advisable, it may be required that any person discharging industrial wastes install and maintain in approved manner a suitable device to continuously measure and record the pH of the wastes so discharged; 
5.  Wastes containing any noxious or malodorous gas or substance which either singly or by interaction with sewage or other wastes is, in the opinion of the director, likely to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or prevent entry to sewers for their maintenance and repair; 
6.  Wastes containing ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastic, wood, hair, lime slurry, lime residues or paint residues in such quantity and concentration that in the opinion of the director, such substances will cause an obstruction to the flow in the sewer or otherwise interfere with the proper operation of the public sewer systems. Attention is called to the fact that the maximum permissible concentration will vary throughout the system depending upon the size of the particular receiving sewer and the flows therein; 
7.  Wastes containing insoluble, nonflocculent substances having a specific gravity in excess of 1.10; 
8.  Wastes containing soluble substances in such concentration as to cause the specific gravity of the waste to be greater than 1.1; 
9.  Any waters or wastes containing biochemical oxygen demand or suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant; 
10.  Wastes containing grease, oil or other substances that will solidify or will become viscous at temperatures of thirty-two degrees Fahrenheit and one hundred sixty degrees Fahrenheit; 
11.  Wastes containing visible amounts of grease, oil or other substances in concentrations or flows sufficient to cause stoppage, pluggage, breakage, or obstruction of flow to the treatment system, or cause any other damage or increased maintenance of the collection system; 
12.  Wastes containing more than ten milligrams per liter of the following gases: hydrogen, sulfide, sulfur dioxide, nitrous oxide or any of the halogens; 
13.  Sludges resulting from the treatment of concentrated solutions that are not acceptable for discharge to the sewers; 
14.  Wastes containing gases or vapors, either free or occluded, in concentrations toxic or dangerous to humans or animals; 
15.  Wastes containing any toxic radioactive isotopes without a special permit, except where: 
a.  Permission of Governmental Agency. The person is authorized to use radioactive materials by the Atomic Energy Commission or other governmental agency empowered to regulate the use of radioactive materials, 
b.  Conformance with Atomic Energy Commission Recommendations. The waste is discharged in strict conformity with current Atomic Energy Commission recommendations for safe disposal of radioactive wastes, 
c.  Assumption of Responsibility. The person discharging the radioactive wastes assumes full responsibility for any injury to personnel or damage to the sewerage system that may result from such discharge and submits evidence satisfactory to the director of public works that he has assumed this responsibility. Any person discharging a radioactive waste to the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of subdivision b of this subsection shall submit to the director of public works such reports as the director may deem necessary. If any radioactive material is accidentally discharged into the public sewer, the person responsible shall: 
i.  Immediately notify the director of public works, 
ii.  Render such technical or other assistance to the department of public works within his power to prevent the sewerage system from becoming contaminated with radioactivity. 
B.  State Requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this chapter. 
C.  City's Right of Revision. The city reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in this chapter. 
D.  Excessive Discharge. No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the Federal National Pretreatment Standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state. 
E.  Accidental Discharges. Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharges of prohibited materials or other substance regulated by this chapter. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facility. All existing users shall complete such a plan by December 31, 1989. No user who commences contribution to the wastewater treatment plant after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this section. In the case of accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the wastewater treatment plant of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume of corrective actions. 
1.  Written Notice. Within five days following an accidental discharge; the user shall submit to the director a detailed written report, describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the wastewater treatment plant, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law. 
2.  Notice to Employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
F.  All of the preceding standards shall apply at the point where the wastes are discharged into the sanitary sewer system, or the storm drain system, and any chemical or mechanical corrective treatment required must be accomplished to practical completion before the wastes reach that point. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.110 - Permit—Required. 
A.  No person shall use or make a connection for the purpose of using any public sewer for the deposit or discharge of industrial waste without first obtaining a waste discharge permit from the city. 
B.  A person who is required to, but does not have, a permit and who has been notified by the city in writing that he is required to obtain a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall within fifteen days apply for the required permit. Failure to do so constitutes a willful violation of this chapter. 
C.  All existing commercial, institutional and industrial uses of the public sanitary sewer system shall file new applications for industrial waste discharge permits with the city on or before February 28, 1986. All future users shall file applications for industrial waste discharge permits with the city at least thirty calendar days prior to commencement of sewer discharge. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.120 - Permit—Application—Fee. 
A.  All applicants for a waste discharge permit shall be required to pay a filing fee. The following fee schedule shall apply: 
1.  For all users discharging all domestic wastewater with a five-day biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and suspended solids (SS) less than three hundred parts per million and with an average daily flow less than one thousand gallons per day, and with no hazardous materials stored, handled and processed on the premises, no fee; 
2.  For all other users not included in paragraph 1 of this subsection, five hundred dollars (for a five-year permit). 
B.  Application fees set in subsection A of this section may be revised from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.130 - Permit—Application—Contents. 
A.  Any person requiring a permit under this chapter shall make a written application to the city on forms furnished by the city. The application shall give a description of the property or place to be served and such other information concerning the proposed disposal as the city may require in order to determine that there will be compliance with the provisions of this section. 
B.  Information to be included in the application. Information to be included in the application shall be as follows: 
1.  Name, address and location (if different from the address); 
2.  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended; 
3.  Wastewater constituents and characteristics including but not limited to those mentioned in Chapter 13.28 of this title as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended; 
4.  Time and duration of contribution; 
5.  Average daily and three-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any; 
6.  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation; 
7.  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged; 
8.  Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state or federal pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O and M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards; 
9.  If additional pretreatment and/or O and M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions apply to this schedule: 
a. The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction). 
b. No increment referred to in subparagraph (9)(a) of this subsection shall exceed nine months. 
c. Not later than fourteen days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the city, including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the city; 
10.  Each product produced, by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production; 
11.  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
12.  Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system; 
13.  Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.140 - Permit—Application—Evaluation. 
The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the city may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.150 - Permit—Issuance—Limitations. 
If it appears from the application for a permit that the proposed disposal complies with the provisions of this chapter, the city shall issue such permit. The city may issue a permit containing limitations or conditions or both. The city may also modify an existing permit by the addition or elimination of such conditions and limitations as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.160 - Permit—Contents and conditions. 
A.  Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations, user charges, and fees established by the city. Permits may contain the following: 
1.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer; 
2.  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
3.  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
4.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
5.  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule; 
6.  Compliance schedules; 
7.  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports; 
8.  Notice that whenever the director of public works, health officer, or any authorized representative of the city shall have cause to conduct a routine inspection or to suspect that a nuisance or violation of this chapter exists in any house, cellar, enclosure, or building within the city limits or discharging into the sewerage system or, for the purpose of inspecting and monitoring industrial waste discharges for general compliance, the director or representative may demand entry therein at all reasonable times in order to take independent samples. 
9.  Requirements for notification of the city of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system; 
10.  Requirements for notification of slug discharges; and 
11.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
B.  Unreasonable refusal or delay by the owners or occupants to open said buildings or enclosures and to admit a free examination or sampling is unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014; Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 50, 5-2-2018)  
13.20.170 - Permit—Modification. 
Within nine months of the promulgation of a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the wastewater discharge permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as required by Sections 13.20.120 and 13.20.130, the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within one hundred eighty days after the promulgation of the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard. In addition, the user with an existing wastewater discharge permit shall submit to the city within one hundred eighty days after the promulgation of an applicable Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard the information required by paragraphs 8 and 9 of subsection B of Section 13.20.130. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.180 - Permit—Nontransferable. 
Permits issued under this chapter are not transferable from one location to another or from one permittee to another, and discharge of industrial waste shall be made strictly in accordance with all provisions contained in the permit, at the location specifically designated therein. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.190 - Permit—Renewal. 
All permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be renewed every five years. The permits shall be renewed by filing a new application with the city. Renewal applications shall be subject to the fee schedule set forth in Section 13.20.110. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.200 - Compliance date report. 
Within ninety days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the city a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards or requirements, and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O and M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement and all other reports to be submitted under 40 CFR 403.12 shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, and certified to by a qualified professional. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.210 - Pretreatment—Plans required. 
Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.220 - Pretreatment—Standards—Notice of violators. 
A.  The city shall annually publish in a local newspaper a list of the users which were not in compliance with any pretreatment requirements or standards at least once during the twelve previous months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user(s) during the same twelve months. 
B.  All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the EPA or approval authority upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.230 - Periodic compliance reports—Submission. 
A.  The frequency for self-monitoring for the various classifications of industrial users as defined by Section 13.20.290 of this chapter shall be as follows: 
Classification 	Frequency 
1 	4 times per year 
2 	12 times per year 
3 	2 times per year 
 
B.  Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the city during the months of June and December, unless required differently in the pretreatment standard or by the city, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow reported in subsection A of Section 13.20.150 of this chapter. At the discretion of the city and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the city may agree to alter the months during which the above are to be submitted. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.240 - Periodic compliance reports—Mass limitations—Sampling and analysis. 
The city may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subsection B of Section 13.20.220 shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where requested by the city, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard. All analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the administrator pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the administrator. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.250 - Federal categorical pretreatment standards—Regulations supersede when. 
Upon the promulgation of the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this chapter. The city shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR, Section 403.12. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.260 - Federal categorical pretreatment standards—Modification. 
Where the city's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the city may apply to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in the federal pretreatment standards. "Consistent removal" means reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent, which is achieved by the system in ninety-five percent of the samples taken when measured according to the procedures set forth in Section 403.7(c)(2) of Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403, "General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution," promulgated pursuant to the Act. The city may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the federal pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR Part 403, Section 403.7 are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.270 - Confidentiality. 
A.  Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction, unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. 
B.  When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit, state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
C.  Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the city unless a ten-day notification is given to the user. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.280 - Test manholes. 
The city engineer shall require the installation by the property owner or permittee at his expense of a test manhole or other structure. All test manholes shall be at locations and be of a type approved by the city. Such structures shall be so designed that flows may be measured and samples readily obtained therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.290 - Records—Retention—Inspection by city. 
All permitted users shall retain for a minimum of three years any records of monitoring activities and results (whether or not such monitoring activities are requested by the city) and shall make such records available for inspection and copying by the city. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user or when requested by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.300 - Pretreatment enforcement—Frequency of monitoring. 
A.  Frequency of pretreatment service provided shall be dependent upon the classification of discharging source. The following classification of discharges is established: 
1.  Nondomestic or domestic high-strength waste; 
2.  High-volume nondomestic low-strength waste; 
3.  Low-volume nondomestic low-strength waste; 
4.  Low-volume domestic waste. 
B.  Classifications 1, 2 and 3 shall be monitored by the city twice per year; classification 4 shall be monitored once every ten years. Classification 1 shall be tested for toxics, metals, BOD and SS. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.310 - Pretreatment enforcement—Fees—When due. 
The fees set forth in Sections 13.20.310 and 13.20.320 shall be due and payable on the 15th day of the month following billing. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.320 - Types of charges for industrial use. 
The types of charges for industrial use may include, but are not limited to: 
A.  Fees for permit application; 
B.  Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance; 
C.  Surcharge for dischargers in excess of 300 mg/1 BOD, TSS, volume and other discharge constituents; 
D.  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.340 - Grease, oil and sand interceptors—When required. 
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any inflammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters, living or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city, and shall be so located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.350 - Interceptors—Construction. 
Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature and pressure. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers. Interceptors shall be effectively trapped and vented. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.360 - Interceptors—Maintenance. 
Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.365 - Design and inspection requirements—New construction. 
Plans for sewerage construction shall meet all design requirements of the standard details, Public Works Department Manual, and shall also meet the design requirements as established from time to time by the director of public works. Inspection of all sewerage construction shall be made by personnel of the city in the manner described in Standard Specifications for Public Works' Construction (commonly referred to as the "Green Book"). Maximum allowable infiltration/exfiltration shall be as determined in Section 306—1.4 Testing Pipelines section of the Green Book. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.370 - Violation—Notice. 
Whenever the city finds that any person is acting in violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any permit issued hereunder, the city shall serve upon the person causing or suffering such violation to be committed, including the permittee, if a permit has been issued, a notice of violation. This notice shall state the act or acts constituting the violation and shall direct that the violation be corrected within such time, to be specified in the notice, as the city may deem reasonable. A person who has been so notified shall cease all such activities within the time so specified and shall not resume them until the city determines that all of the violations charged in the notice have been corrected. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.380 - Violation—Manner of giving notice. 
A.  Any notice required to be given under the terms of this chapter, including a notice of violation and a notice of hearing, shall be in writing, and may be served by any one of the following methods: 
1.  In the manner provided for in the California Code of Civil Procedure for service of process; 
2.  By registered mail; 
3.  By certified mail; 
4.  By hand delivery. 
B.  When service is by mail, no return receipt is required and the notice may be sent to the last address given to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.390 - Emergency power to disconnect service. 
Whenever the city finds that the continued violation of any provision of this chapter or of a condition of any permit issued under this chapter is so serious and aggravated that: 
A.  The prevention of the pollution of the underground or surface waters requires the immediate cessation of the activities causing the violation; or 
B.  The prevention of a public nuisance requires the immediate cessation of the activities causing the violation; or 
C.  The protection of any part of the public sewer system and its appurtenances or of the sewage treatment works of the city from damage requires the immediate cessation of the activities causing the violation, and there is an immediate threat to the public health, peace or safety, then in any of the above situations, the city is authorized to disconnect or cause to be disconnected immediately, and before giving the notice required by Section 13.20.360, any connection to a public sewer or to a public water system, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.400 - Reestablishment of service—Conditions—Bond. 
When any service to a public sewer or to a public water system has been disconnected, the city may require the person or persons requesting that such service be reestablished to furnish a bond in the sum of five hundred dollars, payable to the city and conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter, before granting permission to reconnect to the city sewer or water system. The person making application for such reestablishment of service shall pay all expenses incurred or to be incurred by the city in causing such disconnection and reconnection before such permission may be granted. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.410 - Suspension or revocation of permits—Grounds. 
The city council may, after notice and hearing as hereinafter provided, either suspend a permit for a definite or indefinite period, or permanently revoke a permit on any one or more of the following grounds: 
A.  Violation of the conditions of the permit, or applicable state and federal regulations; 
B.  Failure of the user to report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge; 
C.  Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics, or increases in sewage discharge; 
D.  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for purposes of inspection or monitoring; 
E.  Nonpayment of fees and charges; 
F.  Failure of a permittee or a property owner to correct a violation within the time prescribed in a notice of violation; 
G.  Willful violation of any provisions of this chapter or of a condition or limitation of a permit, or of any lawful order of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.420 - Suspension or revocation—Initiation of proceedings. 
Proceedings for the suspension or revocation of a permit may be initiated by: 
A.  The city manager or designate by serving upon the permittee a copy of, and filing with the city clerk a written recommendation of, revocation or suspension, setting forth the grounds therefore and requesting a hearing thereon before the city council; or 
B.  The city council on its own motion, or upon the complaint of a third person, by serving or causing to be served upon the permittee and the city manager or designate a written notice of intention to revoke or suspend, setting forth the grounds therefore and designating a time and place for hearing thereon. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.430 - Suspension or revocation—Public hearing. 
The notice of hearing shall set the time and place thereof, which shall be at least ten days after such notice is served upon the permittee. The hearing shall be open to the public and may for good cause be continued by order of the city council. The city council shall, within fifteen days after conclusion of the hearing, render its decision. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.440 - Falsifying information unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false statement, representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan, or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter or the permit, or to falsify, tamper with, or knowingly render inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 50, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 50, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 13.20.440 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 13.20.440 pertained to falsifying information—penalty and derived from Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, adopted July 2, 2014.  
13.20.450 - Violation—Civil penalty. 
Any user who is found to have violated an order of the city council or any provisions of this chapter and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued under this chapter, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars nor more than one thousand dollars for each offense. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. The city may also discontinue all services for water and sewer until the violations are corrected. In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this chapter or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued in this chapter. The city shall have the right to seek injunctive relief for noncompliance by industrial users with any pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
13.20.460 - Violation. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to violate, or cause or permit the violation of, any of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned to the city by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 50, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 50, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 13.20.460 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 13.20.460 pertained to violation—misdemeanor penalty and derived from Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, adopted July 2, 2014.  
13.20.470 - Violation—Remedies cumulative. 
The rights and remedies of the city and penalties under this chapter shall be cumulative and not exclusive of each other. 
(Ord. No. 2108 N.S., § 1, 7-2-2014)  
Chapter 13.24 - SEPTIC TANKS 
Sections: 
 
13.24.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  "Building inspector" means the building inspector or his assistant(s) employed by the city. 
B.  "City standards" means those standards relating to individual sewage disposal system design, construction and/or maintenance described in the Santa Clara County Sewage Disposal Ordinance and adopted by reference by resolution of this city council. 
C.  "Health officer" means the county health officer, his assistants, or authorized deputies acting as health officer appointed by the city council. 
D.  "Percolation rate" means the rate expressed in minutes per inch as determined by percolation tests made in accordance with the procedure described in the county ordinance. 
E.  "Registered pumper" means a duly city-licensed septic tank pumping company which is approved by the city to perform such work. 
F.  "Sanitary waste" means and includes, but is not limited to, the discharge from toilets, bathtubs, lavatories, dishwashers, washing machines and any and all other fixtures connected to the building plumbing system. 
G.  "Sewage disposal system" means a privately owned system for the disposal of sanitary waste on land other than publicly owned land or other than into a municipal sewage system. 
(Ord. 1081 N.S. § 1, 1992; Ord. 425 N.S. § C (part), 1976)  
13.24.020 - Permit—Required—Application. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct, build or rebuild any residence, place of residence or other building or place where persons congregate, reside or are employed which is not to be connected to any approved public sanitary sewer without first submitting plans of the means of sewage disposal to the health officer, and obtaining a permit therefor as provided in this chapter. The application shall include a plot plan of the premises showing overall topography and surface drainage direction; specific location of septic tank; leaching field and other finished elevations of structures including leaching field giving all dimensions, and such other pertinent information as the health officer may require. If the application is prepared and the work proposed both in conformance with the requirements of this chapter and the city standards, the health officer shall issue the septic tank permit. Every applicant for a permit shall pay to the health officer for each permit issued and at the time of issuance, a fee as established by the county for that purpose. 
(Ord. 1081 N.S. § 2, 1992; Ord. 482 N.S. § A, 1979)  
13.24.030 - Permit—Required—System modifications. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to alter, repair, expand or otherwise modify an existing sewage disposal system without first submitting plans of the proposed work to the health officer and obtaining a permit therefor as provided in this chapter. The application shall include a plot plan of the premises showing overall topography and surface drainage direction, description of existing system and details of proposed alteration or modifications showing all dimensions and such other pertinent information as the health officer may require. The health officer may require preparation of this application by a registered civil engineer. If the application is prepared and the work proposed both in conformance with the requirements of this chapter and with city standards, the health officer shall issue the septic tank permit. Every applicant for a permit shall pay to the health officer for each permit issued, and at the time of issuance, a fee as established by the county for that purpose. 
(Ord. 1081 N.S. § 3, 1992; Ord. 482 N.S. § B, 1979)  
13.24.040 - Permit—Fees. 
No building permit shall be issued for any building which is not to be connected to an approved public sanitary sewer without the written approval of the health officer of the proposed means of sewage disposal for such building. 
(Ord. 1081 N.S. § 7(a), 1992; Ord. 425 N.S. § C (part), 1976)  
13.24.050 - Certificate of occupancy approval. 
No certification of occupancy shall be issued for any building which is not connected to an approved public sanitary sewer without the written approval by the health officer of the means of sewage disposal for such building. 
(Ord. 1081 N.S. § 7(b), 1992; Ord. 425 N.S. § C (part), 1976)  
13.24.060 - Sewer connection—Required when. 
All existing buildings where persons reside, congregate or are employed shall be required to be connected to an approved public sewer when such sewer is reasonably available except when the existing means of sewage disposal is functioning in conformance to the requirements of this chapter and to the city standards and to the satisfaction of the health officer. 
(Ord. 1081 N.S. § 7(c), 1992; Ord. 425 N.S. § C (part), 1976)  
13.24.070 - Installation—Plan posting on premises. 
A plot plan showing the specific tank and leach field as installed must be posted in the garage of all houses at the time of final inspection. 
(Ord. 1081 N.S. § 7(d), 1992; Ord. 425 N.S. § C (part), 1976)  
13.24.080 - Flush toilets required—Exception. 
It is unlawful to maintain, or use, any residence, place of business or other building or place where persons reside, congregate or are employed which is not provided with a water-flush toilet and with the discharge of any sanitary waste to a sewage system approved by the health officer. 
(Ord. 1081 N.S. §§ 4, 7 (part), 1992: Ord. 425 N.S. § C (part), 1976)  
13.24.090 - Septic tank—Installation generally. 
Every residence, place of residence or other building or place where persons congregate, reside or are employed, which is not connected to a public sewer system shall be provided with a private sewage disposal system, the disposal system to be built or rebuilt, constructed, altered or reconstructed or repaired, and maintained in such a manner as to meet the requirements of this chapter and in accordance with the city standards as adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 1081 N.S. § 7(e), 1992; Ord. 425 N.S. § C (part), 1976)  
13.24.100 - Subsurface drainage system required when. 
The health officer may require the installation of subsurface drainage on any premises on which a private sewage disposal system is proposed or on which there is an existing sewage disposal system which is failing or in which failure is imminent. Prior to installation of the drainage system, the health officer may require the owner or resident of the premises to submit a report showing nature and extent of subsurface water movement and method of draining. Such report shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer. 
(Ord. 1081 N.S. § 7(f), 1992; Ord. 425 N.S. § C (part), 1976)  
13.24.110 - System failure—Reporting requirements. 
All sewage disposal system failures shall be reported within ten days of their occurrence to the city by the owner or resident. 
(Ord. 1081 N.S. § 7(g), 1992; Ord. 425 N.S. § C (part), 1976)  
13.24.120 - Pumping for disposal. 
All private disposal system pumping must be done by a registered pumper. Each pumper shall report to the health officer all pumping made during the month. Each registered pumper shall be registered with the health officer and shall utilize a disposal point or site approved by the health officer. 
(Ord. 1081 N.S. § 7(h), 1992; Ord. 425 N.S. § C (part), 1976)  
13.24.130 - Conditions prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any septic tank, sewage treatment works, sewer pipes or conduits, or other pipes or conduits for the treatment or discharge of sewage or impure waters or any matter or substance offensive, injurious or dangerous to health, whereby they shall do any of the following: 
A.  Overflow any lands whatever; 
B.  Empty, flow, seep, drain into or affect any springs, streams, rivers, lakes or other waters within the city. 
(Ord. 1081 N.S. § 7(i), 1992; Ord. 425 N.S. § C (part), 1976)  
13.24.140 - Water softener water prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to discharge the waste or brine from any self-regenerating water softener into a septic tank system (sewage disposal system.) 
(Ord. 1081 N.S. § 7(j), 1992; Ord. 425 N.S. § C (part), 1976)  
13.24.150 - Leaching sump prohibited. 
It is unlawful to construct, maintain or operate as part of a private sewage disposal system a leaching sump, seepage pit, cesspool or similar device. 
(Ord. 1081 N.S. § 7(k), 1992; Ord. 425 N.S. § C (part), 1976)  
13.24.160 - Cesspools and sewer wells prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to use a cesspool for the disposal of sewage, or to drill, construct, maintain or operate a sewer well. 
(Ord. 1081 N.S. § 7(l), 1992; Ord. 425 N.S. § C (part), 1976)  
13.24.170 - Enforcement. 
It is the duty of the health officer to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and in the performance of this duty, the health officer or any duly authorized agent of the foregoing, is authorized to enter at any reasonable hour any premises as may be necessary for the enforcement of this chapter and to make any investigation including taking of samples and conducting of dye tests. 
(Ord. 1081 N.S. §§ 5, 7(m), 1992; Ord. 425 N.S. § C (part), 1976)  
13.24.180 - Appeals procedure. 
Any applicant aggrieved by a determination of any administrative official may appeal such determination to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days after receiving notice of the administrative official's determination. The city clerk shall then put the matter on the next open agenda for hearing at a regularly scheduled city council meeting. 
(Ord. 1081 N.S. § 7(n), 1992; Ord. 425 N.S. § C (part), 1976)  
13.24.190 - Liability limitations. 
This chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the city any liability or responsibility for damage resulting from the defective construction of any sanitary disposal system as provided in this chapter, nor shall the city or any official or employee thereof, be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by reason of the inspection authorized thereunder. 
(Ord. 1081 N.S. § 7(o), 1992; Ord. 425 N.S. § C (part), 1976)  
13.24.200 - Violation—Public nuisance. 
Every violation of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance and be subject to abatement as such. 
(Ord. 1081 N.S. § 7(p), 1992; Ord. 425 N.S. § C (part), 1976)  
13.24.210 - Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate, or refuse or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 51, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 51, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 13.24.210 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 13.24.210 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 425 N.S., § C(part), adopted in 1976; Ord. 778 N.S., § 2(part), adopted in 1986; and Ord. 1081 N.S., § 7(q), adopted in 1992.  
Chapter 13.28 - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
Sections: 
 
13.28.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations have the meaning given in this section: 
A.  "Solid waste collector" means any person with whom the city has duly contracted under the terms set out in this chapter, to collect and transport solid waste matter through the streets, alleys or public ways of the city. 
B.  "Solid waste matter" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid and liquid wastes and garbage held to include all animal and vegetable wastes from kitchens; all household wastes that have resulted from the preparation of food, and also, every accumulation of animal and vegetable waste from the establishments where foodstuffs intended for human consumption are handled commercially. "Solid waste matter" also means and includes refuse (stones, cement, other noncombustible material) and rubbish (boxes, paper, rags and other combustible materials.) 
(Ord. 674 N.S. § A (part), 1984)  
13.28.020 - Accumulation unlawful. 
A.  Every person shall keep the premises occupied or controlled by him and every owner of any unoccupied premises or property shall keep the same in a clean and sanitary condition and shall not cause, suffer or permit any garbage to accumulate on such premises or property for a period in excess of one calendar week or cause, suffer or permit any rubbish to accumulate on his premises for a period in excess of one calendar month. Provided, however, that this provision shall not be construed to prohibit any person from keeping building materials on any premises or property during the period of active construction, reconstruction or repair of a building or structure there under a current valid permit, nor the keeping of wood neatly piled upon such premises for household use nor the composting of grass or trimmings. 
B.  The county health officer can require more frequent pickup and removal of rubbish or garbage whenever in his discretion he deems its necessary to prevent a public nuisance or a health hazard on any premises. 
(Ord. 674 N.S. § A (part), 1984)  
13.28.030 - Garbage containers—Specifications. 
Every person in possession or control of any boardinghouse, restaurant, cafe, hotel, apartment or eating house, dwelling house or flat, and every other person having garbage in the city shall provide, or cause to be provided and at all times keep, or cause to be kept, suitable and sufficient watertight cans or receptacles, adequate to contain without leakage or escape of odors, the amount of garbage and rubbish ordinarily accumulating at such place during the intervals between collections made under this chapter. Each such receptacle shall be constructed of galvanized iron and shall have suitable bales or handles on the outside. Such cans or containers shall be kept in a sanitary condition by the owners thereof and the covers shall not be removed except for the purpose of placing refuse therein or removing refuse therefrom, and shall at all times prevent access to flies to the contents thereof. Except as provided herein, no garbage container shall exceed thirty-two gallons in capacity or weigh more than seventy pounds when full. Plastic containers not exceeding thirty-two gallons in capacity and otherwise satisfying the foregoing sanitation standards, and plastic bags securely tied to prevent spillage, shall constitute sufficient containers in compliance with this section. Wheeled refuse carts fixed with a tight-fitting lid and a capacity not to exceed ninety-six gallons provided by the solid waste collector shall also constitute sufficient containers in compliance with this section. 
(Ord. 966 N.S. § 1, 1990: Ord. 788 N.S. § 1 (2.03-1), 1986: Ord. 674 N.S. § A (part), 1984)  
13.28.040 - Garbage containers—Multiple dwellings. 
All persons who are the lessees or operators of a multiple dwelling such as a hotel, motel, trailer park or apartment house shall furnish an adequate number of garbage containers for such multiple dwelling and shall be liable for the garbage collection fees set forth in this chapter pertaining to such dwelling. 
(Ord. 674 N.S. § A (part), 1984)  
13.28.050 - Garbage containers—Placement. 
No garbage container shall be placed or kept on or in any public street, alley, sidewalk, footpath or any public place whatever, other than as allowed by Sections 13.28.055 and 13.28.060 of this chapter, but shall be placed on the premises. 
(Ord. 755 N.S. § 1, 1986: Ord. 674 N.S. § A (part), 1984)  
13.28.055 - Debris boxes—Placement. 
A.  Debris boxes may be placed on public streets or in alleys in accordance with the conditions of a permit issued by the director of public works. Said conditions shall include, at a minimum, requirements that safety reflectors or markings be affixed to said boxes. Such placement shall not exceed a period of seven calendar days. 
B.  Debris boxes are defined as metal containers designed to be loaded and unloaded onto a truck trailer by means of a winch or cable, and are commonly known as "transfer rigs." Such boxes shall not be wider than eight feet nor higher than six feet. 
(Ord. 755 N.S. § 2, 1986)  
13.28.060 - Garbage containers—Placement for collection. 
Collection of solid waste, recyclables and organic wastes shall be at the curbside of the customer's property unless arrangements are made with the company by the customer for a side yard pickup and payment of the additional rate for side yard pickups. Containers shall not be placed at the curbside for collection before six a.m. on the day preceding collection and shall be properly stored as specified in Section 13.28.050 no later than six a.m. the day immediately following the day after collection. 
(Ord. 1704 N.S. § 1, 2004: Ord. 674 N.S. § A (part), 1984)  
13.28.070 - Collection—Franchise agreement. 
A.  For the collection and disposal of solid waste matter, a contract for a period not to exceed twenty years may be entered into by the city. 
B.  The agreement shall provide that the collector shall dispose of all garbage and rubbish outside the city limits in a place and manner that will not be a nuisance to the inhabitants nearby or objectionable in any way to the city council. The disposal site shall have the approval of all applicable regulatory agencies. 
(Ord. 674 N.S. § A (part), 1984)  
13.28.080 - Collection—Mandatory service required—Generally. 
It is found and determined that the public health, safety and welfare of all the citizens of the city require that the accumulation, collection, removal and disposal of garbage from lands, buildings, premises, apartments, hotels and all other premises within the city must be handled in a manner for the greatest good and the least possible inconvenience, cost and maintenance to the city and the citizens thereof; and to that end, garbage collection service is provided by a franchise agreement with a contract agent of the city, and it shall be mandatory for all owners, occupants or persons in possession, charge or control of all places and premises in the city in or from which garbage is created, accumulated or produced to subscribe to and use the city's garbage collection service in the manner and according to the terms and provisions of this chapter. Those places or premises which produce rubbish or refuse only, need not subscribe to this mandatory service and may provide their own means of removal of these materials. 
(Ord. 674 N.S. § A (part), 1984)  
13.28.090 - Collection—Mandatory service required—Exception. 
Upon written application to the city manager setting forth in writing the unusual or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to a particular building or premises, the city manager or his duly authorized representative, may grant an exception to the mandatory garbage service where in his opinion a hardship would be created or it would be impractical to provide the premises with regular garbage service. The exception granted may enable two premises to use the same containers or it may grant a complete exemption. 
(Ord. 674 N.S. § A (part), 1984)  
13.28.100 - Collection—Service established by council resolution. 
The city council, by terms of the franchise agreement, shall establish the routes, times for collection, the rates or fees to be charged, the type of containers to be used, and the placement of containers for solid waste collection. The charges for such collection shall be an obligation of the occupant of the premises or other person who ordered or contracted for this service. 
(Ord. 674 N.S. § A (part), 1984)  
13.28.120 - Owners and occupants liable for fees. 
A.  It is found and determined that the periodic collection, removal and disposal of garbage from all places and premises in the city benefits all owners, occupants or persons in possession, charge or control of all places and premises in the city where such accumulates and requires removal therefrom, and such owners, occupants or persons in possession, charge or control of all such places and premises within the city are made liable for the payment of the garbage collection fees as may be established by the city council, irrespective of the actual use of the garbage collection service provided by the city. 
B.  In the case of premises containing more than one dwelling unit or place of business, or both, which are serviced by a single water meter, such fees may be billed to the owner of the premises who shall collect such fees levied against the occupants of the dwelling units or places of business located on the premises, and shall transmit the amounts so collected to the city. If the owner fails to collect the fees from any such occupants and remit the fees to the city, the owner shall be liable to the city for payment of such fees and subject to the penalties provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 674 N.S. § A (part), 1984)  
13.28.140 - Burying or burning prohibited. 
No person shall place any garbage upon or beneath the surface of any premises nor burn any garbage or rubbish in the city without first obtaining a written permit from the appropriate regulatory agencies. 
(Ord. 674 N.S. § A (part), 1984)  
Chapter 13.30 - URBAN STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL 
Sections: 
 
13.30.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to ensure the health, safety, and general welfare of City of Morgan Hill citizens, and protect and enhance the water quality of watercourses and water bodies in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (California Water Code § 1300 et seq.) by reducing pollutants in storm water discharges to the maximum extent practicable and by prohibiting non-storm water discharges to the storm drain system. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.020 - Definitions. 
The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Best Management Practices or BMP's" means activities, practices, and procedures to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to the municipal storm drain system and waters of the United States or the state. Best Management Practices (BMPs) include but are not limited to: treatment facilities and methods to remove pollutants from storm water; operating and maintenance procedures; facility management practices to control runoff, spillage or leaks of non-storm water, waste disposal, and drainage from materials storage; erosion and sediment control practices; and the prohibition of specific activities, practices, and procedures and such other provisions as the city determines appropriate for the control of pollutants. The City has adopted the BMPs developed by the California Storm Water Quality Association (CASQA) and presented in the California Storm Water Quality Best Management Practices Handbooks (2003 and 2004 Errata). BMP's shall also include any BMP requirements promulgated by any federal, state, regional or local governmental or regulatory agency with legal authority and jurisdiction to promulgate regulations, enforce, implement or carry out the Clean Water Act and the Porter Cologne Act in regards to any activity, operation, or facility which would otherwise cause the discharge of pollutants to the waters of the United States or the state or the storm drain system. 
B.  "City" means the City of Morgan Hill, California. 
C.  "Clean Water Act" means the federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
D.  "Construction Activity" means activities subject to National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre or more or projects in the city's right-of-way. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, excavating, demolition, and all grading activities. 
E.  "Director" means the director of public works of the city or his or her designee. 
F.  "Hazardous Materials" means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
G.  "Illegal Discharge" means any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the waters of the United States or the state or the storm drain system, except as exempted in Section 13.30.90 of this chapter. 
H.  "Illicit Connections" means either of the following: 
1.  Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-storm water discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by a government agency; or 
2.  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the city. 
I.  "Industrial Activity" means activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14). 
J.  "Mobile commercial washing" means any activity conducted for compensation that involves the washing of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, or any other vehicle, and which is moved from one location to another, such as to serve customers at their residences or places of work and includes any temporary car wash event conducted by any person for the purpose of fund raising. 
K.  "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permits" means general, group, and individual storm water discharge permits which regulate facilities defined in federal NPDES regulations pursuant to the Clean Water Act. The California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Central Coast Region (hereinafter, Regional Board) and the State Water Resources Control Board have adopted general storm water discharge permits, including but not limited to the General Construction Activity and General Industrial Activity permits. 
L.  "Non-Storm Water Discharge" means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of storm water. 
M.  "Pollutant" means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; dirt, refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure (including but not limited to sediments, slurries, and concrete rinsates); and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
N.  "Pollution" means alteration of the quality of the waters of the state by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects either the waters for beneficial uses or the facilities which serve these beneficial uses. Pollution may include "contamination as defined in California Water Code § 13050(k). 
O.  "Porter-Cologne Act" means the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act and as amended (California Water Code § 13000 et seq.). 
P.  "Premises" means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Q.  "Storm Drain System" means publicly-owned facilities operated by the city which storm water is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, and other drainage structures which are within the city and are not part of a publicly owned treatment works as defined at 40 CFR Section 122.2. 
R.  "Storm Water" means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from rain storm events. 
S.  "Waters of the United States or the State" means all waters that are defined as "Waters of the United States" at 40 CFR § 230.3(s) or "Waters of the State" as defined at California Water Code § 13050. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.030 - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the waters of the United States or the state or the storm drain system, generated on any developed and undeveloped lands lying within the city including any amendments or revisions thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.040 - Responsibility for administration. 
The director shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.050 - Severability and validity. 
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.060 - Regulatory consistency. 
This chapter shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of the Clean Water Act and Porter-Cologne Act and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto, or any applicable implementing regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.070 - Ultimate responsibility of discharger. 
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants into waters of the United States or the state caused by said person. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, or any agent or employee thereof for any damages that result from any discharger's reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.090 - Prohibition of illegal discharges. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the storm drain system or waters of the United States or the State any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than storm water, whether or not the discharge of such material or pollutant is specifically prohibited in this chapter. 
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
A.  Discharges from the following activities will not be considered a source of pollutants to the storm drain system and to waters of the United States or the state when properly managed to ensure that no potential pollutants are present, and therefore they shall not be considered illegal discharges unless determined to cause a violation of the provisions of the Porter-Cologne Act, Clean Water Act, or this ordinance: potable water line flushing; uncontaminated pumped groundwater and other discharges from potable water sources; diverted stream flows; rising groundwater; groundwater infiltration to the storm drain system; uncontaminated foundation and footing drains; uncontaminated water from crawl space pumps; air conditioning condensation; uncontaminated non-industrial roof drains; springs; flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; street wash waters; and flows from fire fighting. 
B.  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered by the State of California under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted by the City of Morgan Hill for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
C.  With written concurrence of the Regional Board, the City of Morgan Hill may exempt in writing other non-storm water discharges which are not a source of pollutants to the storm drain system nor waters of the United States or the state. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.100 - Prohibition of discharges from industrial or commercial activity. 
Illegal discharges from industrial/commercial sources into the storm drain system or waters of the United States or the state shall be prohibited unless permitted under a separate NPDES permit or as allowed by BMPs published or approved by the city public works department. Such discharges include, but are not limited to, the following: 
A.  Water from the cleaning of gas stations, vehicle service garages, or other types of vehicle service facilities; 
B.  Water, cleansers, or solvents from the cleaning of vehicles, machinery or equipment, and other such commercial and industrial operations; 
C.  Water from the washing or rinsing of vehicles containing soap, detergents, solvents, or other cleaners; 
D.  Water from the washing or rinsing of vehicles, with or without soap, from auto body repair shops; 
E.  Water from the cleaning or rinsing of vehicle engine, undercarriage, or auto parts cleaning; 
F.  Vehicle fluids; 
G.  Mat wash water from food service facilities; 
H.  Food and kitchen cleaning water from food service facilities; 
I.  Leakage from dumpsters or trash containers; 
J.  Water from the cleaning or rinsing of garbage dumpster areas and areas where garbage is stored or contained; 
K.  Water from pressure washing, steam cleaning, and hand scrubbing of sidewalks, gutters, plazas, alleyways, outdoor eating areas, steps, building exteriors, walls, driveways, parking lots, loading docks, and other outdoor surfaces; 
L.  Wastewater or cleaning fluids from carpet cleaning; 
M.  Swimming pool and spa water; 
N.  Wash out from concrete trucks; 
O.  Runoff from areas where hazardous substances, including diesel fuel, gasoline and motor oil are stored; 
P.  Super-chlorinated water normally associated with the disinfection of potable water systems. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.110 - Prohibition of illicit connections. 
A.  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
B.  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.120 - Waste disposal and litter prohibitions. 
No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, left, or maintained, in or upon any public or private property, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, component of the storm drain system, or water of the United States or state, any refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, pet litter or droppings or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution. Wastes deposited in streets in proper waste receptacles for the purposes of collection are exempted from this prohibition. 
Private or commercial garbage and waste storage areas shall properly contain waste and shall not be allowed to discharge contents which can contribute to pollution. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.130 - Prohibition of discharges from landscape water runoff activity. 
No person shall discharge, cause or permit any discharge fertilizer, pesticides, herbicides, or sediment into waters of the United States or the state or the stormdrain system, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.140 - Discharges in violation of industrial or construction activity NPDES storm water discharge permit. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the director prior to or as a condition of a subdivision map, site plan, building permit, or development or improvement plan; upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement proceeding or action; or for any other reasonable cause. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.150 - Leaking motor vehicles prohibition. 
No person shall discharge, cause, or permit any discharge water containing grease, oil, antifreeze, or other fluids from motor vehicles into the waters of the United States or the state or the storm drain system, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution. Any leak or spill related to vehicles or equipment shall be cleaned and contained to prevent the potential release of pollutants into storm water. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.160 - Limitations on point of discharge. 
No person shall discharge any substance directly into a manhole or other opening in a city storm drain other than through a city-approved storm drain connection. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.170 - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce storm water pollutants. 
A.  Every person undertaking activity or operation, or owning or operating a facility which would otherwise cause the discharge of pollutants to the storm drain system or the waters of the United States or the state shall comply with BMP's. 
B.  The city may require any owner or person developing real property to identify BMP's to control the volume, rate and potential pollutant load storm water runoff from new development and redevelopment projects as may be appropriate to minimize the generation, transport and discharge of pollutants. Such identified BMP's shall be incorporated into any land use entitlement and construction or building-related permit to be issued relative to such development or redevelopment. The owner and developer shall comply with the terms, provisions, and conditions of such land use entitlements and building permits as required in this chapter and other applicable sections of this code. 
C.  Notwithstanding the presence or absence of requirements promulgated pursuant to Subsections A. and B., any person engaged in activities or operations, or owning commercial or industrial facilities or residential property which will or may result in pollutants entering storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States or the state shall implement BMPs to the extent they are technologically achievable to prevent and reduce such pollutants. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes shall be provided and maintained at the owner or operator's expense. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.180 - Requirement to eliminate illegal discharges. 
The director may require by written notice that a person responsible for an illegal discharge immediately, or by a specified date, discontinue the discharge and, if necessary, take measures to eliminate the source of the discharge to prevent the occurrence of future illegal discharges. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.190 - Requirement to eliminate or secure approval for illicit connections. 
A.  The director may require by written notice that a person responsible for an illicit connection to the storm drain system comply with the requirements of this chapter to eliminate or secure approval for the connection by a specified date, regardless of whether or not the connection or discharges to it had been established or approved prior to the effective date of this chapter. 
B.  If, subsequent to eliminating a connection found to be in violation of this chapter, the responsible person can demonstrate that an illegal discharge will no longer occur, said person may request city approval to reconnect. The reconnection or reinstallation of the connection shall be at the responsible person's expense. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.200 - Watercourse protection. 
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee of such property, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property reasonably free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. The owner or lessee shall not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually necessary for maintenance, nor remove said vegetation in such a manner as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion. The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining and stabilizing that portion of the watercourse that is within their property lines in order to protect against erosion and degradation of the watercourse originating or contributed from their property. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.210 - Requirement to Remediate. 
Whenever the director finds that a discharge of pollutants is taking place or has occurred which will result in or has resulted in pollution of storm water, the storm drain system, or water of the United States or the state, the director may require by written notice to the owner of the property and/or the responsible person that the pollution be remediated and the affected property restored within a specified time pursuant to the provisions of Sections 13.30.300 through 13.30.310. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.220 - Requirement to monitor and analyze. 
The director may require by written notice that any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility which may cause or contribute to storm water pollution, illegal discharges, and/or non-storm water discharges to the storm drain system or waters of the United States or the state to undertake at said person's expense such monitoring and analyses and furnish such reports to the city as deemed necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. The burden, including costs, of these activities, analyses, and reports shall bear a reasonable relationship to the need for the monitoring, analyses, and reports and the benefits to be obtained. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.230 - Notification of spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm drain system, or water of the United States or the state from said facility, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of a hazardous material said person shall immediately notify emergency response officials of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services (911). In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the city's public works department in person or by phone or facsimile no later than 5:00 p.m. of the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city's public works department within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.240 - NPDES General Permit No. CAS000001 for industrial activities. 
Industrial facilities which fall under the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) by federal regulations shall obtain and comply with the State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB) NPDES General Permit No. CAS000001 waste discharge requirements (WDRS) for discharges of storm water associated with industrial activities excluding construction activities. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.250 - NPDES General Permit No. CAS000002 for construction activities. 
For all projects disturbing a soil area of one or more acres, or projects part of a larger common plan of development that in total disturbs more than one acre, it shall be a condition of a subdivision map, site plan, building permit, or development or improvement plan to obtain and comply with the State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB) NPDES General Permit No. CAS000002 waste discharge requirements (WDRS) for discharges of storm water runoff associated with construction activity. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.260 - Storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) manual. 
A.  A storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) manual shall be a condition of a subdivision map, site plan, building permit, or development or improvement plan for all projects disturbing a soil area of one or more acres, or projects part of a larger common plan of development that in total disturbs more than one acre. 
B.  Preparation of a SWPPP manual shall be prepared in accordance with the most current SWRCB NPDES General Permit No. CAS000002 for construction activities. 
C.  A SWPPP manual shall be made available at construction sites at all times. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.270 - Water pollution control. 
A.  Water pollution control drawings for erosion and sediment control showing how to stabilize soil and sediment on the construction site shall be a condition of a subdivision map, site plan, building permit, or development or improvement plan. 
B.  Erosion control shall be planned during rainy season between September 15th and May 1st, and sediment control shall be planned year round for the life of the project. Erosion and sediment control shall meet the minimum standards and specification of the CASQA BMP's. 
1.  Erosion control plans shall provide details for BMPs such as but not limited to: 
a.  Preservation of existing vegetation. 
b.  Hydraulic mulch. 
c.  Hydroseeding. 
d.  Soil binders. 
e.  Straw mulch. 
f.  Geotextile and mats. 
g.  Wood mulching. 
h.  Earth dikes and drainage swales. 
i.  Velocity dissipation. 
j.  Slope drains. 
2.  Sediment control plans shall provide details for BMPs such as but not limited to: 
a.  Silt fence. 
b.  Sediment basin. 
c.  Sediment trap. 
d.  Check dam. 
e.  Fiber rolls/straw wattles. 
f.  Gravel bag berm. 
g.  Street sweeping and vacuuming. 
h.  Sand bag barrier. 
i.  Straw bale barrier. 
j.  Strom drain inlet protection. 
k.  Wind/dust control. 
l.  Stabilized rocked construction entrance/exit. 
m.  Tracking control. 
C.  Implementation of the water pollution control drawings for erosion and sediment control shall be completed prior to any physical development of any property. 
D.  Construction sites shall keep erosion and sediment control supplies on site during the rainy season. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.280 - Mobile commercial washing operations. 
A.  No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on mobile commercial washing without first obtaining and maintaining a mobile commercial washing operation permit issued pursuant to this chapter; 
B.  Applications for mobile commercial washing permits shall be filed with the director and shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Applications for mobile commercial washing permits shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
2.  Applications shall be completed on a form designated by the director, shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury, and shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name, address, telephone and other contact information for the applicant. 
b.  A complete description of the mobile commercial washing to be conducted in the city. 
c.  Any other information that the director reasonable requires to administer this chapter of this code with respect to the applicant's activities in the city; 
C.  Once a completed application is filed, and the applicant pays the prescribed fee, the director shall review the application and either approve (with or without conditions of approval) or deny, the application. If the application is denied, the director shall give notice of that decision to the applicant and shall include a statement of the reasons for the denial. The grounds for denial shall be: 
1.  The permit application contains a false or misleading statement of a material fact. 
2.  The permit application fails to demonstrate how the applicant will comply with this chapter of this code. 
3.  The application seeks approval for mobile commercial washing in violation of applicable law; 
D.  Notice of the director's decision shall be mailed by certified or registered mail or personally delivered to the applicant at the address shown on the application; 
E.  A mobile commercial washing permit shall be effective on the date it is approved by the director and shall be valid for one year from the date of its issuance, unless suspended or revoked; 
F.  A permittee shall notify the director of any change in facts or information presented in the application within ten calendar days after such change provided, however, that nothing in this section shall entitle a permittee to conduct mobile commercial washing other than in compliance with the permit as issued and in accordance with this chapter of this code and other applicable law; 
G.  No permit issued under this chapter may be transferred and any attempt to do so shall invalidate the permit and constitute a violation of this chapter; 
H.  A mobile commercial washing permittee shall: 
1.  When utilizing wash water recycling units: 
a.  Notify the director in writing of all changes in disposal sites during the permit period; 
b.  Discharge wash water only as specified in the permit application; 
2.  Comply with this chapter of this code. 
3.  Display its mobile commercial washing permit as required by the director. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.290 - Authority to inspect. 
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this chapter, or whenever the director has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter, the director may enter such premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same and to inspect and copy records related to storm water compliance provided that (i) if such building or premises be occupied, he or she shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and (ii) if such building or premises be unoccupied, he or she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
In any circumstance where there appears an immediate threat to the public health or safety, the director may enter any structure or premises without the consent of any person or court process. 
Routine or area inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of this chapter, including but not limited to random sampling and/or sampling in areas with evidence of storm water contamination, illicit discharges, discharges of non-storm water to the storm water system, or similar factors. 
The city shall have the right to establish on any property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. During any inspection as provided herein, the director may take any samples and perform any testing deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or to record site activities. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.300 - Notice of violation. 
Whenever the director finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the director may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
A.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
B.  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
C.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
D.  The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
E.  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
F.  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by the city or a contractor designated by the director and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator pursuant to Section 13.30.330, "Charging Cost of Abatement." 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.310 - Appeal. 
Any person receiving a notice of violation under Section 13.30.300, above may appeal the determination of the director to the City Manager. The notice of appeal must be received by the city manager within five days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the city manager or his/her designee shall take place within fifteen days from the date of city's receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the city manager or designee shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.320 - Abatement by city. 
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal under Section 13.30.310, within ten days of the decision of the city manager upholding the decision of the director, then the city or a contractor designated by the director may enter upon the subject private property and is authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the city or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.330 - Charging cost of abatement. 
Within 30 days after abatement of the nuisance by city, the director shall notify the property owner of the property of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment with the city clerk within fifteen days. The city clerk shall set the matter for public hearing by the city council. The decision of the city council shall be set forth by resolution and shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.340 - Urgency abatement. 
The director is authorized to require immediate abatement of any violation of this chapter that constitutes an immediate threat to the health, safety or well-being of the public. If any such violation is not abated immediately as directed by the director, the city is authorized to enter onto private property and to take any and all measures required to remediate the violation. Any expense related to such remediation undertaken by the city o shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner and/or responsible party. Any relief obtained under this section shall not prevent city from seeking other and further relief authorized under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.350 - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010; Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 52, 5-2-2018)  
13.30.360 - Compensatory action. 
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this chapter, the director may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.370 - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties hereinbefore provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored by the city at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.380 - Acts potentially resulting in a violation of the Federal Clean Water Act and/or California Porter-Cologne Act. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any provision of any requirement issued pursuant to this chapter may also be in violation of the Clean Water Act and/or the Porter-Cologne Act and may be subject to the sanctions of those acts including civil and criminal penalties. Any enforcement action authorized under this chapter shall also include written notice to the violator of such potential liability. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.390 - Coordination with hazardous materials inventory and response program. 
The first revision of the business plan for any facility subject to the city's hazardous materials inventory and response program shall include a program for compliance with this chapter, including the prohibitions on non-storm water discharges and illicit discharges, and the requirement to reduce storm water pollutants to the maximum extent practicable. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
13.30.400 - Fees set by resolution. 
The city council shall establish, by resolution, any fees necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1989 N.S., § 1, 6-2-2010)  
Title 14 - HOUSING  
Chapter 14.04 - INCLUSIONARY HOUSING 
 
14.04.010 - Findings. 
The City Council finds that: 
A.  Housing prices and rents in the city of Morgan Hill have increased at a significantly higher rate than general wages. The lack of affordable housing forces many residents to pay a very high percentage of their income for housing or to commute considerable distances, adding to air pollution and traffic congestion throughout Santa Clara County. The lack of affordable housing has made it more difficult to recruit workers, potentially affecting the economic vitality of the city. New housing developments do not provide an adequate supply of housing affordable to low- and moderate-income households. 
B.  Rental and owner-occupied housing in Morgan Hill has become steadily more expensive. Although Morgan Hill has historically met its regional housing needs allocation goals, in recent years, housing costs have escalated sharply, increasing faster than incomes. As a result, there is a severe shortage of adequate, affordable housing for extremely low-, very low-, low-, and moderate-income households. 
C.  In order to meet the needs of Morgan Hill households, residential developments will need to provide housing for a variety of household types of a range of incomes and ages. The inclusionary housing ordinance codified in this title will substantially advance the city's interest in providing additional rental and ownership housing affordable to all income levels and dispersed throughout the city. 
D.  Continued new housing development that does not include housing for low- and moderate-income households will further contribute to the current shortage of affordable housing by reducing the small remaining supply of undeveloped land. 
E.  On February 18, 2015, the city council approved the city's housing element, a chapter of the general plan which includes strategies to build new housing to meet the full range of future community housing needs, including affordable and accessible housing. 
F.  Implementation of the inclusionary housing ordinance is a necessary part of the city's efforts to meet its regional housing needs allocation goals and obligations. Pursuant to the ordinance, at least fifteen percent of the units in a new housing development of two or more units will be required to be price or rent-restricted and available for occupancy by low- and moderate-income households. In some circumstances, developers will have an option to provide inclusionary units off-site or to pay an in-lieu housing fee. 
(Ord. No. 2278 N.S., § 1, 7-25-2018)  
14.04.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to further the city's efforts to require housing available to extremely low-income, very low-income, low-income, and moderate-income households. The housing element of the city's general plan implements the established policy of the state of California that each community should foster an adequate supply of housing for persons at all economic levels. 
Providing the inclusionary units required by this chapter will help to ensure that part of Morgan Hill's remaining developable land is used to provide affordable housing to encourage an economically balanced community. Requiring builders of new market-rate housing to include some housing affordable to households at a range of incomes is consistent with the goal of fostering an adequate supply of housing for persons at all income levels and serves the goal of mixed-income housing. Furthermore, the production of inclusionary units is intended to assist the city in meeting its regional housing need allocation. 
The inclusionary housing ordinance is required in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare while preserving and enhancing economic diversity and inclusiveness within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2278 N.S., § 1, 7-25-2018; Ord. No. 2299 N.S., § 1, 3-20-2019)  
14.04.030 - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth below: 
1.  "Affordable ownership cost" means average monthly housing costs during the first calendar year of a household's occupancy, including mortgage principal and interest payments, mortgage insurance fees, if any, property taxes, reasonable allowances for utilities and property maintenance and repairs, homeowners insurance, and homeowners' association dues that in the aggregate do not exceed thirty five percent of the applicable income limit for eligible households for a particular inclusionary unit that is a for-sale unit. 
2.  "Affordable rent" means a monthly rent and utility allowance that does not exceed the limits as defined in Section 50053 of the California Health and Safety Code, as may be amended from time-to-time. 
3.  "Affordable sales price" means a sales price that will result in an affordable ownership cost for an eligible household of the applicable income limit for an inclusionary unit that is a for-sale unit, and that does not exceed the limits as defined in Section 50052.5 of the California Health and Safety Code, as may be amended from time-to-time. 
4.  "Applicant" means a person or entity who applies for approvals for a residential project, and if the applicant does not own the property on which the residential project is proposed, also means the owner or owners of the property. 
5.  "Area median income" or "AMI" means the median household income of households in Santa Clara County, adjusted for household size, as determined and published by the California Housing and Community Development Department (HCD). 
6.  "Assumed household size" means, for the purpose of establishing affordable sales prices and affordable rent, a household with a total number of members equal to the number of bedrooms in the dwelling unit, plus one, consistent with Section 50052.5(h) of the California Health and Safety Code and subject to applicable federal rules (if any). For example, the assumed household size for a three-bedroom home is a four-person household. 
7.  "Building permit" means full structural building permits as well as partial permits such as foundation-only permits. 
8.  "Certificate of occupancy" means that construction is complete and the city building official or his or her designee has signed off the "residential dwelling occupancy approval" on the backside of the city of Morgan Hill building permit card. 
9.  "City manager" means the city manager of Morgan Hill or his or her designee. 
10.  "Contiguous" means any parcel of land that is: 
a.  Touching another parcel at any point; 
b.  Separated from another parcel at any point only by a public right-of-way, private street or way, or public or private utility, service, or access easement; or 
c.  Separated from another parcel only by other real property of the applicant which is not subject to the requirements of this chapter at the time of the planning permit application by the applicant. 
11.  "Density bonus" means an increase in the number of units permitted in a proposed residential project provided pursuant to the state density bonus law as set forth in Section 65915 et seq. of the California Government Code, as amended. 
12.  "Downtown" means the geographical area as depicted in Figure CNF-2 of the general plan. 
13.  "Dwelling unit" means a residential unit consisting of one or more rooms designed, occupied, or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping, and bathroom facilities. 
14.  "Eligible household" means a household whose gross annual household income does not exceed the applicable maximum for a given inclusionary Unit. 
15.  "Extremely low-income household" means a household with a gross annual household income that does not exceed thirty percent of AMI for Santa Clara County. This definition corresponds to the definition of extremely low-income household used for state- and federally-assisted housing programs. Extremely low-income households are a subset of very low-income households. 
16.  "First approval" means the first of the following approvals to be issued with respect to a residential project: building permit, planned development permit, tentative parcel map, tentative subdivision map, conditional use permit, site and architectural review permit, or other discretionary city land use approval. 
17.  "For-sale project" means a residential project, or portion thereof, that is intended to be sold to owner-occupants upon completion. 
18.  "Gross annual household income" means the combined adjusted gross (pre-tax) income of all adult persons in a household who is an applicant for an inclusionary unit, or who are residing in an inclusionary unit, as calculated pursuant to the Section 8 Program under the United States Housing Act of 1937, as amended, or its successor. 
19.  "Inclusionary affordable housing agreement" means an agreement between the city and an applicant, governing how the applicant will comply with this chapter. 
20.  "Inclusionary unit" means a dwelling unit that pursuant to this chapter is required to be rented at an affordable rent or sold at an affordable sales price to extremely low-, very low-, low-, or moderate-income households as applicable. 
21.  "In-lieu fee" means the fee payable pursuant to this chapter as an alternative to the construction of on-site inclusionary units. 
22.  "Low-income household" means a household with a gross annual household income between fifty-one percent and eighty percent of AMI for Santa Clara County. This definition corresponds to the definition of lower income household used for state- and federally-assisted housing programs. 
23.  "Market-rate unit" means a dwelling unit offered on the open market at the prevailing market-rate for purchase or rental. 
24.  "Moderate-income household" means a household with a gross annual household income between eighty-one percent and one hundred twenty percent of AMI for Santa Clara County. This definition corresponds to the definition of moderate-income household for state-assisted housing programs. 
25.  "Regional housing need allocation" (RHNA) means the state of California mandated process that identifies the total number of housing units by affordability level that each jurisdiction must accommodate in its housing element. 
26.  "Rental project" means a residential project, or portion thereof, that is intended to be rented to tenants upon completion. 
27.  "Residential project" means a project undertaken for the purpose of development of land for residential purposes that requires the issuance of a discretionary or ministerial approval or permit, including a permit for construction, and that will include two or more dwelling units. "Residential project" also includes developments on contiguous lots for which applications are filed by the same property owner or applicant and that will include two or more dwelling units. 
28.  "Very low-income household" means a household with a gross annual household income that does not exceed fifty percent of AMI for Santa Clara County. This definition corresponds to the definition of very low-income household used for state- and federally-assisted housing programs. Very low-income households are a subset of low-income households. 
(Ord. No. 2278 N.S., § 1, 7-25-2018)  
14.04.040 - General requirements. 
A.  Percentage Requirement. Except as provided in paragraphs B and D of this section, at least fifteen percent of all units in residential projects shall be inclusionary units that shall be made available at affordable rents or affordable sales prices as prescribed in this section. The inclusionary units shall be approved, and construction of the inclusionary units shall be completed not later than the times prescribed in Section 14.04.050 of this chapter, unless an alternative requirement is approved pursuant to Section 14.04.070 of this chapter. 
Whenever application of the requirements of this chapter results in a fractional number of required inclusionary units, if the fraction is 0.50 or greater, construction of the next higher whole number of inclusionary Units shall be required, and where the fraction is 0.49 or less, payment of the applicable housing fee adopted by city council shall be required for the fractional unit. 
B.  For-Sale Projects in Downtown. All new for-sale residential projects consisting of two or more dwelling units located within downtown are required to restrict ten percent of the dwelling units for sale at affordable sales prices to moderate-income households. Such dwelling units must be sold to eligible households, and shall be subject to a recorded deed restriction that will impose resale price restrictions for a period of forty-five years. 
C.  For-Sale Projects Outside of Downtown. All new for-sale residential projects consisting of two or more dwelling units located within the city but outside of downtown are required to restrict fifteen percent of the dwelling units for sale at affordable sales prices to moderate-income households. Such dwelling units must be sold to eligible households, and shall be subject to a recorded deed restriction that will impose resale price restrictions for a period of forty-five years. 
D.  Rental Projects in Downtown. All new rental residential projects consisting of two or more dwelling units located within downtown are required to restrict ten percent of the dwelling units for rent at affordable rents and occupancy by low-income and very low-income households. Such dwelling units must be occupied by, or if vacant, available for occupancy by eligible households, and such restrictions shall be documented in a recorded inclusionary affordable housing agreement with a term of fifty-five years. At least one-half of the required inclusionary units shall be offered at affordable rents exclusively to very low-income households. 
E.  Rental Projects Outside of Downtown. All new rental residential projects consisting of two or more dwelling units located within the city but outside of downtown are required to restrict fifteen percent of the dwelling units for rent at affordable rents and occupancy by low-income and very low-income households. Such dwelling units must be occupied by, or if vacant, available for occupancy by eligible Households, and such restrictions shall be documented in a recorded inclusionary affordable housing agreement with a term of fifty-five years. At least one-half of the required inclusionary units shall be offered at affordable rents exclusively to very low-income households. 
F.  Location and Design of Inclusionary Units. All inclusionary units shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the residential project, and shall be comparable to the design of the market-rate units in the residential project in terms of distribution of model types, number of bedrooms, appearance, materials and quality of finishes. There shall not be significant identifiable differences between inclusionary units and market-rate dwelling units that are visible from the exterior of the dwelling units, and the size and design of the dwelling units shall be reasonably consistent with the market-rate units in the development. occupants of inclusionary units shall be provided the same access to project amenities, recreational facilities, and common areas as occupants of market-rate units. 
G.  For-sale Projects. Inclusionary units that will be offered for sale shall be sold for owner-occupancy at an affordable sales price to moderate-income households that qualify as eligible households. 
H.  Rental projects. The inclusionary units that are constructed in market-rate rental projects shall be offered for rent to eligible households at affordable rents to low- and very low-income households. At least one-half of the required inclusionary units in rental projects, shall be offered at affordable rents exclusively to very low-income households. 
I.  Exceptions. The affordability levels required for a residential project may be modified by written agreement between the city and the applicant upon a finding that such modification is necessary to effectively achieve the city's RHNA goals in the then-current housing element cycle. 
(Ord. No. 2278 N.S., § 1, 7-25-2018)  
14.04.050 - Time of performance. 
A.  An application for first approval of a residential project will not be deemed complete until the applicant has submitted plans and proposals that demonstrate how the applicant proposes to meet requirements of this chapter, including any plans for the construction of on-site units pursuant to Section 14.04.040 of this chapter or the applicant's proposal for an alternative means of compliance pursuant to Section 14.04.070, of this chapter. 
B.  Conditions to carry out the purposes of this chapter shall be imposed on the first approval for a residential project. Additional conditions may be imposed on later city approvals or actions, including without limitation planned development permits, tentative parcel maps, tentative subdivision maps, conditional use permits, site and architectural review permits, or building permits. The conditions of approval included with the first approval of the residential project shall further provide that prior to the recordation of the parcel map or final map in the case of subdivisions and/or prior to the issuance of building permits in the case of all other land use permits to which this chapter applies, the applicant shall enter into an inclusionary affordable housing agreement prepared by the city attorney and approved by the city manager that contains specific requirements implementing the conditions of approval including, but not limited to, as applicable, the number of inclusionary units, the level(s) of affordability, the location and type of inclusionary units, timing of construction of inclusionary units in relation to the construction of the market-rate units contained in the development, marketing and selection of tenants and homebuyers, and the amount of the in-lieu fee, if any. The inclusionary affordable housing agreement may be amended by the parties, provided the amendment is consistent with the condition of approval imposed as part of the first approval and the then-existing city approvals. If such proposed amendment is minor or technical in nature, the city manager shall have authority to approve or disapprove the amendment on behalf of the city. If such proposed amendment makes a substantive or material change to the inclusionary affordable housing agreement, such amendment shall be effective only following notice and hearing and such other procedures as may be required by law, and approval by the city department that issued the first approval for the project. 
C.  No building permit shall be issued for any market-rate unit until the applicant has obtained permits for inclusionary units sufficient to meet the requirements of Section 14.04.040 of this chapter, or received approval of an alternative requirement under Section 14.04.070 of this chapter. No final inspection for occupancy for any market-rate unit shall be completed until the applicant has constructed the inclusionary units required by Section 14.04.040 of this chapter, or completed corresponding alternative performance under Section 14.04.070 of this chapter. The time requirements set forth in this subsection for issuance of building permits for market-rate units and for final inspections for occupancy for market-rate units may be modified to accommodate phasing schedules, model variations, or other factors in a residential project, if the city determines this will provide greater public benefit. 
(Ord. No. 2278 N.S., § 1, 7-25-2018)  
14.04.060 - Continued affordability and city review of occupancy. 
A.  Term of affordability—For-sale projects. A resale restriction, covenant, deed of trust and/or other documents in form prepared by the city attorney, shall be recorded against each inclusionary unit that is a for-sale unit. These documents shall have an initial term of forty-five years, and shall be renewed upon each change of title to the inclusionary unit. The resale restriction, or other documents required by this subsection, and any change in the form of any such documents, shall be approved by the city manager or his or her designee prior to execution and recordation of such document. The city shall be a party to the resale restriction or other documents required by this subsection and shall have the right to enforce the covenants and restrictions contained therein. 
B.  Term of affordability—Rental projects. A regulatory agreement, covenant, deed of trust, and/or other documents prepared by the city attorney, shall be recorded against each residential project that contains inclusionary units that are rental units. These documents shall have a term of fifty-five years. The regulatory agreement and other documents required by this subsection, shall run with the land and shall not be affected by the sale of the property or units in the project. The regulatory agreement and other documents required by this subsection, and any modification to such document, shall be approved by the city manager or his or her designee and approved as to form by the city attorney, prior to execution and recordation of such document. The city shall be a party to the regulatory agreement or other documents required by this subsection and shall have the right to enforce the covenants and restrictions contained therein. 
C.  Eligibility requirements. No household shall be permitted to begin occupancy of an inclusionary unit unless the city or its designated administrator as referenced in the Below Market-Rate (BMR) Program Administration Ordinance 2204, Chapter 15.23, Section 15.23.040, Duties of Program Administrator, has approved the household's eligibility. If the city or its designee maintains a list of, or otherwise identifies, eligible households, initial and subsequent occupants of inclusionary units shall be selected first from the list of identified households, to the maximum extent possible, in accordance with rules approved by the city manager or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 2278 N.S., § 1, 7-25-2018; Ord. No. 2288 N.S., § 3, 10-24-2018)  
14.04.070 - Alternatives. 
In lieu of building inclusionary units within a residential project, an applicant may propose to satisfy the requirements of this chapter by one of the following alternative modes of compliance, provided that the applicant includes such proposal in its application for the first approval of the residential project, and further provided that the criteria stated in the relevant subsection below are satisfied. 
A.  Rental Units in For-Sale Projects. Where owner-occupied inclusionary units are required by Section 14.04.040 of this chapter, an applicant may instead elect to construct as part of the residential project the same or a greater number of rental units, affordable to extremely low-, very low-, low- and moderate-income households in the proportions and at the rents as prescribed in Section 14.04.030 of this chapter. Substitution of rental units shall be allowed under this subsection only if either: 
1.  The rental units are at least equal in number of bedrooms to the owner-occupancy units that would have been allowed, or 
2.  Any comparative deficiency in the number of bedrooms is compensated for by additional units and/or affordability to households with lower incomes. 
B.  Off-site Construction. An Applicant may propose to construct, or make possible construction by another developer, units that will not be physically contiguous to the market-rate units (or units that are physically contiguous to the market-rate units if the city determines this will provide greater public benefit). Off-site construction pursuant to this subsection shall be approved only if: 
1.  An inclusionary affordable housing agreement acceptable to the city manager or his or her designee that requires an equal or greater number of inclusionary units as required under Section 14.04.040 of this chapter is recorded; 
2.  Approval has been secured for the off-site units not later than the time the residential project is approved, and completion of the off-site units is secured by a requirement that certificates of occupancy for the related market-rate units will be issued after certificates of occupancy have been issued for the inclusionary units, provided that the time requirements set forth in this subsection for final inspections for occupancy for market-rate units may be modified to accommodate phasing schedules, model variations, financing requirements, or other factors, if the city determines this will provide greater public benefit; 
3.  The off-site units will be greater in number, larger, or will be affordable to households with lower incomes than would otherwise be required by Section 14.04.040 of this chapter; 
4.  Financing or a viable financing plan is in place for the off-site units; 
5.  If the off-site units receive any public assistance, the developer of the market-rate project will contribute economic value to the off-site units equivalent to the cost that would have been incurred to provide the required number of inclusionary units on-site in the residential project; and 
6.  The city may require that completion of off-site units shall be further secured by the developer's agreement to pay an in-lieu fee in the amount approved by city council in the event the off-site units are not timely completed. 
C.  Land Dedication. An applicant may pro-pose to dedicate without cost to the city, a lot or lots within or contiguous to the residential project, sufficient to accommodate at least the required inclusionary units for the residential project. An election to dedicate land in lieu of compliance with other provisions of this chapter shall be allowed only if: 
1.  The value of the lot or lots to be dedicated is sufficient to make development of the otherwise required inclusionary units economically feasible, and financing or a viable financing plan is in place for at least the required number of inclusionary units; and 
2.  The lot or lots are zoned for and suitable for construction of affordable housing at a feasible cost, served by utilities, streets, and other infra-structure; there are no hazardous materials present or other material constraints on development of affordable housing on the lot or lots; and land use approvals have been obtained as necessary for the development of the inclusionary units on the lot or lots. 
D.  In-lieu Housing Fee. 
1.  An in-lieu housing fee may be paid in addition to building or in-lieu of building as follows: 
a.  As provided in Section 14.04.040A, whenever application of the requirements of this chapter results in a fractional number of .49 or less of required inclusionary units. 
b.  For all other residential projects, upon determination by city council that payment of an in-lieu fee is preferred to building inclusionary units onsite, or one of the other alternatives described in Section 14.04.070A through C above, considering the following: 
i.  Whether the production of the proposed inclusionary units will fill a need in an affordable housing category or some other prioritized housing need area. 
ii.  Whether the proposed inclusionary units are in a category for which the city has already met its RHNA goal and therefore payment of a fee may be preferred. 
iii.  Whether there is a specific identifiable project that the city can support with the fees. 
iv.  Whether affordable units are appropriate in the specific project. 
2.  The initial in-lieu fee schedule shall be set by city council resolution or other action of the city council so that the fee amounts are not greater than the difference between: 
a.  The amount of a conventional permanent loan that an inclusionary unit would support based on the affordable rent or affordable sales price for the inclusionary unit; and 
b.  The estimated total development cost of a prototypical inclusionary unit. 
3.  The city council may annually review the fees authorized by this subsection by resolution, and may, based on that review, adjust the fee amount. For any annual period during which the city council does not review the fee authorized by this subsection, fee amounts shall be adjusted once by the city manager or his or her designee based on the construction cost index. 
4.  In-lieu fees shall be calculated based on the fee schedule in effect at the time the fee is paid. In-lieu fees shall be paid prior to issuance of building permits for market-rate units in a residential project. If building permits are issued for only part of a residential project, the fee amount shall be based only on the number of units then permitted. Where payment is delayed, in the event of default or for any other reason, the amount of the in-lieu fee payable under this subsection shall be based upon the fee schedule in effect at the time the fee is paid. 
(Ord. No. 2278 N.S., § 1, 7-25-2018; Ord. No. 2299 N.S., § 2, 3-20-2019)  
14.04.080 - Use of in-lieu fees. 
A.  All in-lieu fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited into a separate account to be designated as the city of Morgan Hill housing in-lieu fee fund. 
B.  The in-lieu fees collected pursuant to this chapter, and all earnings from investment of such fees, shall be expended exclusively to provide or assure continued provision of affordable housing in the city through acquisition, construction, development assistance, rehabilitation, financing, rent subsidies, or other methods, and for costs of administering programs that serve those ends. The housing assisted with such funds shall be of a type, or at an affordability level, for which there is a need in the city and that is not adequately supplied by private development. 
(Ord. No. 2278 N.S., § 1, 7-25-2018)  
14.04.090 - Waiver of requirements. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the requirements of this chapter shall be waived, adjusted, or reduced if the applicant demonstrates that applying the requirements of this chapter would take property in violation of the constitutions of the United States or the State of California or would otherwise result in an unconstitutional application of this chapter. To receive a waiver, adjustment or reduction under this section, the applicant must file a written request together with the development application(s) when applying for a first approval for the residential project, and/or as part of any appeal that the city provides as part of the process for the first approval. The written request shall provide substantial evidence showing that applying the requirements of this chapter would take property in violation of the constitutions of the United States or the state of California or would otherwise result in an unconstitutional application of this chapter. The city may assume that: (a) the applicant will provide the most economical inclusionary units feasible meeting the requirements of this chapter; and (b) the applicant is likely to obtain housing subsidies when such funds are reasonably available. The waiver, adjustment, or reduction may be approved only to the extent necessary to avoid an unconstitutional result, after adoption of written findings, based on substantial evidence, supporting the determinations required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 2278 N.S., § 1, 7-25-2018)  
14.04.100 - Enforcement. 
A.  The city council may adopt guidelines, by resolution, to assist in the implementation and administration of all aspects of this chapter. 
B.  The city shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter and all inclusionary affordable housing agreements, regulatory agreements, covenants, resale restrictions, promissory notes, deed of trust, and other requirements placed on inclusionary units by civil action and any other proceeding or method permitted by law. 
C.  Failure of any official or agency to fulfill the requirements of this chapter shall not excuse any applicant or owner from the requirements of this chapter. 
D.  The remedies provided for in this chapter shall be cumulative and not exclusive, and shall not preclude the city from any other remedy or relief to which it otherwise would be entitled under law or equity. 
E.  The city shall evaluate the effectiveness of the ordinance codified in this title, for review by the city council, five years after the operative date of this title. 
F.  No permit, license, map, or other approval or entitlement for a residential project shall be issued, including without limitation a final inspection or certificate of occupancy, until all applicable requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 2278 N.S., § 1, 7-25-2018)  
14.04.110 - Monitoring. 
The inclusionary housing guidelines adopted or to be adopted by the city, and each inclusionary affordable housing agreement shall include provisions for monitoring by the city of each residential project and each inclusionary unit for compliance with the terms of this chapter, the inclusionary housing guidelines, and the applicable inclusionary affordable housing agreements. The city and/or its designated administrator shall also monitor and submit compliance reports to governmental agencies as required by law. Such provisions shall require property owners to submit annual compliance reports to the city and/or its administrator, and shall authorize the city or its administrator to conduct periodic on-site inspections and audits to ensure compliance with all applicable laws, policies, and agreements. The city council may adopt fees to cover the city's costs of monitoring and compliance. Such fees shall be payable by the property owner and shall be deposited into the city's housing in-lieu fee fund. 
(Ord. No. 2278 N.S., § 1, 7-25-2018)  
14.04.120 - On-site inclusionary housing incentives. 
A.  The developer of a residential project providing all required inclusionary units on the same site as the market-rate units may, at the developer's option and concurrently with the submittal of the affordable housing plan and the earlier of the zoning or planning permit application, submit a written request for one or more of the following on-site inclusionary housing development incentives: 
1.  Density Bonus. The residential project may receive a density bonus if the residential project includes affordable units in accordance with the threshold requirements for density bonus pursuant to California Government Code Section 65915 et seq. For residential projects qualifying for a density bonus pursuant to this subsection, the city shall, upon request of the applicant at the time of application for the first approval, authorize a density bonus in the amount specified in California Government Code Section 65915 et seq. unless such a density bonus would cause an adverse impact to the public health, safety and welfare, including but not limited to historic or natural resources, or the environment. The city shall not provide any other incentives or concessions, other than those listed in this Section 14.04.120, in addition to such density bonus unless otherwise required by law. 
2.  Reduction in Minimum Setback Requirements. The developer may request a reduction in the minimum setback requirements for the residential project, provided such reduction will not cause an adverse impact to the public health, safety and welfare, including, but not limited to, historic or natural resources, or the environment. 
3.  Alternative Unit Type. The developer may request to provide inclusionary units that are of a different unit type than the market-rate units to be constructed within the residential project; provided however, the inclusionary units shall have the same bedroom count in the same percentage distribution as the market-rate units. 
4.  Alternative Interior Design Standards. The developer shall provide the same amenities within the inclusionary units as provided in the market-rate units, but may request to provide different but functionally equivalent amenities for the inclusionary units; provided however, residents of inclusionary units shall have access to all common areas of the residential project equal to the access provided to residents of market-rate units. 
(Ord. No. 2278 N.S., § 1, 7-25-2018)  
Chapter 14.08 - IN-LIEU HOUSING FEES 
 
14.08.010 - Findings and purpose. 
A.  Need for in-lieu housing fees. The city council has determined, based on the city's general plan including the housing element, and existing statutes and regulations of the state of California, that the in-lieu housing fee is needed in order to finance the preservation of the existing below market rate portfolio, the administration of the housing program, future affordable housing programs and new projects. 
B.  Consistency with City General, Specific and Master Plans. In establishing the in-lieu housing fee, the city council finds that it is consistent with the city's general plan, including the housing element and applicable specific plans and master plans. 
C.  The city of Morgan Hill residential development control system ("RDCS") awards competing developments points for construction of very low, low-income, and moderate-income housing or for the contribution of in-lieu housing fees to the housing in-lieu fee fund. 
D.  Since 1977, the city has amassed one of the largest below market rate ("BMR") property portfolios per capita in the state and established a BMR Program that provides ownership opportunities and affordability to very low, low-income, and moderate-income households. 
E.  In-lieu housing fees provide for the cost of administering the city's housing program, maintaining the BMR portfolio, as well as the creation and preservation of affordable units, as funding is available. 
(Ord. No. 2288 N.S., § 1, 10-24-2018)  
14.08.020 - Fee established. 
A.  There is created an in-lieu housing fee for new residential development for residential projects that are required or which volunteer to pay an in-lieu housing fee. 
B.  For-Sale Residential Projects Outside of Downtown. The in-lieu housing fee for "for-sale" residential projects outside of downtown for which there is a fifteen-percent inclusionary housing requirement is nineteen dollars and seventy cents per habitable square foot of the residential building area of market-rate housing. 
C.  For-Sale Residential Projects Within Downtown. The in-lieu housing fee for "for-sale" residential projects within the downtown for which there is a ten-percent inclusionary housing requirement is thirteen dollars and twenty cents per habitable square foot of the residential building area of market-rate housing. 
D.  Rental Residential Projects Outside of Downtown. The in-lieu housing fee for "rental" residential projects outside of downtown for which there is a fifteen-percent inclusionary housing requirement is twenty-nine dollars per habitable square foot of the residential building area of market-rate housing. 
E.  Rental Residential Projects Within Downtown. The in-lieu housing fee for "rental" residential projects within the downtown for which there is a ten-percent inclusionary housing requirement is fourteen dollars and fifty cents per habitable square foot of the residential building area of market-rate housing. 
F.  Basis for calculation of the In-Lieu Housing Fee. The city approves, adopts, and incorporates the summary report from Keyser Marston Associates (KMA), entitled "Summary of Per Square Feet In-Lieu Fee Amounts for Ownership Projects Equivalent to Range of On-site BMR Requirements, and Summary of Per Square Feet In-Lieu Fee Amounts for Rental Projects Equivalent to Range of On-site BMR Requirements for Morgan Hill" dated September 25, 2018. This establishes the value of the in-lieu housing fee, which is determined to be a fair and effective fee to maintain the BMR program. 
(Ord. No. 2288 N.S., § 1, 10-24-2018)  
14.08.030 - Applicability 
A.  The in-lieu housing fees are established for residential projects and will be incorporated into development agreements entered into after the effective date of this ordinance. 
B.  All collected in-lieu housing fees shall be used to finance the administration and implementation of affordable housing programs and projects within the city of Morgan Hill in support of the goals and objectives established in the city of Morgan Hill housing element. 
C.  The in-lieu housing fee per square foot resulting from a calculation of total livable space of the market rate project, excludes the garages and other non-habitable space when calculating the total square feet of the project. 
D.  The in-lieu housing fee will be paid by developers to satisfy their required contribution to the housing in-lieu fee fund. 
E.  Example calculations of in-lieu housing fee: 
1.  Amount—Nineteen dollars and seventy cents: Project has fifty-six market rate units. The average habitable square footage of each unit is two thousand square feet. The in-lieu housing fee contribution shall be: Nineteen dollars and seventy cents times fifty-six units times two thousand square feet equals two million two hundred six thousand four hundred dollars. 
2.  Amount—Thirteen dollars and twenty cents: Project has fifty-six market rate units. The average habitable square footage of each unit is two thousand square feet. The in-lieu housing fee contribution shall be: Thirteen dollars and twenty cents times fifty-six units times two thousand square feet equals one million four hundred seventy-eight thousand four hundred dollars. 
3.  Amount—Twenty-nine dollars: Project has fifty-six market rate units. The average habitable square footage of each unit is two thousand square feet. The in-lieu housing fee contribution shall be: Twenty-nine dollars times fifty-six units times two thousand square feet equals three million two hundred forty-eight thousand dollars. 
4.  Amount—Fourteen dollars and fifty cents: Project has fifty-six market rate units. The average habitable square footage of each unit is two thousand square feet. The in-lieu housing fee contribution shall be: Fourteen dollars and fifty cents times fifty-six units times two thousand square feet equals one million six hundred twenty-four thousand dollars. 
F.  The in-lieu housing fee must be provided to the housing division in proportion to the market rate units being delivered prior to housing division signing off for occupancy. 
G.  Whenever application of the inclusionary housing requirements results in a fractional number of required inclusionary units of forty-nine hundredths or less, the applicant may elect to pay the in-lieu housing fee instead of developing the inclusionary unit. 
H.  Example calculation of fractional in-lieu housing fee: the fractional BMR threshold is five-tenths to encourage the construction of new BMR units. The program applies the fractional fee to fractional requirements less than five-tenths of a unit. Project has fifty-six total units; average size of market rate units is two thousand square feet. To receive maximum RDCS points the fifty-six-total unit project has committed to a fifteen-percent affordable commitment, fifty-six units times fifteen percent equals eight and four-tenths. This equates to eight on-site BMR units and a fractional fee payment due for the ".4" units. First, calculate the implicit in-lieu fee: fifty-six units times two thousand square feet times nineteen dollars and seventy cents per SF = an implicit in-lieu fee of two million two hundred six thousand four hundred dollars. From that implicit in-lieu fee, calculate the per BMR unit cost: two million two hundred six thousand four hundred dollars divided by eight and four-tenths equals two hundred sixty-two thousand six hundred sixty-six dollars per BMR unit cost. The fractional payment owed for this project. 
(Ord. No. 2288 N.S., § 1, 10-24-2018)  
Chapter 14.12 - BELOW MARKET RATE PROGRAM 
 
14.12.010 - Purpose and findings. 
The city council finds that: 
A.  The city of Morgan Hill residential development control system ("RDCS"), awards competing developments points for provision of low-income and moderate-income housing and housing for the elderly. 
B.  Since 1977, the city has amassed one of the largest below market rate ("BMR") property portfolios in the state and established a BMR program that provides ownership opportunities and affordability to low-income and moderate-income households. 
C.  The excess sales proceeds value in each below market rate property represents a bona fide city asset that subsidizes the affordability for each BMR property owner ("owner") and is a vehicle that can be used to renovate older units, build new units, and help pay for program administration. 
D.  The city recognizes that the declaration of restrictions, which secures the excess sale proceeds, is a covenant that runs with the land by and between the BMR property owner and the city of Morgan Hill that restricts the right of use or enjoyment and should be enforced judicially. 
E.  A program and program guidelines are essential to maintain integrity of the BMR program and compliance therewith and these guidelines and policies will be updated from time to time to address challenges and changes in the market and economic environment. 
F.  In order to respond to program needs, the city manager or his or her designee should be empowered to approve BMR program guidelines and BMR agreements. 
G.  In order to ensure compliance with the city's program the program must be actively administrated. The administration of the program can be achieved by city staff and/or an outside administrator. The city is empowered to delegate the day-to-day management of the program to a third-party administrator. 
H.  Either in-house or third-party administration is vital to ensure program integrity and continued affordability of below market rate properties. 
I.  In response to the dissolution of the city's redevelopment agency, schedules have been put in place to pay for the costs of services funded by former redevelopment agency funds. 
(Ord. No. 2288 N.S., § 2, 10-24-2018)  
14.12.020 - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter, these terms mean the following: 
"Adjacent lots" means parcels with boundary lines that touch at any point. "Adjacent lots" includes parcels that are separated only by a private or public street, other than highways and expressways, or that are separated only by other parcels owned or controlled by the same owner or applicant. 
"Administrator" means below market rate program administrator which may either be the city itself or a third party administrator acting as an agent for the city in connection with all aspects of the operation of the city's below market rate program pursuant to an agreement entered into between the city and the administrator, as such agreement may be amended or replaced from time to time. 
"Area median income (AMI)" means the median household income of households in Santa Clara County, adjusted for household size, as determined, and published by the California Housing and Community Development Department (HCD). 
"Assumed household size" means, for the purpose of establishing affordable sales prices, a household with a total number of members equal to the number of bedrooms in the below market rate home, plus one, consistent with Section 50052.5(h) of the California Health and Safety Code and applicable federal rules (if any). For example, the assumed household size for a three-bedroom home is a four-person household. 
"Below market rate (BMR) ownership housing" means dwelling units developed to be sold and affordable to lower to moderate income households and regulated by this chapter. "BMR unit" means one BMR ownership housing dwelling unit. 
"BMR assisted housing" means any project that receives development funding from any local, state, or federal governmental or non-profit source, which meets the criteria for below market rate housing. 
"CC&Rs" means, covenants, conditions and restrictions containing a covenant that runs with the land existing in favor of the city where a development project contains at least one BMR unit. 
"Covenant that runs with the land" means the BMR property interest held by the city of Morgan Hill as a result of the recorded declaration of restrictions that restrict the right of use of enjoyment by the BMR owner-occupant. 
"Decision-making body" means the planning commission or city council, whichever is authorized to make a final decision on the project application for land use approvals. 
"Eligible buyer" means a household which meets the requirements of this chapter to buy, or in the case of acquisition of a BMR unit through devise or inheritance, to occupy, a BMR unit; or a public or non-profit housing agency able to acquire and manage dwelling units for rental to eligible persons. 
"Excess sale proceeds" means the difference between the fair market value of a BMR property and the maximum restricted resale price. 
"Fee schedule" means the schedule of fees, adopted by city council resolution, and published annually, that outlines charges to program participants, including, but not limited to applicants, owner-occupants, housing professionals and developers. 
"Gross annual household income" means the gross, pre-tax income of all adult occupants of the applicant household, and as may be further defined in the BMR ownership housing guidelines. 
"Housing cost" means the monthly mortgage payment (principal and interest), property taxes, owners' association dues, and owner's insurance. 
"Low income household" means a household with a gross annual household income between fifty-one percent and eighty percent of AMI for Santa Clara County. This definition corresponds to the definition of lower income household used for state- and federally-assisted housing programs. 
"Market rate unit" means a dwelling unit that is not subject to the occupancy or sale regulations in this chapter or any other affordability restrictions or covenants. 
"Moderate income household" means a household with a gross annual household income between eighty to one hundred twenty percent of AMI for Santa Clara County. This definition corresponds to the definition of moderate-income household for state-assisted housing programs. 
"Project" means one or more applications filed for city approval of a residential development. "Project" includes a development across adjacent lots or a multi-phased development, on the same or adjacent lots. "Project" also includes developments on adjacent lots for which applications are filed by the same owner or applicant within a period of ten years. 
"Property" means properties contained with the below market rate program portfolio subject to occupancy and sale restrictions. 
"Very low-income household" means a household with a gross annual household income that does not exceed fifty percent of AMI for Santa Clara County. This definition corresponds to the definition of very low-income household used for state- and federally-assisted housing programs. Very low-income households are a subset of lower income households. 
(Ord. No. 2288 N.S., § 2, 10-24-2018)  
14.12.030 - Applicability. 
A.  Residential Development Control System ("RDCS"). All projects subject to RDCS that provide units to meet the city's need for low and moderate income and elderly housing and the extent to which such units meet the goals of the housing element of the general plan, including the distribution of housing types to provide neighborhoods of ethnic and economic diversity. 
B.  BMR Ownership Housing Guidelines. The administrator develops detailed procedures and guidelines to ensure the orderly and efficient administration of the requirements of this chapter. The BMR ownership housing guidelines shall be approved by the city manager or the city manager's designee and approved by the city council from time to time. 
C.  BMR Program Letters. BMR program letters may be issued by the Administrator to update procedures and guidelines not yet incorporated into the BMR ownership housing guidelines. These letters shall be approved by the city manager or designee and serve as amendments to the guidelines that will be published online and made available to the public including guidelines for refinances, purpose, and hardship review. 
D.  BMR Agreements. Declaration of restrictions and affordable housing agreements may be amended from time to time subject to the approval by the city manager or the city manager's designee. 
(Ord. No. 2288 N.S., § 2, 10-24-2018)  
14.12.040 - Duties of program administrator. 
The city may either handle in-house or contract responsibility for administration of the BMR ownership housing program and monitoring compliance with the requirements to a program administrator pursuant to an agreement executed between the city and the administrator. 
The Administrator shall perform the following services, among others: 
1.  Maintain and update the BMR ownership housing guidelines and BMR program letters; 
2.  Conduct ongoing homebuyer education training programs, including preparation of program materials; 
3.  Screen and select qualified buyers according to BMR ownership housing guidelines and maintain qualified owner eligibility list; 
4.  Assist in seeking and arranging mortgage financing for purchase of the below market units; 
5.  Administer programs for monitoring compliance with terms and conditions of the occupancy and sale restrictions; 
6.  Administer BMR ownership housing guidelines concerning sale and resale of the below market units at a restricted price, including exercise of the city's option to buy the below market units upon assignment of such option, and assist in resale of the unit to eligible purchasers or families; and 
7.  In cases of default, administer the process of taking possession of the BMR property as appropriate, and completing the acquisition, rehabilitation, and resale to an eligible buyer. 
(Ord. No. 2288 N.S., § 2, 10-24-2018)  
14.12.050 - Occupancy and sale restrictions. 
Recordation of Declaration of Restrictions. Before issuance of any building permit for a BMR unit, the property owner, administrator, and the city shall execute and record a declaration containing the occupancy and sale restrictions in this chapter. The declaration establishes a valid and enforceable covenant that runs with the land in favor of the city and is binding to the heirs, assigns and successors in interest of the property owner. 
1.  Timing of Sale. At completion of each BMR unit, the administrator will be contacted to coordinate the sale of the property to an eligible buyer. The seller shall accept the first valid offer from a buyer deemed eligible by the administrator and shall cooperate to close escrow within the timeframe outlined in the affordable housing agreement. 
2.  Term of Restrictions. BMR units shall be reserved for lower and moderate-income households subject to guidelines of the RDCS and shall be subject to the occupancy and sale restrictions for a specified period of time. This term begins upon sale to an eligible buyer. If the BMR unit is sold to another eligible buyer during the term, a new term shall begin upon resale and shall be secured by a new declaration of restrictions. 
3.  Maximum Sales Price. The administrator shall establish and publish annually the maximum sale prices for each BMR unit size in the BMR ownership housing guidelines as approved by the city manager. The maximum BMR unit sale prices shall not exceed a price affordable to households at the applicable income level, based on a predetermined housing cost, specified with a maximum percentage of monthly gross household income for the unit's assumed household size. The percentage of AMI used shall be published annually by the administrator. 
4.  Sale Requirements. The following requirements shall be met in any sale and resale of a BMR unit after the issuance of a building permit and during the term of restrictions: 
a.  The seller shall notify the administrator of the intent to sell before offering the unit for sale, contacting a real estate agent, or listing the property on any listing service 
b.  The administrator shall respond to the seller with the sales procedure and maximum sale price 
c.  The administrator shall follow the process outlined in the BMR ownership housing guidelines to locate and deliver an eligible buyer to complete the home purchase 
d.  The eligible buyer shall execute and record a new declaration of restrictions which incorporates all current occupancy and sale restrictions in this chapter and in the BMR ownership housing guidelines; and 
e.  Closing costs and title insurance fees shall be paid or according to the BMR ownership housing guidelines. 
5.  Eligible Buyers. The administrator shall determine the eligibility of prospective buyers of BMR units. It is prohibited for any person to willfully make a false or misleading representation or fail to disclose information for the purpose of qualifying as eligible to purchase a BMR unit. Prospective buyers must meet the following requirements: 
6.  Income Limits. The prospective buyer's combined household income and assets shall not exceed specific household income limits, as further defined in the BMR ownership housing guidelines; 
7.  Conflict of interest. The following individuals, by virtue of their position or relationship, are ineligible to purchase a BMR unit: 
a.  Any administrator, city official or employee who administers or has policy-making authority over city housing programs; 
b.  The developer of the unit; or 
c.  The immediate relative or employee of, and anyone gaining significant economic benefit from a direct business association with, administrator employees, city employees, officials, developers, or owners who are not eligible to purchase a BMR unit; and 
8.  Additional Criteria. The administrator may establish other reasonable eligibility criteria, ownership, and occupancy requirements in the BMR ownership housing guidelines to ensure the buyer's ability to close escrow, maintain ownership of the unit, and to ensure effective operation of the program and equitable access to the units among eligible buyers. 
9.  Occupancy and Rental Restrictions. BMR units shall be occupied as the primary residence of the eligible buyer for the duration of their ownership of the unit and shall not be rented to other occupants at any time, except that: 
a.  BMR units that are owned by a public or nonprofit housing agency may be rented to eligible households with prior written approval of the administrator; and 
b.  The administrator may allow the temporary rental of a BMR unit upon a finding of hardship beyond the control of the owner and after a full review of the hardship documentation. 
10.  Refinancing. BMR home owners shall not refinance a BMR unit without prior written approval of the Administrator. BMR units shall not be used as collateral to secure liens or debts with a combined loan to value ratio in excess of the BMR ownership housing guidelines of the maximum BMR resale price applicable to the unit at the time of the proposed refinancing. 
11.  Additional Refinancing Criteria. The administrator may establish other refinancing criteria in the course of seeking financing to change the rate and/or term of a mortgage, consolidate purchase money lines or cash out a portion of the excess sale proceeds that would be due to the owner upon sale. 
(Ord. No. 2288 N.S., § 2, 10-24-2018)  
14.12.060 - Affordable housing agreement. 
A.  Required Before Final Map or Building Permit. Before final recordation of a subdivision map or issuance of any building permits for the project, whichever occurs first, the property owner shall execute and record an affordable housing agreement (agreement) with the administrator and city outlining the details of the below market rate unit commitment as outlined in the "specific restrictions and requirements (including RDCS requirements)" of the development agreement. 
B.  Agreement Provisions. The agreement shall include, at a minimum, the following provisions: 
1.  Binding of Persons. A provision that binds the heirs, assigns, and successors in interest of the property owner to the agreement; 
2.  Binding of Project Site. The obligation for the entire project site to fulfill the for the project under this chapter; 
3.  Liens. A lien on each unit identified to meet the BMR ownership housing requirement, or if the alternative to pay an in-lieu fee is approved, a lien on every unit; 
4.  Transaction Processing Fee. For each BMR unit, the developer shall pay a BMR transaction processing fee to the city according to the most current fee schedule approved by the city. The city may provide this fee to the administrator as an offset to charges incurred. This fee is not a real estate commission or real estate broker commission. This fee shall be listed as an "additional settlement charge" fee paid by the seller as reflected in section 1300 of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Settlement Statement (HUD-1) or "other costs" paid by the seller in the new closing disclosure as determined by the TILA-REPA Integrated Disclosure rule. 
5.  Project Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions. A provision that prohibits any amendments to the development's covenants, conditions and restrictions that would increase the proportion of the owners' association dues or assessments payable by any BMR unit. The provision must also acknowledge the covenant that runs with the land in favor of the city where the development project contains at least one BMR unit. This provision shall create a right of judicial enforcement by the city or the owner of any affected BMR unit. 
6.  Enforcement. A provision that shall require the property owner to pay the city rent for a BMR unit from the date of any unauthorized use of the unit, and for the city's recovery of reasonable attorney's fees and costs to pursue legal action in enforcing this agreement. 
7.  Amendments. Major amendments to the agreement, including any proposal to change any approved alternatives shall be reviewed by the decision-making body. Minor amendments to the agreement may be reviewed by the administrator. Upon approval, a new agreement containing the amendments shall be executed and recorded. 
(Ord. No. 2288 N.S., § 2, 10-24-2018)  
14.12.070 - Approved program participants and vendors. 
The city and administrator shall maintain a list of approved program participants and vendors to protect the integrity of the BMR program, BMR properties contained within the portfolio, and excess sale proceeds. The approval requirements and process will be included in the BMR ownership housing guidelines. The program participant list will include, but will not be limited to: 
1.  Mortgage Lenders. Due to the integral role that mortgage loan officers and lenders play in purchase and refinance transactions, first mortgage and subordinate loan officers and lenders must be approved by the administrator and a lender agreement will be put in place concerning BMR program compliance during loan origination, underwriting and servicing. In no event shall a deed of trust securing any loan to a BMR owner be valid or enforceable as to any recorded interest, resale agreement or option of the city of Morgan Hill unless the following conditions are satisfied: 
a.  The city of Morgan Hill or its Administrator has first approved the loan; 
b.  The loan is in accordance with the BMR ownership housing guidelines and any and all recorded deed restrictions; 
c.  The city of Morgan Hill or its Administrator has expressly subordinated its recorded restrictions to the specific deed of trust; and 
d.  Prior to making any loan to a BMR property owner for the purchase of a BMR unit intended to be secured by a deed of trust against the BMR unit, a lender shall disclose to the city of Morgan Hill or its administrator the following information: 
i.  The borrower's loan application describing the loan terms; and 
ii.  Provide an acknowledgement in writing that that the total encumbrance does not exceed the maximum restricted resale value for the BMR unit as determined by the city of Morgan Hill or its Administrator according to the BMR ownership housing guidelines. 
2.  Real Estate Agents. Real estate agents and brokerages involved in the purchase or sale of BMR properties must be approved by the administrator and a vendor agreement will be put in place concerning BMR program compliance during the listing, purchase, and escrow process. 
3.  Escrow Companies. An approved list of escrow officers and escrow companies will be maintained by the administrator. 
4.  Contractors. For work on BMR properties that exceed certain dollar amounts, as outlined in the BMR ownership housing guidelines, an approved list of contractors will be maintained by the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2288 N.S., § 2, 10-24-2018)  
14.12.080 - Default, foreclosure, and loss of unit. 
A.  Default. Upon declaration of a default by the city of any agreement between the city and the owner or if the owner or owner's proposed purchaser makes any misrepresentation in connection with receiving any benefits under the declaration of restrictions, the city or administrator may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for specific performance of this chapter, for an injunction prohibiting a proposed sale or transfer in violation of this chapter, for a declaration that a transfer in violation of this chapter is void or any such other relief at law or in equity as may be appropriate. 
B.  Option to Purchase. If a notice of default is recorded on a BMR unit by a third party secured creditor or a lien is filed against the BMR unit, or any breach of any provision of any agreement between the city and the owner, and the owner fails to correct it, an eligible buyer, or the administrator on behalf of the city or the city itself, may purchase the unit. The unit shall be purchased at a sale price equal to the amount the owner would have received on the date of the foreclosure sale under the BMR ownership housing guidelines. The eligible buyer may purchase the unit by paying any amounts due to lien holders and paying to the owner any balance of funds remaining after payment of the costs of sale and any repairs chargeable to the owner. All other resale provisions of the guidelines apply. 
C.  Loss of Unit. BMR units which have not been completed or sold to initial eligible buyers shall not be released from the restrictions of this chapter through a trustee's sale or judicial foreclosure. 
D.  Distribution of Proceeds. This subsection applies to any BMR unit lost by sale at a trustee's sale or foreclosure, destruction, condemnation, or by liquidation of the owners' association. If a BMR unit is restored, the remaining term of occupancy and sale restrictions shall continue upon completion. Any proceeds remaining after payment of encumbrances on the unit shall be distributed as follows. 
1.  Owner. To the owner, up to the net amount the owner would have received under the sale price in the BMR ownership housing guidelines if the city had purchased the unit on the date of the loss; and 
2.  City. To the city, any surplus remaining after payment to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2288 N.S., § 2, 10-24-2018)  
14.12.090 - Annual report. 
The administrator shall provide an annual informational report to the city council on the status of BMR units developed under this chapter. The report shall include the number, size, type, tenure, and general location of each BMR unit completed during the year, as well as the number of BMR resales and BMR defaults and losses, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2288 N.S., § 2, 10-24-2018)  
14.12.100 - Enforcement. 
The city, or administrator if authorized, may institute injunction, mandamus, or any appropriate legal actions or proceedings necessary for the enforcement of this chapter, including actions to suspend or revoke any permit, including a development approval, building permit or certificate of occupancy; and for injunctive relief or damages. 
(Ord. No. 2288 N.S., § 2, 10-24-2018)  
14.12.110 - Below market rate (BMR) ownership program participation guide. 
The purpose of the below market rate (BMR) ownership program participation guide (ownership guide) is to describe the BMR program policies and procedures to an existing BMR homeowner who is a program participant. The ownership guide includes the following and is intended to be an overview for a program participant who is occupying a BMR home. The ownership guide describes the policies and procedures for a BMR homeowner, including: 
•  Program participation guidelines 
•  Resale price determination and household information profiles 
•  Sale proceeds and owner's minimum return on down payment 
•  Agreement compliance at the point of sale or refinance 
•  Ownership and estate planning 
•  Compliance and annual certification 
•  Refinance and subordination requests 
•  Capital improvements and special assessments 
•  Ownership changes, re-sales, and approved vendors 
The ownership guide is prepared by the city and/or the administrator to provide procedures and guidelines. Any updates shall be approved by the city manager or the city manager's designee from time to time as needed and may serve as amendments to the ownership guidelines that will be published online and made available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2288 N.S., § 2, 10-24-2018)  
14.12.120 - Below market rate (BMR) ownership program application guide for potential homebuyers. 
The purpose of the below market rate (BMR) ownership program application guide (application guide) describes the BMR program policies and procedures to a prospective BMR homeowner who is considering the BMR program application process. The application guide includes the following and is intended to be an overview for a program applicant who is considering applying for a BMR home. 
•  Application process and selection, opportunity drawing methods 
•  File structure and application criteria, online web portal, establishing an account 
•  Education title and mortgage requirements 
•  Eligibility and preference criteria for ownership of BMR units 
•  Occupancy standards for BMR units 
•  Income eligibility criteria and preference criteria 
•  Asset limitation criteria 
•  First time homebuyer criteria and title requirements 
•  Household information profiles 
•  Application criteria 
•  Transaction and document handling 
•  Reasonable accommodation 
•  Below market rate pricing and city's option to purchase 
The application guide may be prepared by the city and/or the administrator to provide procedures and guidelines. Any updates shall be approved by the city manager or the city manager's designee from time to time as needed and serve as amendments to the application guidelines that will be published online and made available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2288 N.S., § 2, 10-24-2018)  
14.12.130 - Below market rate (BMR) program development standards. 
A.  Development standards approved by city council are designed to guide the implementation and construction of the below market rate (BMR) units, to ensure quality homes are built consistent with the character of the neighborhood and providing guidance for the inclusion of materials and amenities within each unit. 
B.  The BMR development standards are generally intended to apply to development projects where proposed BMR inclusionary units will be constructed by a developer constructing a market rate project, but these BMR development standards would not typically apply to publicly financed one hundred percent affordable housing projects. 
C.  The city may consider instances where deviations from these standards may be appropriate for the provision of inclusionary or affordable units. The designated reviewing body shall make a finding to this effect prior to any approval or any issuance of permits (i.e., community development director, planning commission, or city council). This includes, but is not limited to: 
1.  When the deviation results in a greater number of affordable units and/or broaden affordability levels to help the city implement its housing element and achieve RHNA goals. 
2.  Developments in which a market rate developer is partnered with an affordable housing developer in which the market rate developer develops only the market rate units while the affordable housing developer develops the affordable units, some of the BMR program development standards, such as the distribution throughout the project requirement, may not apply or may need to be adjusted. 
D.  Any updates to the BMR program development standards shall be approved by the city manager or the city manager's designee from time to time as needed and serve as amendments to the BMR program development standards that will be published online and made available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2288 N.S., § 2, 10-24-2018)  
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION  
Chapter 15.08 - BUILDING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 1, adopted Nov. 2, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 15.08, §§ 15.08.010—15.08.120, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.08 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2000 N.S., § 4, adopted Jan. 26, 2011; and Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, adopted Nov. 20, 2013. 
 
15.08.010 - Adoption of the 2016 California Building Code, the 2016 California Residential Code and other parts of the State Building Standards Code. 
There is hereby adopted by reference that certain code known and designated as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Parts 1, 2, 2.5, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, and 12 as published by the California Building Standards Commission, as further described and including the following: 
•  2016 California Administrative Code (California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 1). 
•  2016 California Building Code (California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 2) based on the 2015 International Building Code&reg; as prepared by the International Code Council, and as amended by the State of California. 
•  2016 California Residential Code (California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 2.5) based on the 2015 International Residential Code&reg; as prepared by the International Code Council, and as amended by the State of California. 
•  2016 California Energy Code (California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 6). 
•  2016 California Historical Building Code (California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 8). 
•  2016 California Existing Building Code (California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 10) based on the 2015 International Existing Building Code&reg; as prepared by the International Code Council, and as amended by the State of California. 
•  2016 California Green Building Standards Code (California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 11). 
•  2016 California Referenced Standards Code (California Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 12). 
Such code shall include those sections requiring enforcement by the Morgan Hill Building Department, and, as further amended by the City of Morgan Hill, provisions intended to address local climatic, geologic, and topographic conditions as permitted by state law. Adoption of said code shall include the adoption of Appendices B, I, and J, including Division II Scope and Administration, contained in the 2016 California Building Code. 
Such code shall be and become the City of Morgan Hill Building Code regulating the erection, construction, alteration, repair, relocation, demolition, occupancy, use, height, area, and maintenance of all buildings and structures and certain equipment therein specifically regulated. The provisions of said code shall provide for the issuance of permits and certificates of occupancy, the collection of fees thereof, and penalties for violation of such code. 
At least one copy of the City of Morgan Hill Building Code has been deposited in the office of the city building official and is available for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 1, 11-2-2016)  
15.08.020 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "building code" and may be cited as such. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 1, 11-2-2016)  
15.08.030 - Organization, enforcement, fees, and inspections. 
The organization, enforcement, fees, and inspections shall comply with the 2016 California Building Code. The building official shall use the building valuation data from the building standards publication for "cost per square foot." For residential construction, two general classes, one for "average" and one for "good" construction, will be used by the building official with adjustments for special architectural or structural features and location of the project. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 1, 11-2-2016)  
15.08.040 - Additions, amendments, and deletions. 
The following provisions of the California Building Code and California Residential Code shall be added, amended, or deleted as follows: 
A.  The following sections in the California Building Code are amended by this chapter: 1505.1.4, 310.1, 2308.6.5, 1907A.1, and 1808A.1. 
B.  The following section in the California Residential Code is amended by this chapter: R902.1.4. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 1, 11-2-2016)  
15.08.050 - Sections 1505.1.4 and R902.1.4 amended—Construction of roof coverings in wildland-urban interface areas. 
A.  Section 1505.1.4 of the 2016 California Building Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
1505.1.4 Roofing requirements in a Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 50 percent of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class A. 
B.  Section R902.1.4 of the 2016 California Residential Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
R902.1.4 Roofing requirements in a wildland-urban interface fire area. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 50 percent of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class A. 
C.  Findings. 
1.  The council finds and declares that the areas as defined in the open space and conservation element of the general plan are considered a hazardous fire area and that it is, therefore, necessary to establish special minimum fire-resistive requirements in these areas for the protection of life and property. The fire hazard of untreated wood roofs has long been recognized by the National Fire Protection Association. The city's foothills cause many problems for firefighters including long response times, inadequate water supply, and unlimited fuel. The city is in a region which experiences high winds and low humidity during summer months. Winter rains promote the growth of grass and brush. This vegetation presents heavy dry fuel loads in the summer months. These conditions are conducive to the ready ignition, propagation, and spread of grass, brush, and structure fires. Fog, heavy rains, mud slides, and earthquakes are other common occurrences which negatively affect the ability of the city's public safety resources to respond to emergency situations. The topography of Morgan Hill has hillside homes on each side of the city, causing long response time for safety equipment. The city is in a Category D seismic activity classification. Many traffic corridors, such as Highway 101 and Monterey Road, Union Pacific Railroad, and related bridges, underpasses, and crossings are subject to obstruction in the event of an earthquake, traffic accident, hazardous material spill, or other disaster. 
2.  Any of the above factors could quickly exhaust the fire department's resources and prevent the assistance of mutual aid resources. Therefore, Class A roofing would provide the fire protection needed through this amendment. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 1, 11-2-2016)  
15.08.060 - Building over utility easements. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, or maintain any building, garage, carport, storage shed, or other similar building over or within the boundary of any public easement. "Public utility easement" as used in this section includes any easement for a gas line, water line, storm drainage line, or buried or overhead electrical or telephone lines. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 1, 11-2-2016)  
15.08.070 - Section 310.1 amended—Single-room occupancies (SRO). 
A.  Section 310.1 of the 2016 California Building Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
310.1 Residential Group R. The SRO unit shall have a living room of not less than 150 square feet (13.9m2) of superficial floor area. An additional 100 square feet (9.3m2) of superficial floor area shall be provided for each occupant of such SRO unit in excess of two. 
The SRO unit shall be provided with a separate closet. 
The SRO unit may be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in front. Light, ventilation and emergency egress conforming to this Code shall be provided. 
Every building shall be provided with at least one water closet. Every hotel or subdivision thereof where both sexes are accommodated shall contain at least two separate toilet facilities which are conspicuously identified for male and female use, each of which contains at least one water closet. 
Exception: Hotel guest rooms may have one unidentified toilet facility. 
Additional water closets shall be provided on each floor for each sex at the rate of one for every additional ten guests, or fractional part thereof, in excess of ten. 
Every SRO unit shall be provided with a kitchen equipped with a kitchen sink; however, that single room occupancy living unit facilities and single room occupancy residential hotels may contain partial kitchen facilities so long as a sink is provided and laundry facilities and kitchen facilities are provided on each floor accessible from a public hallway. 
Every SRO unit and every lodging house shall be provided with a bathroom equipped with facilities consisting of a water closet, lavatory and either a bathtub or shower; however, that single room occupancy residential hotels may contain partial bathroom facilities. If individual bath facilities are not provided, common bath facilities must be provided as follows: 
Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided there shall be provided on each floor, for each sex, at least one water closet and lavatory and one bath, accessible from a public hallway. Additional water closets, lavatories and baths shall be provided on each floor for each sex at the rate of one for every additional ten guests or fractional number thereof in excess of ten. Such facilities shall be clearly marked for "men" or "women." As an alternative, adequate unisex facilities may be provided. Each sink, lavatory and either a bathtub or shower shall be equipped with hot and cold running water necessary for its normal operation. 
When SRO units are required by state law to be accessible or adaptable, appropriate sections of state law for access requirements must be followed. 
B.  This amendment is made pursuant to the authority set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 17958.1. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 1, 11-2-2016)  
15.08.080 - Section 2308.6.5 amended—Alternate bracing (gypsum board and Portland cement). 
A.  Section 2308.6.5 of the 2016 California Building Code, which allows the use of gypsum board and Portland cement for wall bracing, is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
2308.6.5 Alternative Bracing. The use of gypsum board and Portland cement is not allowed in the City of Morgan Hill. 
B.  Findings. The city is in a Category D seismic activity classification. Gypsum wallboard and exterior Portland cement plaster have performed poorly during California seismic events. Shear values for gypsum wallboard and Portland cement stucco contained in the code are based on monodirectional testing. It is appropriate to eliminate the use of these materials until cyclic loading tests are performed and evaluated. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 1, 11-2-2016)  
15.08.090 - Section 1907A.1 amended—Minimum slab provisions. 
A.  Section 1907A.1 of the 2016 California Building Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
1907A.1 General. The minimum thickness of concrete floor slabs supported on base rock shall not be less than 3-1/2" thick. The slab shall be reinforced with not less than six inches by six inches ten-gauge wire mesh or an approved alternate installed at mid height of the slab over 4" of approved base or as designed by a licensed professional engineer. 
B.  Findings. To avoid damage due to soil expansion, shrinkage and seismic activity which causes damage to concrete slab flooring throughout the city, imposing the above requirements eliminates the need for a soils report for some small projects. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 1, 11-2-2016)  
15.08.100 - Section 1808A.1 amended—Foundations. 
A.  Section 1808A.1 of the 2016 California Building Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
1808A.1 General. A minimum of one top and one bottom continuous bar of 1/2" diameter reinforcing steel shall be required in all continuous concrete or masonry bearing foundations of Group R residential occupancies. Other occupancies shall be based on design. 
B.  Findings. The city is within a very active seismic area and local soil conditions can be highly expansive (clay soils). Damage to plain concrete footings is extremely expensive to repair, in contrast to the nominal expense of providing footing reinforcement. Footing reinforcement is also necessary to help prevent damage due to shrinking and swelling during seasonal drying and wetting conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 1, 11-2-2016)  
15.08.110 - Violation. 
A.  A violation of the code adopted by this chapter occurs when a person: 
1.  Fails to comply with this code; 
2.  Violates or fails to comply with any order made under this code; 
3.  Builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken; or 
4.  Fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed in this chapter. 
B.  The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. 
C.  The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 53, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 53, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 15.08.110 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 15.08.110 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 1, adopted Nov. 2, 2016.  
Chapter 15.12 - ELECTRICAL CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 2, adopted Nov. 2, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 15.12, §§ 15.12.010—15.12.050, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.12 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for a detailed history of derivation. 
 
15.12.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "electrical code". 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 2, 11-2-2016)  
15.12.020 - Adoption of the 2016 California Electrical Code. 
There is adopted by reference that certain code known and designated as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 3, further described and referred to as the 2016 California Electrical Code published by the California Building Standards Commission and based on the National Electric Code&reg;, 2014 Edition, prepared by the National Fire Protection Association. Adoption of said code shall include those sections and annexes requiring enforcement by the Morgan Hill Building Department and, as further amended by the City of Morgan Hill, provisions intended to address local climatic, geologic, and/or topographic conditions, as permitted by state law. Adoption of said code shall include adoption of the following annexes of the California Electrical Code: Annex A, Annex B, Annex C, Annex D, Annex E, Annex F, and Annex H with local amendments. Such code shall be and become the Morgan Hill Electrical Code, regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation, and maintenance of electrical systems, equipment, and appliances. The provisions of said Code shall provide for the issuance of permits and collection of fees thereof and penalties for violation of such code. 
At least one copy of the city electrical code has been deposited in the office of the city building official and is available for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 2, 11-2-2016)  
15.12.030 - Scope, organization, enforcement, fees, and inspections. 
The scope, organization, enforcement, fees, and inspections of the 2016 California Electrical Code must comply with those set forth in the 2016 California Building Code and 2014 National Electrical Code. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 2, 11-2-2016)  
15.12.040 - Additions, amendments, and deletions. 
The following provisions of the 2016 Electrical Code shall be amended or deleted: 
A.  The following sections of the 2016 California Electrical Code are amended by this chapter: Article 334.12. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 2, 11-2-2016)  
15.12.050 - Article 334.12 amended—Uses not permitted. 
A.  Article 334.12 of the 2016 California Electrical Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
Article 334.12 Uses Not Permitted. Type NM or NMC. Type NM and NMC cables shall not be used: (1) in any dwelling or structure exceeding three floors above grade; (2) as service-entrance cable; (3) embedded in poured concrete; or (4) in any non-residential occupancy. For the purpose of this article, the first floor of the building shall be that floor that has 50 percent or more of the exterior wall surface area level with or above finish grade. One additional level that is the first level and not designated for human habitation and used only for vehicle parking, storage, or similar use shall be permitted. 
B.  Findings. Morgan Hill is in an active seismic zone and has experienced two large seismic events in the past twenty-five years. Structural damage to commercial buildings in the business community was severe; electrical wiring within these commercial buildings was severely damaged, causing fire and creating electrical shock hazards to the occupants. Requiring that all electrical building wiring be protected in an approved electrical raceway as described in the California Electrical Code will minimize fire and life safety hazards to the occupants and rescue personnel caused by damaged exposed electrical wiring. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 2, 11-2-2016)  
15.12.060 - Violation. 
A.  A violation of the code adopted by this chapter occurs when a person: 
1.  Fails to comply with this code; 
2.  Violates or fails to comply with any order made under this code; 
3.  Builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plan submitted and approved thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken; or 
4.  Fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed in this chapter. 
B.  Such person shall be liable severally and for each and every violation and noncompliance respectively. 
C.  The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. 
D.  The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 54, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 54, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 15.12.060 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 15.12.060 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 2, adopted Nov. 2, 2016.  
Chapter 15.16 - MECHANICAL CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 3, adopted Nov. 2, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 15.16, §§ 15.16.010—15.16.040, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.16 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 1250 N.S., § A(part), adopted in 1995; Ord. 1450 N.S., § (A)1, adopted in 1999; Ord. 1861 N. S., § 4(part), adopted in 2007; Ord. No. 2000 N.S., § 6, adopted Jan. 26, 2011; and Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, adopted Nov. 20, 2013. 
 
15.16.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "mechanical code" and may be cited as such. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 3, 11-2-2016)  
15.16.020 - Adoption of the 2016 California Mechanical Code. 
There is hereby adopted by reference that certain code known and designated as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 4, further described and referred to as the 2016 California Mechanical Code published by the California Building Standards Commission and based on the Uniform Mechanical Code&reg;, 2015 Edition, prepared by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials. The adoption of said Code shall include those sections requiring enforcement by the Morgan Hill Building Department. Such code shall be and become the Morgan Hill Mechanical Code, regulating heating, ventilating, comfort cooling, refrigeration systems, and other miscellaneous heating appliances, prescribing conditions under which such work may be performed within the city, and providing for the issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefore and penalties for violation of such code. 
At least one copy of the city mechanical code has been deposited in office of the city building official and is available for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 3, 11-2-2016)  
15.16.030 - Scope, organization, enforcement, fees, and inspections. 
The scope, organization, enforcement, fees, and inspections of the California Mechanical Code must comply with those set forth in the 2016 California Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 3, 11-2-2016)  
15.16.040 - Violation. 
A.  A violation of the code adopted by this chapter occurs when a person: 
1.  Fails to comply with this code; 
2.  Violates or fails to comply with any order made under this code; 
3.  Builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken; or 
4.  Fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed in this chapter. 
B.  Such person shall be liable severally and for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively. 
C.  The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. 
D.  The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 55, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 55, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 15.16.040 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 15.16.040 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 3, adopted Nov. 2, 2016.  
Chapter 15.20 - PLUMBING CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 4, adopted Nov. 2, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 15.20, §§ 15.20.010—15.20.100, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.20 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for a detailed history of derivation. 
 
15.20.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "plumbing code" and may be cited as such. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 4, 11-2-2016)  
15.20.020 - Adoption of the 2016 California Plumbing Code. 
There is hereby adopted by reference that certain code known and designated as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 5, further described and referred to as the 2016 California Plumbing Code published by the California Building Standards Commission and based on the Uniform Plumbing Code&reg;, 2015 Edition, prepared by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials. The adoption of said code shall include those sections requiring enforcement by the local building department as mandated by the State and as further amended by the City of Morgan Hill with provisions intended to address local climatic, geologic, and topographic conditions, as permitted by state law. Such code shall be and become the Morgan Hill Plumbing Code, regulating plumbing and drainage systems, house sewers, private sewage disposal, drainage systems, and prescribing conditions under which such work may be carried on within the city and providing for the issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefore. 
At least one copy of the city plumbing code has been deposited in the office of the city building official and is available for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 4, 11-2-2016)  
15.20.030 - Scope, organization, fees, and inspections. 
The scope, organization, enforcement, fees, and inspections of the 2016 California Plumbing Code must comply with those set forth in the 2016 California Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 4, 11-2-2016)  
15.20.040 - Amendments and deletions. 
The following provisions of the 2016 California Plumbing Code shall be amended or deleted: 
A.  The following sections of the California Plumbing Code are amended by this chapter: 604.3, 608.2, 609.3, 710.1 and 1002.1 - 1002.3. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 4, 11-2-2016)  
15.20.050 - Section 604.3 amended—Copper tube. 
A.  Section 604.3 of the 2016 California Plumbing Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
604.3 Copper tube. Copper tube for potable water piping shall have a weight of not less than type "L." 
B.  Finding. Due to water hardness in the city, type "L" copper shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 4, 11-2-2016)  
15.20.060 - Section 608.2 amended—Pressure regulators. 
A.  Section 608.2 of the 2016 California Plumbing Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
608.2 Excessive Water Pressure. An approved type pressure regulator preceded by an adequate bypass strainer shall be installed and the pressure reduced to fifty-five pounds per square inch or less for all occupancies. 
Provision shall be made to prevent pressure on the building side of the regulator from exceeding main supply pressure. Each such regulator shall be accessibly located and shall have the strainer readily accessible for cleaning without removing the regulator or strainer body or disconnecting the supply piping. 
B.  Findings. Due to the topography of Morgan Hill, water supply tanks are located on top of local hills, causing high water pressure in the system. This velocity of water causes water pipes to deteriorate faster than normal. With this problem, requiring pressure regulators to areas in excess of fifty-five psi provides protection to each structure of pipe breakage and therefore necessitates this amendment. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 4, 11-2-2016)  
15.20.070 - Sections 609.3 amended—Under concrete slab. 
A.  Section 609.3 of the 2016 California Plumbing Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
609.3 Under Concrete Slab. Water piping shall not be installed in or under a concrete floor slab within a building without prior approval of the Building Official. 
B.  Findings. 
1.  Most of the surface soils in Morgan Hill are relatively young and unconsolidated sedimentary materials formed from a wide variety of parent materials. The varying chemical composition, degree of weathering, and the relatively acid environment have created soils of varying types, which are peculiarly corrosive in nature. 
2.  Much of the surface soil in Morgan Hill is characterized by peculiarly high expansivity (i.e., shrink-swell behavior) and low bearing strength. There are two types of expansive soils in the area: 
a.  The organic silty clays which are the recent bay muds; and 
b.  The plastic silty clays which weather from the shale found in the hills surrounding Santa Clara Valley. 
3.  The local climate is characterized by markedly delineated rainy and dry seasons, which tend to maximize the volume changes occurring within the soil. 
4.  Areas of the city have hard water, which may be corrosive to ferrous pipe. 
5.  The groundwater table is unusually high in many places. 
6.  Morgan Hill is a seismically active region. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 4, 11-2-2016)  
15.20.080 - Section 710.1 amended—Backflow protection. 
A.  Section 710.1 of the 2016 California Plumbing Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
Section 710.1 Backflow Protection. Drainage piping serving fixtures which have flood level rims less than twelve (12) inches (304.8 mm) above the elevation of the next upstream manhole and/or flushing inlet cover at the public or private sewer system serving such drainage piping shall be protected from backflow of sewage by installing an approved type backwater valve. Fixtures above such elevation shall not discharge through the backwater valve, unless first approved by the Building Official. 
B.  Findings. The local topography includes mountainous and foothill areas with intermittent steep slopes. The City of Morgan Hill is located in a seismically active area, which increases the likelihood of breakage of building sewers and laterals, leading to an above average potential of sewage back-up into buildings without adequate protection. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 4, 11-2-2016)  
15.20.090 - Sections 1002.1, 1002.2, and 1002.3 amended—Vents and traps. 
A.  Section 1002.1 of the 2016 California Plumbing Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
1002.1 Vent Pipes. In all new installations to buildings and in all existing installations to buildings where the outlet of a trap for a plumbing fixture is installed or located at an elevation which is less than two feet from the rim of the nearest manhole uphill from the point of connection of the building sewer to the lateral sewer, approved types of trap, vent, and cleanout shall be installed in the building sewer at a point as close as possible to the building being served. 
B.  Section 1002.2 of the 2016 California Plumbing Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
1002.2 Fixture Traps. The installation shall include a back-water overflow device with 4" plastic two-way cleanout. In lieu of a two-way cleanout, a combination Wye and 1/8 bend with cleanout plug brought to grade may be installed, provided the main building drain is in a straight line with an exterior cleanout plug at grade on the opposite end of the main building drain line. 
C.  Section 1002.3 of the 2016 California Plumbing Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
1002.3 Change of Direction. Every existing installation which includes a plumbing fixture trap outlet which is less than two feet from the rim of the nearest manhole uphill from the point of connection of the building sewer to the lateral sewer is hereby declared to be dangerous, unsanitary, and a menace to life, health and property. Whenever it shall come to the attention of the inspector that such an installation exists, the inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require that such plumbing outlet be immediately plugged or capped or that the equipment described in the preceding paragraphs in this section be installed immediately. 
D.  Findings. The changes or modifications in the requirements of the 2016 California Plumbing Code, as set out in this section, are necessary because many parts of the city are susceptible to flooding. The possibility of this undue strain upon existing city waste collection facilities and the attendant hazard of contamination of the city's water system requires that additional safeguards be imposed upon the installation of plumbing fixtures. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 4, 11-2-2016)  
15.20.100 - Violation. 
A.  A violation of the code adopted by this chapter occurs when a person: 
1.  Fails to comply with this code; 
2.  Violates or fails to comply with any order made under this code; 
3.  Builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken; or 
4.  Fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed in this chapter. 
B.  Such person shall be liable severally and for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively. 
C.  The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. 
D.  The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 56, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 56, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 15.20.100 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 15.20.100 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 4, adopted Nov. 2, 2016.  
Chapter 15.24 - HOUSING CODE 
 
15.24.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Housing Code" and may be cited as such. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 6 (part), 2007: Ord. 1252 N.S. § A (part), 1995: Ord. 1077 N.S. § A (part), 1992: Ord. 949 N.S. § A (part), 1989; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.24.020 - Adoption of the Uniform Housing Code. 
Pursuant to Sections 50022.1 through 50022.4, inclusive, of the Government Code of the state of California, the text of that certain publication copyrighted and published by the International Conference of Building Officials entitled "Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition" is adopted as the rules, regulations, and standards within this city as to all matters therein contained except as otherwise provided in this chapter. One copy of the Uniform Housing Code will at all times be kept on file in the office of the building official, and is available for public inspection. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 6 (part), 2007: Ord. 1452 N.S. § A, 1999: Ord. 1252 N.S. § A (part), 1995: Ord. 1077 N.S. § A (part), 1992: Ord. 949 N.S. § A (part), 1989; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.24.030 - Scope, organization, enforcement, fees and inspections. 
The scope, organization, enforcement, fees and inspections of the Uniform Housing Code must comply with those set forth in the 1997 Uniform Administrative Code (see Chapter 15.04 of this title). 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 6 (part), 2007: Ord. 1252 N.S. § A (part), 1995: Ord. 1077 N.S. § A (part), 1992: Ord. 949 N.S. § A (part), 1989; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.24.040 - Additions, amendments and deletions. 
A.  The following provisions of the Uniform Housing Code shall be deleted: Sections 104, 203, 204, 302 and 303 shall be deleted. 
B.  Findings. The council finds that the requirements contained in Sections 104, 203, 204, 302 and 303 of the Uniform Housing Code are redundant because they are contained in the 1997 Administrative Code, which has been adopted by the council. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 6 (part), 2007: Ord. 1252 N.S. § A (part), 1995: Ord. 1077 N.S. § A (part), 1992: Ord. 949 N.S. § A (part), 1989; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.24.050 - Violation. 
A.  A violation of the code adopted by this chapter occurs when a person: 
1.  Fails to comply with this code; 
2.  Violates or fails to comply with any order made under this code; 
3.  Builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken; or 
4.  Fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed in this chapter. 
B.  Such person may be liable severally and for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively. 
C.  The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. 
D.  The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 57, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 57, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 15.24.050 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 15.24.050 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 1077 N.S., § A(part), adopted in 1992; Ord. 1172 N.S., § 7, adopted in 1994; Ord. 1252 N.S., § A(part), adopted in 1995; Ord. 1861 N.S., § 6(part), adopted in 2007; and Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, adopted Nov. 20, 2013.  
Chapter 15.25 - PROPERTY MANAGEMENT 
 
15.25.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Property Maintenance Code" and may be cited as such. 
(Ord. No. 2000 N.S., § 8, 1-26-2011; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.25.020 - Adoption of the International Property Maintenance Code. 
Pursuant to Sections 50022.1 through 50022.4, inclusive, of the Government Code of the state of California, the text of that certain publication copyrighted and published by the ICC entitled "2009 International Property Maintenance Code" is adopted as the rules, regulations, and standards within this city as to all matters therein contained except as otherwise provided in this chapter. One copy of the International Property Maintenance Code will at all times be kept on file in the office of the city building official and is available for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2000 N.S., § 8, 1-26-2011; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.25.030 - Scope, organization, enforcement, fees and inspections. 
The scope, organization, enforcement, fees and inspections of the Uniform Housing Code 2009 International Property Maintenance Code must comply with those set forth in the 2013 California Building Code (see Chapter 15.04 of this Title). 
(Ord. No. 2000 N.S., § 8, 1-26-2011; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.25.040 - Violation. 
A.  A violation of the code adopted by this chapter occurs when a person: 
1.  Fails to comply with this code; 
2.  Violates or fails to comply with any order made under this code; 
3.  Builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken; or 
4.  Fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed in this chapter. 
B.  Such person may be liable severally and for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively. 
C.  The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. 
D.  The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 58, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 58, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 15.25.040 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 15.25.040 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. No. 2000 N.S., § 8, adopted Jan. 26, 2001; and Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, adopted Nov. 20, 2013.  
Chapter 15.28 - HOME MORTGAGE FINANCE PROGRAM 
 
15.28.010 - Adoption. 
The city adopts a home mortgage finance program (the "program") pursuant to Chapters 1—5 of Part 5 of Division 31 of the Health and Safety Code of the state (the "Act") and declares its intention that the Northern California finance authority (the "authority") issue revenue bonds pursuant to the act to provide funds for the purpose of financing the acquisition, construction and rehabilitation of homes in accordance with the program and the home mortgage finance programs of the other parties to the authority. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 7 (part), 2007: Ord. 591 N.S. § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.28.020 - Purposes. 
The city finds and declares that the program will serve the public purposes of providing financing for decent, safe and sanitary housing that people in the lower end of the purchasing spectrum can afford and of increasing the housing supply. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 7 (part), 2007: Ord. 591 N.S. § 2, 1982; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.28.030 - Construction of provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter, being necessary for the welfare of the city and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect its purposes. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 7 (part), 2007: Ord. 591 N.S. § 4, 1982; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.28.040 - Authority of officers. 
The proper officers of the city are authorized and directed to perform any acts and enter into and execute any agreements or other documents that they deem necessary or appropriate to implement this program. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 7 (part), 2007: Ord. 591 N.S. § 3, 1982; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
Chapter 15.30 - REPLACEMENT HOUSING 
 
15.30.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the replacement housing ordinance codified in this chapter is to assist in developing and preserving affordable housing opportunities for low and moderate income households residing in the downtown area of Morgan Hill. The replacement housing ordinance codified in this chapter is intended to ensure that assistance is provided to households whose existing homes are replaced with higher density housing or commercial development by requiring developers to provide relocation assistance to low and moderate income households whose homes are demolished, removed or converted to another use. Additionally, developers who demolish a residential unit occupied by low or moderate income households with new, higher density residential units will be required to provide one replacement unit on-site affordable to low-income persons. If a property contains two residential units which will both be demolished, the owner will be required to provide only one replacement unit. Commercial development replacing existing residential units occupied by low or moderate income housing will mitigate this impact through the payment of fees in lieu of replacement residential units. These fees will be paid into a special housing fund to provide low/moderate residential housing. 
A.  The city council finds and declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter will serve the public purposes of preserving and increasing the supply of affordable housing for low-income households. 
B.  The city council finds and declares that this chapter will prevent displacement of low and moderate income households from the city and will ease the burden of relocation through the provision of relocation benefits. 
C.  The city council finds that the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter will not have a significant, substantial or adverse effect on the physical environment of the community because enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter involves no deviation from the general plan and no change in the present use of any property within the city. Further environmental review will be performed for individual projects as they are proposed to be constructed. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 8 (part), 2007: Ord. 913 N.S. § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.30.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  "Affordable rent" means monthly rent that does not exceed twenty-five percent of the monthly gross income of a household at the upper income limit of the applicable income category. 
B.  "Gross income" means the total gross income for federal income tax purposes of all adult members of a household who intend to permanently occupy the household. 
C.  "Low-income household" means a household with a gross income that does not exceed eighty percent of the median income. 
D.  "Median income" means the median gross yearly income for a household in Santa Clara County, adjusted for household size, as published by the state of California in Title 25, California Code of Regulations Section 6932 (or any successor code section), as periodically revised. 
E.  "Moderate-income household" means a household with a gross income that is greater than eighty percent of median income that does not exceed one hundred twenty percent of median income. 
F.  "Monthly gross income" means one-twelfth of the gross income as defined in subsection B. 
G.  "Residential unit" is any unit occupied as the primary place of residence of a household, regardless of zoning classification or permissible use of the building of which it is a part. 
H.  "The downtown neighborhood" means the areas within the designated outline shown on the boundaries map of the replacement housing program attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and incorporated herein by this reference. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 8 (part), 2007: Ord. 913 N.S. § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.30.030 - Program Boundaries Map incorporated by reference. 
A map entitled "Program Boundaries Map, Replacement Housing Program" is incorporated herein by this reference and made a part of this chapter. This map shall be available for public inspection at the City Hall under the same terms and conditions as other public documents. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 8 (part), 2007: Ord. 913 N.S. § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.30.040 - Applicability. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to residential rental units located in the downtown neighborhood which are occupied by either a low-income household or a moderate-income household. 
B.  For purposes of this section, a residential dwelling unit shall be considered occupied by a low or moderate income household if a low or moderate income household currently occupied the unit, or has occupied the dwelling unit within six months prior to the date of submission of the application for increased residential density development or a change to commercial use. 
C.  For purposes of this section, a residential dwelling unit shall be considered occupied by a low or moderate income household if a low or moderate income household occupied the unit within one year of the date of application for increased residential density development or a change to commercial use where substantial evidence exists that the household was evicted or the tenancy was terminated by the landlord, including constructive eviction caused by harassment or failure to repair and maintain the residential unit for the purposes of avoiding the requirements of this section. Termination of tenancy by the owner or owner's agent within one year prior to the application, for any cause other than nonpayment of the rent, or damage to the premises, shall create a rebuttable presumption that the household was evicted for purposes of avoiding the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 8 (part), 2007: Ord. 913 N.S. § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.30.050 - Assistance to be provided—Residential units replaced with new residential units. 
As a condition of approval for existing residential units in the downtown area to be replaced with new residential units of higher density, the owner is required to assist the existing low or moderate income households by providing temporary relocation assistance during demolition and construction of new units, and providing the first right of refusal for an on-site replacement housing unit to replace the previously existing units when construction is completed. The replacement housing units shall remain affordable for the longest feasible time but no less than that period of time required by regulations adopted by the redevelopment agency for use of housing moneys. If redevelopment funds are used, the new replacement unit shall remain affordable for the duration of land use controls of the city's redevelopment plan. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 8 (part), 2007: Ord. 913 N.S. § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.30.060 - Assistance to be provided—Residential units converted to or replaced with another use. 
As a condition of approval for existing residential units in the downtown area to be converted or replaced with use other than residential, the owner shall be required to provide relocation assistance to the existing tenants so they can move to suitable and affordable housing. Relocation assistance shall consist of all reasonable moving expenses (up to a maximum of seven hundred fifty dollars per household) and assistance in locating decent, safe, and sanitary affordable housing. At a minimum, the owner will be required to provide up to twelve months of assistance to the tenant in an amount which equals the reasonable increase in rent and utility costs, not to exceed a maximum total payment of four thousand two hundred dollars per household. Additionally, the owner shall pay into a special housing fund to be established, fees to be set by resolution of the city council, which fees shall be used for the purpose of developing and constructing low and moderate income housing. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 8 (part), 2007: Ord. 913 N.S. § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.30.070 - Notice requirements. 
A.  The property owner must provide a minimum of sixty days' advance notice in writing to the tenants of tenants' need to vacate the unit for demolition or conversion. Said notice shall inform the tenants of their options in terms of housing assistance. A sample "Notice to Tenants" containing the required information will be available as an appendix in the Rules and Regulations maintained pursuant to Section 15.30.090 to implement this chapter. 
B.  Notice under subsection A shall be given to all tenants residing in the dwelling unit at the time the application for demolition or conversion is made as well as to those tenants who occupied the dwelling unit within six months prior to the date of application but who have since moved. Additional notice will be required to be provided to any tenants who live in the unit within one year of the date of application but who are determined by the city to have been evicted for the purposes of avoiding the program requirements under this chapter. 
C.  The property owner shall make every reasonable effort to locate former tenants as required under subsection B and provide them with the required notice. The property owner shall maintain written documentation that efforts have been made to locate former tenants who might benefit from this chapter. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 8 (part), 2007: Ord. 913 N.S. § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.30.080 - Relocation/replacement loans. 
Any redevelopment housing funds available to the city will be made available to property owners who are required to provide both relocation assistance and replacement housing to tenants. Under the terms to be established by the redevelopment agency, loan funds will be available and shall be secured by the property on which replacement units are built or on the property to be converted to another use. Funds will only be provided where the project including replacement units is not economically feasible without assistance. In the event that redevelopment funds are utilized for a project, state law requirements regarding affordability and relocating may come into effect and will supersede the local requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 8 (part), 2007: Ord. 913 N.S. § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.30.090 - Rules and regulations. 
The housing program coordinator shall make recommendations for rules and regulations as deemed necessary to implement this chapter. Implementing regulations shall be adopted by resolution of the city council and shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk. Such rules and regulations shall serve as an interpretation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 8 (part), 2007: Ord. 913 N.S. § 1 (part), 1989; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.30.100 - Violation. 
It is unlawful to violate any provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 59, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 59, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 15.30.100 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 15.30.100 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 913 N.S., § 1(part), adopted in 1989; Ord. 1861 N.S., § 8(part), adopted in 2007; and Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, adopted Nov. 20, 2013.  
Chapter 15.36 - SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEM PERMITTING 
 
15.36.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context indicates otherwise, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  "Solar energy system" means either of the following: 
1.  Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating; or 
2.  Any structural design feature of a building whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating. 
B.  "Small residential rooftop solar energy system" means all of the following: 
1.  A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty kilowatts thermal; 
2.  A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city; 
3.  A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling; and 
4.  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the city. 
C.  "Electronic submittal" means the utilization of one or more of the following: 
1.  Email; 
2.  The internet; or 
3.  Facsimile. 
D.  "Association" means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development. 
E.  "Common interest development" means any of the following: 
1.  A community apartment project; 
2.  A condominium project; 
3.  A planned development; or 
4.  A stock cooperative. 
F.  "Specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
G.  "Reasonable restrictions on a solar energy system" are those restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance or that allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits. 
H.  "Restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance" means: 
1.  For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating systems: An amount exceeding ten percent of the cost of the system, but in no case more than one thousand dollars, or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding ten percent, as originally specified and proposed. 
2.  For photovoltaic systems: An amount not to exceed one thousand dollars over the system cost as originally specified and proposed or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding ten percent as originally specified and proposed. 
I.  "City" means the City of Morgan Hill. 
(Ord. No. 2213 N.S., § 1, 9-7-2016)  
15.36.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter encourages the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city, and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. This chapter allows the city to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 2213 N.S., § 1, 9-7-2016)  
15.36.030 - Applicability. 
A.  This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city. 
B.  Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2213 N.S., § 1, 9-7-2016)  
15.36.040 - Solar energy system requirements. 
A.  All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the city's building and fire departments. 
B.  Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code. 
C.  Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. 
(Ord. No. 2213 N.S., § 1, 9-7-2016)  
15.36.050 - Duties of building department and building official. 
A.  All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available on the publicly accessible city website. 
B.  Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by email, the Internet, and facsimile shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants. An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature. 
C.  The city's building department shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. All code requirements in these documents shall conform to the requirements found in the most recently adopted California Solar Permitting Guidebook model Tool Kit documents adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. 
D.  All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy system shall be adopted by resolution of City Council in compliance with Government Code Sections 65850.55, 66015, and 66016 and Health and Safety Code Section 17951. 
(Ord. No. 2213 N.S., § 1, 9-7-2016)  
15.36.060 - Permit review and inspection requirements. 
A.  The building department shall adopt an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of small residential rooftop solar energy systems that substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook within thirty days of the adoption on this chapter. The building department shall issue a building permit or other nondiscretionary permit the same day for over-the-counter applications or within one to three business days for electronic applications upon receipt of a complete application meeting the requirements of the approved standard plan and checklist. 
B.  Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. 
C.  Review of the application shall be limited to the building official's, or his or her designee's, determination of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements. If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. 
D.  The building official, or his or her designee, may require an applicant to apply for a use permit if the official, or his or her designee, finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. The building official, or his or her designee, shall issue a decision letter to the applicant. Such decisions may be appealed to the planning commission utilizing the procedures set forth in Section 15.36.060(G). 
E.  If a use permit is required, the building official, or his or her designee, may deny an application for the use permit if the official, or his or her designee, makes written findings, based upon substantive evidence in the record, that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. The building official, or his or her designee, shall issue a decision letter to the applicant. Such decisions may be appealed to the planning commission utilizing the procedures set forth in Section 15.36.060(G). 
F.  "A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact" includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of Civil Code Section 714 defining restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance. 
G.  For appeals to the planning commission pursuant to Sections 15.36.060(C) and (D), a written notice of appeal must be filed with the secretary of the planning commission within ten days of receipt of the decision letter from the building official or his or her designee. The notice of appeal shall set forth the specific grounds of the appeal. At the time of consideration of the appeal, the appellant shall have the burden of establishing cause why the action appealed from should be altered, reversed, or modified. The planning commission may continue the matter from time to time and, at the conclusion of its consideration, may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the building official or his or her designee. The decision of the planning commission shall be final. 
H.  The city shall not condition approval of an application on the approval of an association, as defined in Civil Code Section 4080. 
I.  Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the building department for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. Such inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections. An inspection shall be scheduled within two business days of a request and provide a two-hour inspection window. 
J.  If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
K.  Where adopted California Building Codes conflict with prescribed code requirements found in the most recently adopted California Solar Permitting Guidebook, the code requirements found in the California Solar Permitting Guidebook shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2213 N.S., § 1, 9-7-2016)  
Chapter 15.37 - ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION PERMITTING 
 
15.37.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context indicates otherwise, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  "City" means the city of Morgan Hill. 
B.  "Electric vehicle charging station" means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with California Electrical Code Article 625, or any successor regulation, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle. 
C.  "Electronic submittal" means the utilization of one or more of the following: 
1.  Email; 
2.  The internet; or 
3.  Facsimile. 
D.  "Specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
(Ord. No. 2259 N.S., § 1, 9-6-2017)  
15.37.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined electric vehicle charging station permitting process that complies with AB 1236 (Chapter 598, Statutes 2015) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of electric vehicle charging stations. This chapter encourages the use of fuel-efficient electric vehicles and electric vehicle charging stations by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the City, and expanding the ability of property owners to install electric vehicle charging stations. This chapter allows the city to achieve these goals while protecting the public health, welfare, and safety. 
(Ord. No. 2259 N.S., § 1, 9-6-2017)  
15.37.030 - Applicability. 
A.  This chapter applies to the permitting of all electric vehicle charging stations in the city. 
B.  Electric vehicle charging stations legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of the electric vehicle charging station in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2259 N.S., § 1, 9-6-2017)  
15.37.040 - Electric vehicle charging station requirements. 
A.  All electric vehicle charging stations shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the city's building and fire departments. 
B.  Electric vehicle charging stations shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Electrical Code. 
C.  Electric vehicle charging stations shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. 
(Ord. No. 2259 N.S., § 1, 9-6-2017)  
15.37.050 - Duties of building department and building official. 
A.  All documents required for the submission of an expedited electric vehicle charging station permit application shall be made available on the publicly accessible city website. 
B.  Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by email, the Internet, and facsimile shall be made available to all electric vehicle charging station permit applicants. An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature. 
C.  The city's building department shall adopt a standard plan checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. All code requirements in these documents shall substantially conform to the requirements found in the "Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist" contained in the most recently adopted Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook published by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. The city's adopted checklist shall be published on the city's website. 
D.  The city council, by resolution, may establish a fee for the processing of electric vehicle charging station permit applications. 
(Ord. No. 2259 N.S., § 1, 9-6-2017)  
15.37.060 - Permit review and inspection requirements. 
A.  The building department shall administratively approve an application to install electric vehicle charging stations through issuance of a building permit or similar nondiscretionary permit. 
B.  A permit application that satisfies the requirements in the city's adopted checklist shall be deemed complete and shall be promptly processed. Upon confirmation by the building official, or his or her designee, that the permit application and supporting documentation meet the requirements of the city's adopted checklist, and is consistent with local, state, and federal health and safety requirements, in accordance with California Government Code Section 65850.7, the application shall be approved and the necessary permit shall be issued. If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. 
C.  The building official, or his or her designee, may require an applicant to apply for a use permit if the official, or his or her designee, finds, based on substantial evidence, that the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. The building official, or his or her designee, shall issue a decision letter to the applicant. 
D.  If a use permit is required, the building official, or his or her designee, may deny an application for the use permit if the official, or his or her designee, makes written findings, based upon substantive evidence in the record, that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. The building official, or his or her designee, shall issue a decision letter to the applicant. Such decisions may be appealed to the planning commission utilizing the procedures set forth in Section 15.37.060(E). 
E.  For appeals to the planning commission pursuant to Sections 15.37.060(C) and (D), a written notice of appeal must be filed with the secretary of the planning commission within ten days of receipt of the decision letter from the building official or his or her designee. The notice of appeal shall set forth the specific grounds of the appeal. At the time of consideration of the appeal, the appellant shall have the burden of establishing cause why the action appealed from should be altered, reversed, or modified. The planning commission may continue the matter from time to time and, at the conclusion of its consideration, may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the building official or his or her designee. The decision of the planning commission shall be final. 
F.  The city shall not condition approval of an application on the approval of an association, as defined in Civil Code Section 4080. 
G.  Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. 
(Ord. No. 2259 N.S., § 1, 9-6-2017)  
Chapter 15.38 - WAGE THEFT PREVENTION 
 
15.38.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below: 
"Completion" means that construction is complete and the project is eligible for a certificate of occupancy. 
"Contractor" means the prime contractor on a construction project. 
"Owner" means the person or persons, firm, corporation, partnership or other legal entity exercising ownership of the project. 
"Project" means new construction of greater than fifteen thousand square feet that is not subject to prevailing wage requirements and/or does not have a valid project labor or community workforce agreement. 
"Project construction employees" means employees of the contractor or subcontractor. 
"Representative" means a person authorized to legally bind the owner and/or contractor (for example; a corporate officer, general partner, or managing member of a limited liability company.) 
(Ord. No. 2265 N.S., § 1, 12-6-2017)  
15.38.020 - Acknowledgement of responsibility. 
As a condition of approval for any building permit required for a project, an applicant shall sign an acknowledgement that owner, contractor and any subcontractors are required to comply with all applicable provisions of the California Labor Code, including Labor Code section 2810.5. 
(Ord. No. 2265 N.S., § 1, 12-6-2017)  
15.38.030 - Pay transparency certification. 
Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or other permit to occupy new construction, for each contractor or subcontractor whose portion of the work exceeds one hundred thousand dollars or one percent of the value of the construction cost of the project, whichever is greater, owner shall provide to the city a pay transparency certification ("certification"), signed by a representative of the owner, the contractor and any subcontractor under penalty of perjury under the laws of the state of California. The certification required under this section shall be in a form approved by the city and contain the following: 
A.  A statement that project construction employees of the contractor and any subcontractors received written notice of the employers pay practices as required by California Labor Code section 2810.5 and wage statements under Labor Code 226(a); or 
B.  Project construction employees of the contractor and/or any subcontractors are covered by a valid collective bargaining agreement that expressly provides for the wages, hours of work, and working conditions of the employee, and if the agreement provides premium wage rates for all overtime hours worked and a regular hourly rate of pay for those employees of not less than 30 percent more than the state minimum wage. (See Labor Code section 2810.5(c).) 
(Ord. No. 2265 N.S., § 1, 12-6-2017)  
15.38.040 - Compliance determination. 
Prior to issuing a certificate of occupancy, or other permit allowing occupancy of the project, the city shall make a finding of compliance with this chapter. Such a finding shall be issued if: 
A.  The city determines after a review of the certificate that owner, Contractor and any subcontractors have complied with the provisions of this chapter; and 
B.  The city has not received any information that the Labor Commissioner of the state of California has found violations of Labor Code sections 226 or 2810.5 regarding construction work performed on the Project. 
(Ord. No. 2265 N.S., § 1, 12-6-2017)  
15.38.050 - Bonds required for correction of violation. 
If the city determines that the owner, contractor or any subcontractor has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter, or if the Labor Commissioner has found violations of Labor Code sections 226 or 2810.5, the city may issue a certificate of occupancy, only if the owner or contractor can provide evidence of the existence of a labor payment and/or lien release bond, in a form and amount sufficient to ensure that any wage claims and penalties can be fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 2265 N.S., § 1, 12-6-2017)  
15.38.060 - Private right of action. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to authorize a right of action against the city. 
(Ord. No. 2265 N.S., § 1, 12-6-2017)  
Chapter 15.40 - BUILDING SECURITY  
Article I. - General Provisions and Administration 
 
15.40.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the provisions of this chapter is to protect the general health, safety and welfare of the public and the protection of persons and property by providing minimum requirements to safeguard property against burglary and other unlawful trespasses. The minimum requirements will achieve this purpose by regulating and controlling the design, construction and quality of materials and equipment as they relate to security of all buildings and structures constructed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or remodeled within the boundaries of the city as required in Sections 14050 and 14051 of the California Penal Code relating to building security. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows: 
1.  "Active door" means when two doors are installed as a pair, the active door is the one which must be opened first. 
2.  "Anti-shim device." Some spring bolts have this added feature to prevent the spring bolt from being depressed when the door is closed by slipping or shimmying. This device is normally adjacent to the bolt and is depressed by the strike when the door is closed. 
3.  "Armored strike" means a metal strike plate backed up by steel, designed to prevent jamb peeling, mortised into door jamb to restrain the bolt. 
4.  "Auxiliary locking device" means a secondary locking system added to the primary locking system to provide additional security. 
5.  "Bolt" means a metal bar which, when actuated, is projected (or "thrown") either horizontally or vertically into a retaining member, such as a strike plate, to prevent a door or window from moving or opening. 
6.  "Burglary-resistant glazing" means those materials as defined in the Underwriters Laboratory Bulletin 972. 
7.  "CBC" means the California Building Code. The CBC is dedicated to the development of building construction and safety to the public by uniformity in the building laws. The code is founded on broad-base performance principles that make possible the use of new materials and new construction systems. 
8.  "Commercial building" means a building, or portion thereof, used for a purpose other than a dwelling. 
9.  "Cylinder" means the subassembly of a lock containing the cylinder core, tumbler mechanism and the keyway. 
10.  "Cylinder guard" means a free-turning solid metal protective device used to encompass the cylinder of a lock rendering it less vulnerable to wrenching and twisting attacks. 
11.  "Dead bolt" means a metal bolt which cannot be moved when the door is locked, and must be key operable and key, thumbturn or lever operable from the interior. The bolt must project a minimum of one inch from the edge of the door and must contain a cylinder guard on the exterior side when the cylinder is exposed. 
12.  "Deadlatch" or "deadlocking latch" means a spring-activated latch bolt having a beveled end and incorporating a plunger which, when depressed, automatically locks the projected latch bolt against return by end pressure. 
13.  "Door" means a hinged, sliding or other mechanically operated barrier which may be opened and closed to allow or prevent entrance or egress to a building or structure. 
14.  "Door stop" means a projection along the top and sides of a door jamb which checks the door's swinging action. 
15.  "Double-cylinder dead bolt" means a dead bolt lock which can be activated only by a key on both the interior and exterior. 
16.  "Dwelling" means a building or portion thereof designed exclusively for residential occupancy, including single-family and multifamily dwellings. 
17.  "Exit indicator" means a device which shows "open" or "locked" condition of exit door lock. 
18.  "Flushbolt" means a manual, key-operated or turn-operated metal bolt normally used on inactive doors and attached to the top and bottom of the door, engaging in the head and threshold of the frame. 
19.  "Hasp" means a fastening device consisting of a loop and slotted hinge plate. 
20.  "Jamb" means the vertical members of a door frame to which the door is secured. 
21.  "Multifamily dwelling" means a building or portion thereof designed for occupancy by two or more families living independently of each other, including hotels, motels, apartments, duplexes and townhomes. 
22.  "Padlock" means a locking device with a hardened steel shackle, locking heel and toe, with minimum five pin-tumbler operation, with nonremovable key when in an unlocked position. 
23.  "Panic hardware" means a latching device on a door assembly for use when emergency egress is required due to fire or other threat to life safety, devices designed so that they will facilitate the safe egress of people in case of an emergency when is applied to the releasing device in the direction of exit travel. 
24.  "Single-cylinder dead bolt" means a dead bolt lock which is activated from the outside by a key and from the inside by a knob, thumb-turn, lever or similar mechanism. 
25.  "Solid-core door" means a door composed of solid wood or composed of compressed wood equal in strength to solid wood construction. 
26.  "Strike" means a metal plate attached to or mortised into a door or door jamb to receive and to hold a projected latch bolt and/or dead bolt in order to secure the door to the jamb. 
27.  "UL Listed" means tested and listed by Underwriters Laboratory, Inc." 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2000 N.S., § 10, 1-26-2011; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.030 - Administration and enforcement—Scope. 
The provisions set forth in this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the building official or authorized agent and shall apply to the regulation and control of the design, construction and quality of materials and equipment as they relate to the security of all buildings and structures constructed or remodeled in the city after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Buildings and structures constructed within industrial parks, business parks and planned unit developments (M-P and PUD zones) are exempt from the provisions of this chapter except that developers of such projects shall meet with the police department crime prevention unit and the building official to develop appropriate security measures. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 615 N.S., 1983: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2000 N.S., § 10, 1-26-2011; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.040 - Applicability and compliance. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to new construction and to buildings or structures to which additions or alterations are made except as specifically provided by this chapter. 
B.  Existing multifamily dwelling units which are converted to privately owned family units (condominiums) shall comply with the provisions of Article II of this chapter. 
C.  Any existing structure which converts from its original occupancy group, as designated in the California Building Code, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2000 N.S., § 10, 1-26-2011; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.050 - Exemptions. 
Any building as defined in the CBC and Title 19 of the California Administrative Code, requiring special type releasing, latching or locking devices, other than described in this chapter, shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter relating to locking devices of interior and/or exterior doors. (This section is intended to prevent confusion as to requirements for what is known as "panic hardware.") 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.060 - Responsibility for compliance. 
The applicant shall be responsible for compliance with the provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.070 - Alternate materials and methods of construction. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this chapter provided any such alternate has been approved by the enforcing authority, nor is it the intention of this chapter to exclude any sound method of structural design or analysis not specifically provided for in this chapter. Materials, methods of construction, or structural design limitations provided for in this chapter are to be used unless an exception is granted by the enforcing authority. 
B.  The enforcing authority may approve any such alternate provided they find the proposed design to be satisfactory and the material and method of work is, for the purpose intended, at least equivalent to that prescribed in this chapter in quality, strength, effectiveness, burglary resistance, durability and safety. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.080 - Keys and locks for tracts or commercial developments. 
Upon occupancy by the owner or proprietor, each single unit in a tract or commercial development, constructed under the same general plan, shall have locks using combinations which are interchange-free from locks used in all other separate dwellings, proprietorships or similar distinct occupancies. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.090 - Method of enforcement, appeals and variances. 
Methods of the enforcement, appeal and the grant of variances under this chapter shall be those set forth within the municipal code of the city. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.100 - Chapter provisions not exclusive—Life safety factor. 
None of the provisions set forth in this chapter shall supersede any local, state or federal laws, regulations or codes dealing with the life safety factor. Enforcement of these provisions shall be in cooperation with the local fire authority to avoid conflict with fire laws. No portion of this chapter shall supersede any local, state or federal law, regulation or codes dealing with life safety factors. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.110 - Right of entry. 
The enforcing authority shall have the right, and is hereby authorized and empowered, to enter or go on or about any building or premises between eight a.m. and five p.m. for the purpose of inspecting the physical security of such buildings or premises, or for any other purposes consistent with this chapter. The enforcing authority shall be given access to any area of the building or premises upon oral notification to the responsible person, and upon exhibiting suitable evidence of their identity and authority; provided, however, that except in an emergency situation, an inspection warrant issued pursuant to Title 13, Part 3 of the Code of Civil Procedures (Sections 1322.50 to 1322.57, inclusive) shall first be secured when entry or access thereto is refused. It is unlawful to refuse to admit such member when an inspection warrant is not required. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979) 
(Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013; Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 60, 5-2-2018)  
15.40.120 - Appeals. 
In order to prevent or lessen the unnecessary hardship or practical difficulties in exceptional cases where it is difficult or impossible to comply with the strict letter of this chapter, the owner or his designated agent shall have the option to apply for an exemption from any provision of this chapter to the city council. The city council shall exercise its powers on these matters in such a way that the public welfare is secured, and substantial justice done most nearly in accord with the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.130 - Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, move, improve, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause those things to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 60, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 60, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 15.40.130 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 15.40.130 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 491 N.S. (part), adopted in 1979; and Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, adopted Nov. 20, 2013.  
Article II. - Single-Family Dwellings 
 
15.40.140 - Applicability. 
Minimum standards for doors, windows, garage doors and house numbers in single-family dwellings are as set forth in Sections 15.40.150 to 15.40.210. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.150 - House numbers. 
A.  All residential dwellings shall display a street number in a prominent location on the street side of the residence in such a position that the number is easily visible to approaching emergency vehicles. The numerals shall be no less than four inches in height and shall be of a contrasting color to the background to which they are attached. 
B.  Homes whose address numbers are not clearly visible from fifty feet of the roadway surface or the front of the house is below or above grade level or the front of the house is blocked by landscaping or in any other way their immediate observation is blocked, shall be marked at the street entrance to the house and on the house itself so as to make the house immediately identifiable. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.160 - Exterior doors. 
A.  Exterior doors and doors leading from the garage area into the dwelling unit shall be of solid core construction with a minimum thickness of one and three-fourths inches, or with panels not less than five-sixteenths-inch thick. 
B.  All exterior doors for single-family dwellings shall have a single-cylinder or double-cylinder dead bolt lock. The bolt shall have a minimum throw of at least one inch and be constructed so as to repel cutting tool attack. (It may be desired to have dead bolt locks constructed so as to prevent the key from being removed from the interior cylinder when the bolt is projected.) A dual locking mechanism constructed so that both dead bolt and latch can be retracted by a single action of the inside doorknob, or lever, may be substituted provided it meets all other specifications for locking devices. 
C.  Doors leading from enclosed garage areas into single-family dwellings shall be equipped with a single-cylinder or double-cylinder dead bolt lock. Alternate devices equally resistant to illegal entry may be substituted subject to prior approval of the building official or his authorized agent. 
D.  Except where clear vision panels are installed, all front exterior doors shall be equipped with a wide-angle (one-hundred-eighty-degree) door viewer. 
E.  Openings for delivery of mail will be allowed and those openings shall be no larger than twenty-four square inches. The opening itself shall be no higher than one and one-half inches and shall be so constructed to prohibit access to the interior door knob. 
F.  Exterior doors swinging out shall have nonremovable hinges with studs. 
G.  Exterior doors swinging in shall have rabbeted jambs. 
H.  Jambs for all doors shall be constructed or protected so as to prevent violation of the strike. Jambs must include minimum two-and-one-half-inch solid construction around the strike area. 
I.  Glazing in exterior doors or within forty inches of any locking mechanism shall be of fully tempered glass or rated burglary resistant glazing, except when double-cylinder dead bolt locks are installed. 
J.  On double doors, the active leaf shall be equipped with a single-cylinder or double-cylinder dead bolt lock. The bolt shall have a minimum projection of one inch and be constructed so as to repel cutting tool attack. 
K.  The inactive leaf of double doors shall be equipped with metal flush bolts having a minimum throw of five-eighths inch into the head and threshold of the door frame. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.170 - Sliding patio-type doors. 
Sliding patio doors opening onto patios or balconies which are otherwise accessible from the outside: 
A.  It will be permissible for single sliding patio doors to have the movable section of the door slide on the outside as well as the inside of the door, although both shall be provided with pins or sliding door locks that will render the door incapable of being removed. Doors shall comply with tests as set forth in Section 15.40.020. 
B.  Sliding doors shall be equipped with a vertical-bolt-type lock which uses a hook-type bolt to grip the door and frame together. Mounting screws for the lock shall be inaccessible from the outside. Lock bolts shall be hardened steel or have hardened steel inserts and shall be capable of withstanding force of eight hundred pounds applied in any direction. Sliding doors shall comply with tests as set forth in Section 15.40.020. 
C.  Double sliding patio doors must be locked at the meeting rail and meet the locking requirements of subsection B. of this section. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979) 
(Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013; Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 5, 11-2-2016)  
15.40.180 - Windows—Security required when. 
A window, skylight, or other light forming a part of the enclosure of a dwelling unit shall be constructed, installed, and secured as set forth in Section 15.40.190, when such window, skylight, or light is not more than twelve feet vertically and six feet horizontally of a street, highway, yard, court, passageway, corridor, balcony, patio, breezeway, or any portion of the building which is available for use by the public or other tenants, or similar area. A window enclosing a private garage with an interior door leading directly to a dwelling unit shall also comply with Section 15.40.190. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979) 
(Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013; Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 5, 11-2-2016)  
15.40.190 - Windows—Protection methods. 
A.  Windows shall be so constructed that when the window is locked it cannot be lifted from the frame. 
B.  Window locking devices shall be capable of withstanding force of three hundred pounds applied in any direction. (Sliding windows shall comply with tests as set forth in Section 15.40.020.) 
C.  Louvered glass windows shall not be used. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.200 - Garage doors. 
All garage doors shall be secured as follows: 
A.  Overhead garage doors shall not have bottom vents except those doors having double-louvered or shielded vents or approved alternate devices to protect the locking mechanisms. 
B.  Manually operated garage doors shall be provided with slide bolts or any other locking device that will prohibit the garage door from being forced open from either side. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.210 - Alternatives. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to prohibit the use of alternate materials, secondary lock devices or measures when such alternate provisions are deemed by the building official as providing equivalent security based on the recommendations of the crime prevention unit of the police department. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
Article III. - Nonresidential Buildings 
 
15.40.220 - Applicability. 
Minimum standards for doors, windows, transoms and awning windows, roof openings, address numbers, and open parking lots in nonresidential buildings are set out in Sections 15.40.230 through 15.40.320. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.230 - Address numbers. 
A.  The address number of every commercial building shall be illuminated during the hours of darkness so that it will be easily visible from the street. The numerals in these numbers shall be no less than six inches in height and be of a color contrasting to the background. In addition, any business which affords vehicular access to the rear through any driveway, alleyway or parking lot shall also display the same numbers on the rear of the building. 
B.  All exterior commercial doors, during the hours of darkness, shall be illuminated with a minimum of one foot-candle of light. All exterior bulbs shall be protected by vandalism-resistant covers. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.240 - Doors. 
All exterior doors shall be secured as follows: 
A.  A single door shall be equipped with a single-cylinder or double-cylinder dead bolt. The bolt shall have a minimum projection of one inch and be constructed so as to repel cutting tool attack. A hook or expanding bolt can be used providing it has a throw of three-fourths inch, depending on type of occupancy. 
The provisions of the preceding paragraph do not apply where (1) panic hardware is required, or (2) an equivalent device is approved by the enforcing authority. 
B.  On double doors, the active leaf shall be secured with the type of lock required for single doors in subsection A of this section. The inactive leaf of a double door shall be equipped with metal flush bolts having a minimum throw of five-eighths inch into the head and threshold of the door frame. 
C.  Any single or pair of doors requiring locking at the bottom or top rail shall have locks with a minimum five-eighths-inch throw at top and bottom rails. 
D.  Exterior sliding commercial entrances shall be secured as set out in subsections A and B of this section with special attention given to safety regulations. Sliding doors shall meet with the fire code if for exit purposes. 
E.  Rolling overhead doors, solid overhead swinging, sliding or accordion-type garage doors shall be secured with a cylinder lock on the inside and/or padlocks on both sides of the door, when not otherwise controlled or locked by electric power operation. 
F.  Metal accordion grate or grill-type doors shall be equipped with metal guide tracks on top and bottom, and a cylinder lock and/or padlock. The bottom track shall be so designed that the door cannot be lifted from the track when the door is in a locked position. 
G.  Outside hinges on all exterior doors shall be provided with nonremovable pins when using pin-type hinges. 
H.  Except when double-cylinder dead bolts are utilized, the glass panels adjacent to door frames or within forty inches of any door locking mechanism shall be constructed or protected as follows: 
1.  Fully tempered glass or rated burglary-resistant glazing; or 
2.  Iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth-inch material with a minimum two-inch mesh secured on the inside of the glazing may be utilized; or 
3.  The glazing shall be covered with iron bars of at least one-half-inch round or one-inch-by-one-fourth-inch flat steel material, spaced not more than five inches apart, secured on the inside of the glazing; 
4.  Subdivisions 2 and 3 of this subsection shall not interfere with the operation of opening windows if such windows are required to be openable by the California Building Code. 
I.  Doors swinging in shall have rabbeted jambs. 
J.  Jambs for all doors shall be constructed as follows: 
1.  Wooden frames shall be a minimum of two inches thick. 
2.  Hollow steel frames can be used if the residual air space behind the frame is filled with a crush-resistant material such as cement grout, especially in the area of the strike. 
K.  All exterior commercial doors, during the hours of darkness, shall be illuminated with a minimum of one foot-candle of light. All exterior bulbs shall be protected by vandalism-resistant covers. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.250 - Windows—Security requirements generally. 
A.  Windows shall be deemed accessible if less than twelve feet above the ground. Accessible rear and side windows not viewable from the street shall consist of fully tempered glass or burglary-resistant glazing. 
B.  If the accessible side or rear window is of the operable type it shall be secured on the inside with a locking device capable of withstanding a force of three hundred pounds applied in any direction. 
C.  Louvered windows shall not be used within eight feet of any accessible area. 
D.  Outside hinges on all accessible side and rear glass windows shall be provided with nonremovable pins. If the hinge screws are accessible, the screws shall be of the nonremovable type. 
E.  The following window barriers may be used but shall be secured with nonremovable bolts: 
1.  Inside or outside iron bars of at least one-half-inch round or one-fourth-inch flat steel material, spaced not more than five inches apart and securely fastened; or 
2.  Inside or outside iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth-inch material with not more than a two-inch mesh and securely fastened; 
3.  The protective bars or grills shall not interfere with the operation of opening windows if such windows are required to be openable by the California Building Code. Window openings required by the building code for access by the fire department shall be protected by a material approved by the fire department. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.260 - Transoms and awning windows. 
All exterior transoms and awning windows exceeding sixty square inches on the side and rear of any building or premises used for business purposes shall be protected by one of the following: 
A.  Fully tempered glass or rated burglary-resistant glazing; or 
B.  Iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth-inch material with a minimum two-inch mesh securely fastened; or 
C.  Iron bars of at least one-half-inch round or one-by-one-fourth-inch flat steel material spaced not more than five inches apart and securely fastened; 
D.  The protective bars or grills shall not interfere with the operation of opening the transoms if such transoms are required to be openable by the California Building Code. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2000 N.S., § 10, 1-26-2011; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.270 - Roof openings. 
All skylights on the roof of any building or premises used for business purposes shall be provided with: 
A.  Rated burglary-resistant glazing; or 
B.  Iron bars of at least one-half-inch round or one-by-one-fourth-inch flat steel material under the skylight and securely fastened; or 
C.  A steel grill of at least one-eighth-inch material with a maximum two-inch mesh under the skylight and securely fastened. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.280 - Hatchway openings. 
All hatchway openings on the roof of any building or premises used for business purposes shall be secured as follows: 
A.  If the hatchway is of wooden material, it shall be covered on the inside with at least sixteen U.S. gauge sheet metal, or its equivalent, attached with screws. 
B.  The hatchway shall be secured from the inside with a slide bar or slide bolts. (Approval from the fire department is needed.) 
C.  Outside hinges on all hatchway openings shall be provided with nonremovable pins when using pin-type hinges. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.290 - Air duct or vent openings. 
A.  All air duct or air vent openings exceeding ninety-six square inches on the roof or exterior walls of any building or premises used for business purposes shall be secured by covering them with either of the following: 
1.  Iron bars of at least one-half-inch round or one-by-one-fourth-inch flat steel material spaced no more than five inches apart and securely fastened; or 
2.  Iron or steel grills of at least one-eighth-inch material with a maximum two-inch mesh and securely fastened; 
B.  If the barrier is on the outside, it shall be secured with bolts which are nonremovable from the exterior; 
C.  Subsections A.1. and A.2. must not interfere with venting requirements creating a potentially hazardous condition to health and safety or conflict with the provisions of the California Building Code. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2000 N.S., § 10, 1-26-2011; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.300 - Ladders. 
Any ladder, excluding fire escapes, located on the exterior of any building which could provide access to the roof shall be not less than ten feet from any accessible area. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.310 - Open parking lots. 
Open parking lots and access thereto, for the use of the general public, shall be provided with two foot-candles of minimum maintained lighting on the parking surface from dusk until the beginning of business every operating day. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.320 - Alternatives. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to prohibit the use of alternate materials, secondary lock devices or measures when such alternate provisions are deemed by the building official as providing equivalent security based on the recommendations of the crime prevention unit of the police department. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
Article IV. - Hotels, Motels and Multiple Dwellings 
 
15.40.330 - Applicability. 
Minimum standards for doors, windows, garage doors, address numbers, open parking lots and lighting for hotels, motels and multifamily dwellings are as set out in Sections 15.40.340 through 15.40.430. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.340 - Entrance doors to individual units. 
A.  All wood doors shall be solid core with a minimum thickness of one and three-fourths inches as per standards set forth in the California Building Code. 
B.  All entrance doors to individual units shall have dead bolt locks in addition to dead locking latches. The locks shall be so constructed that both the dead bolt and dead locking latch can be retracted by a single action of the inside doorknob. Alternate devices equally resistant to illegal entry may be substituted subject to prior approval of the building official. 
C.  Doors swinging out shall have rabbeted jambs. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.350 - Exterior doors—Multiple dwelling building. 
A.  Exterior doors and doors leading from garage areas into a multiple dwelling building and doors leading into stairwells below the sixth floor level shall have self-locking devices. 
B.  On pairs of doors, the active leaf shall be secured with the type of lock required for single doors. The inactive leaf shall be equipped with lever flush extension bolts with a minimum throw of three-fourths inch at head and foot. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.360 - Sliding patio-type doors. 
Sliding patio-type doors opening onto patios or balconies which are accessible from the outside: 
A.  It will be permissible for single sliding patio doors to have the movable section of the door slide on the outside as well as the inside of the door although both shall be provided with pins or sliding door locks that will render the door incapable of being lifted or slid upward. (Doors shall comply with tests as set forth in Section 15.40.020.) 
B.  Sliding doors shall be equipped with a vertical-bolt-type lock which uses a hook-type bolt to grip door and frame together. Mounting screws for the lock shall be inaccessible from the outside. Lock bolts shall be hardened steel or have hardened steel inserts and shall be capable of withstanding force of eight hundred pounds applied in any direction. (Sliding doors shall comply with tests as set forth in Section 15.40.020.) 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.370 - Windows—Security required when. 
A window, skylight or other light forming a part of the enclosure of a dwelling unit shall be constructed, installed and secured as set forth in Section 15.40.380, when such window, skylight or light is not more than twelve feet vertically and six feet horizontally from a street, highway, yard, court, passageway, corridor, balcony, patio, breezeway or any portion of the building which is available for use by the public or other tenants, or similar area. A window enclosing a private garage with an interior opening leading directly to a dwelling unit shall also comply with Section 15.40.380. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.380 - Window protection. 
A.  Windows shall be so constructed that when the window is locked it cannot be lifted from the frame. 
B.  Window locking devices shall be capable of withstanding force of three hundred pounds applied in any direction. (Sliding windows shall comply with tests as set forth in Section 15.40.020.) 
C.  Louvered windows shall not be used. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.390 - Garage doors. 
All garage doors shall be secured as follows: 
A.  Overhead garage doors shall not have bottom vents except those doors having double-louvered or shielded vents or approved alternate devices to protect the locking mechanism. 
B.  Manually operated garage doors shall be provided with slide bolts or any other locking device that will prohibit the garage door from being forced open from either side. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.400 - Open parking lots. 
Open parking lots and carports shall be provided with a maintained minimum of two foot-candles of light on the parking surface during the hours of darkness. Lighting devices shall be protected by vandalism-resistant covers. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.410 - Address numbers on multifamily dwellings. 
There shall be positioned at the main entrance of the multifamily dwelling complex an illuminated diagrammatic representation of the complex which shows the location of the viewer and the unit designations within the complex. In addition, each individual unit within the complex shall display a prominent identification number, not less than four inches in height, which is easily visible to approaching vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.420 - Lighting in multifamily dwellings. 
Aisles, passageways and recesses related to and within the building complex shall be illuminated with an intensity of at least twenty-five one-hundredths (.25) footcandles at the ground level during the hours of darkness. Lighting devices shall be protected by vandalism-resistant covers. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.40.430 - Alternatives. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to prohibit the use of alternate materials, secondary lock devices or measures when such alternate provisions are deemed by the building official as providing equivalent security based on the recommendations of the crime prevention unit of the police department. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 11 (part), 2007: Ord. 491 N.S. (part), 1979; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
Chapter 15.44 - FIRE CODE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 6, adopted Nov. 2, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 15.44, §§ 15.44.010—15.44.160, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.44 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for a detailed history of derivation. 
 
15.44.010 - Adoption of the 2016 California and 2015 International Fire Codes. 
There is hereby adopted by reference that certain code known and designated as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 9, further described and referred to as the 2016 California Fire Code published by the California Building Standards Commission and based on the International Fire Code&reg;, 2015 Edition, prepared by the International Code Council, including Appendix Chapters B, C, and K, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended by this chapter. Such code shall be and become the Morgan Hill Fire Code, regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling, and use of hazardous substances, materials, and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the City of Morgan Hill. 
One (1) copy of the code shall be kept on file at all times in the office of the city building official and the administrative offices of the Morgan Hill Fire Department for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 6, 11-2-2016)  
15.44.015 - Adoption of appendix chapters. 
The following Appendix Chapters from the 2016 California Fire Code are hereby adopted: 
Appendix B: Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings. 
Appendix C: Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution. 
Appendix K: Temporary Haunted Houses, Ghost Walks and Similar Amusement Uses. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 6, 11-2-2016)  
15.44.020 - Short Title; International Fire Code and California Fire Code Defined. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Fire Code" and may be cited as such. Whenever the phrase "International Fire Code" appears in this code or any ordinance of the city, such phrase shall be deemed and construed to refer to and apply to the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, as adopted and amended by this chapter. Whenever the phrase "California Fire Code" appears in this code or any ordinance of the city, such phrase shall be deemed and construed to refer to and apply to the 2016 California Fire Code, as adopted and amended by this chapter. Sections amended or modified in this chapter shall refer to the sections of the California Fire Code unless otherwise specified. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 6, 11-2-2016)  
15.44.030 - Establishment and duties of bureau of fire prevention. 
The California Fire Code and International Fire Code shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention in the Morgan Hill Fire Department, which shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 6, 11-2-2016)  
15.44.040 - Modification of provisions by chief. 
A.  The Chief of the Morgan Hill Fire Department shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or their duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the codes, provided that the spirit of the codes shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. 
B.  The particulars of such modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the chief shall be entered in the records of the fire department and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant for modification. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 6, 11-2-2016)  
15.44.050 - Establishment of limits of districts. 
A.  Storage of stationary tanks of flammable cryogenic fluids are to be prohibited. The limits referred to in Section 5806.2 of the 2016 California Fire Code, in which the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited, are hereby established as to all locations of the City of Morgan Hill which are residential and congested commercial areas as determined by the fire code official. 
B.  Storage of Class I and II liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited. The limits referred to in Section 5704.2.9.6.1 of the 2016 California Fire Code, in which the storage of flammable or combustible liquids in aboveground tanks is prohibited, are hereby established as to all locations of the City of Morgan Hill that are residential or congested commercial areas as determined by the fire code official. 
C.  Storage of Class I and II liquids in aboveground tanks is prohibited. The limits referred to in Section 5706.2.4.4 of the 2016 California Fire Code, in which the storage of flammable or combustible liquids in aboveground tanks is prohibited, are hereby established as to all locations of the City of Morgan Hill that are residential or other locations as determined by the fire code official. 
D.  Storage of liquefied petroleum gases ("LPG") is prohibited. The limits referred to in Section 6104.2 of the 2016 California Fire Code, in which storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are hereby established as to all locations of the City of Morgan Hill that are residential or congested commercial areas as determined by the fire code official. 
Exceptions: LPG may be used for industrial operations or when natural gas is not available or would not provide a viable substitute for LPG. Portable containers for temporary heating and/or cooking uses may be permitted if stored and handled in accordance with this code. Facilities in commercial areas for refueling portable or mobile LPG containers may be approved by the fire code official on a case by case basis. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 6, 11-2-2016)  
15.44.060 - Additions, amendments, and deletions. 
A.  In accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 17958.7, certain modifications to the California Fire Code as set forth in this Chapter are reasonably necessary because of local climatic, geologic, or topographical conditions. 
B.  Findings: The City of Morgan Hill experiences low humidity, high winds, and warm temperatures during the summer months, creating conditions which are particularly conducive to the ignition and spread of grass, brush, and structure fires. The remoteness and steepness of hillside areas in the city significantly impact the ability of emergency responders to extinguish or control wildland or structure fires. These factors cumulatively mandate special provisions for the creation of defensible space around homes and ignition resistant construction. Additional express findings either already on file with the California Building Standards Commission or will be filed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 6, 11-2-2016)  
15.44.070 - Modifications relating to permits. 
A.  Section 105.6.9 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
105.6.9 Compressed Gases. An operational permit is required for the storage, use or handling at normal temperature and pressure ("NPT") of compressed gases in excess of the amounts listed in Table 105.6.9 to install any piped distribution system for compressed gases or to install a non- flammable medical gas manifold system. A permit is required to install, repair, abandon, remove, place temporarily out of service, close, or substantially modify a compressed gas system. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Vehicles equipped for and using compressed gas as a fuel for propelling the vehicle. 
2.  Routine maintenance. 
3.  For emergency repair work performed on an emergency basis, application for permit shall be made within two working days of commencement of work. 
4.  Inert and simple asphyxiants at or below the amounts listed in Table 105.6.9. 
The permit applicant shall apply for approval to close storage, use, or handling facilities at least 30 days prior to the termination of the storage, use, or handling of compressed or liquefied gases. Such application shall include any change or alteration of the facility closure plan. This 30-day period may be waived by the Chief if there are special circumstances requiring such waiver. 
B.  Table 105.6.9 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
TABLE 105.6.9 
PERMIT AMOUNTS FOR COMPRESSED GASES 1 
TYPE OF GAS 	AMOUNT(cubic feet) 2 
	X 0.0283 for m 3 
Corrosive 	200 
Flammable (except cryogenic and liquefied petroleum gases) 	200 
Highly toxic 	Any amount 
Inert and simple asphyxiant 	6,000 
Irritant 	200 
Moderately toxic 	20 
Other health hazards 	650 
Oxidizing (including oxygen) 	504 
Pyrophoric 	Any amount 
Radioactive 	Any amount 
Sensitizer 	200 
Toxic 	Any Amount 
Unstable (reactive) 	Any amount 
 
1  Refer to Chapters 27, 30, 32, 35, 37, 40 and 41 for additional requirements and exceptions. 
2  Cubic feet measured at normal temperature and pressure. 
C.  Table 105.6.21 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
TABLE 105.6.21 - PERMIT AMOUNTS FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 
TYPE OF MATERIAL 	AMOUNT 
Carcinogens 	10 pounds 
Combustible liquids 	See Section 105.6.17 
Corrosive materials: 	See Section 105.6.9 
Gases 	55 gallons 
Liquids 	500 pounds 
Solids 	
Cryogens 	See Section 105.6.11 
Explosive materials 	See Section 105.6.15 
TYPE OF MATERIAL 	AMOUNT 
Flammable materials: 	See Section 105.6.9 
Gases 	See Section 105.6.17 
Liquids 	10 pounds 
Solids 	
Highly toxic materials: Gases 	Any amount 
Liquids 	Any amount 
Solids 	Any amount 
Moderately toxic gas 	20 cubic feet 
Organic peroxides: 	Any Amount 
Liquids: Class I-IV 	No Permit Required 
Liquids: Class V 	Any Amount 
Solids: Class I-IV 	No Permit Required 
Solids: Class V 	
Oxidizing materials: 	504 Cubic Feet 
Gases 	Any amount 
Liquids 	Any amount 
Solids 	
Pyrophoric materials: 	Any amount 
Gases 	Any amount 
Liquids 	Any amount 
Solids 	
Toxic materials: 	Any amount 
Gases 	Any amount 
Liquids 	Any amount 
Solids 	
Unstable (reactive) materials: 	Any amount 
Gases 	Any amount 
Liquids 	Any amount 
Solids 	
Water reactive materials: 	
Liquids 	Any amount 
Solids 	
 
For SI: 1 gallon = 3.785 L, 1 pound = 0.454 kg. 
a. 20 gallons when table 5003.1.1(1) Note k applies and hazard identification signs in accordance with Section 5003.5 are provided for quantities of 20 gallons or less. 
b. 200 pounds when table 5003.1.1(1) Note k applies and hazard identification signs in accordance with Section 5003.5 are provided for quantities of 200 gallons or less. 
D.  Section 105.6.49(4) of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
4.  Day Care Facility. An operational permit is required to operate a business as a day care facility for more than 6 people. 
E.  Section 105.6.49(5) of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
5.  Institutional. A permit is required to operate, maintain, or use any institutional type occupancy. For the purpose of this Section, an institution shall be, but is not limited to, a hospital, children's home, home or institution for persons with intellectual disabilities, home or institution for the care of aged or senile persons, sanitarium, nursing or convalescent home, certified family care home, residential care home for the elderly, out of home placement facility, halfway house, and day care nursery, or similar facility of any capacity. 
F.  Section 105.6.49(6) of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
6.  Radioactives. To store or handle at any installation more than one microcuri (37,000 becquerel) of radioactive material not contained in a sealed source or sources, or any amount of radioactive material for which a specific license from the nuclear regulatory commission. 
G.  Section 105.7.3 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
105.7.3 Compressed gases. A construction permit is required to install any piped distribution system for compressed gasses or to install a non-flammable medical gas maniford system. A construction permit is required to install, repair damage to, abandon, remove, place temporarily out of service, close, or substantially modify a compressed gas system. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Routine maintenance. 
2.  For emergency repair work performed on an emergency basis, an application for a permit shall be made within two working days of commencement of work. 
The permit applicant shall apply for approval to close storage, use or handling facilities at least 30 days prior to the termination of the storage, use or handling of compressed or liquefied gases. Such application shall include any change or handling of compressed or liquefied gases. Such application shall include any change or alteration of the facility closure plan. This 30-day period may be waived by the Chief if there are special circumstances requiring such waiver. 
H.  Section 105.7.4 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
105.7.4 Cryogenic Fluids. A construction permit is required for installation of or alteration to cryogenic fluid storage systems where the system capacity exceeds the amounts listed in Table 105.6.10. Maintenance performed in accordance with this code is not considered an alteration and does not require a construction permit. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 6, 11-2-2016)  
15.44.080 - Inspections. 
A.  Section 106.5 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
106.5 Final Inspection. No final inspection as to all or any portion of a development shall be deemed completed until the installation of the required fire protection facilities and access ways have been completed and approved. No final certificate of occupancy may be granted until the fire department issues notice of final clearance of such fire protection facilities and access ways to the building department. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 6, 11-2-2016)  
15.44.090 - Modification relating to violations. 
A.  Section 109.3 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby deleted. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 6, 11-2-2016)  
15.44.100 - Chapter 2—Definitions. 
A.  The following definition in Section 202 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
CARCINOGEN. 
A substance that causes the development of cancerous growths in living tissue. A chemical is considered a carcinogen if: 
1.  It has been evaluated by the International Agency for Research on Cancer and found to be a carcinogen or potential carcinogen, or 
2.  It is listed as a carcinogen or potential carcinogen in the latest edition of the Annual Report on Carcinogens published by the National Toxicology program, or 
3.  It is regulated by OSHA as a carcinogen. 
B.  The following definition in Section 202 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
CONTINUOUS GAS DETECTION SYSTEM. 
An approved gas detection system where the analytical instrument is maintained in continuous operation and sampling is performed without interruption. Analysis is allowed to be performed on a cyclical basis at intervals not to exceed 30 minutes. In occupied areas where air is re-circulated and not exhausted to a treatment system (e.g. breathing zone), the Fire Code Official may require a cyclical basis at intervals not to exceed 5 minutes. The gas detection system shall be able to detect the presence of a gas at or below the permissible exposure limit in occupiable areas and at or below ½ IDLH (or 0.05 LC 50 if no established IDLH) in non-occupiable areas. 
C.  The following definition in Section 202 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
CORROSIVE LIQUID. 
1.  Any liquid which, when in contact with living tissue, will cause destruction or irreversible alteration of such tissue by chemical action; 
2.  Any liquid having a pH of 2 or less or 12.5 or more; 
3.  Any liquid classified as corrosive by the U.S. Department of Transportation; or 
4.  Any material exhibiting the characteristics of corrosivity in accordance with Title 22, California Code of Regulations §66261.22. 
D.  The following definition in Section 202 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
DEVICE. 
An appliance or piece of equipment that plays an active part in the proper functioning of the regulated systems. Examples include, but are not limited to, the following: smoke detectors, heat detectors, flame detectors, manual pull stations, horns, alarms, bells, warning lights, hydrants, risers, FDCs, standpipes, strobes, control panels, transponders, and other such equipment used to detect, transmit, initiate, annunciate, alarm, or respond according to the system design criteria. 
E.  The following definition in Section 202 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
MAXIMUM THRESHOLD QUANTITY ("MAX TQ"). 
The maximum quantity of a moderately toxic or toxic gas, which may be stored in a single vessel before a more stringent category or regulation is applied. The following equation shall be used to calculate the Max TQ: 
Max TQ (pounds) = LC50 (ppm) x 2 lb. 
For gas mixtures containing one or more toxic, highly toxic or moderately toxic components, LC50 shall be calculated using CGA Standards P-20 and P-23 as referenced in Appendix E, Section 103.1.3.1 in the California Fire Code. 
F.  The following definition in Section 202 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
MODERATELY TOXIC GAS. 
A chemical or substance that has a median lethal concentration (LC50) in air more than 2000 parts per million but not more than 5000 parts per million by volume of gas or vapor, when administered by continuous inhalation for an hour, or less if death occurs within one hour, to albino rats weighing between 200 and 300 grams each. 
G.  The following definition in Section 202 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
OTHER HEALTH HAZARD MATERIAL. 
A hazardous material which affects target organs of the body, including, but not limited to, those materials which produce liver damage, kidney damage, damage to the nervous system, act on the blood to decrease hemoglobin function, deprive the body tissue of oxygen or affect reproductive capabilities, including mutations (chromosomal damage) or teratogens (effect on fetuses). 
H.  The following definition in Section 202 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
SECONDARY CONTAINMENT. 
That level of containment that is external to and separate from primary containment and is capable of safely and securely containing the material, without discharge, for a period of time reasonably necessary to ensure detection and remedy of the primary containment failure. 
I.  The following definition in Section 202 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
SENSITIZER. 
A chemical that causes a substantial proportion of exposed people or animals to develop an allergic reaction in normal tissue after repeated exposure to the chemical. 
J.  The following definition in Section 202 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE FIRE AREA. 
A geographical area identified by the State as "Fire Hazard Severity Zone" in accordance with the Public Resources Code Sections 4201 through 4204 and Government Code Sections 51175 through 51189, or other areas designated by the City to be at a significant risk from wildfire. 
The Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area shall be defined as all areas within the City of Morgan Hill as set forth and delineated on the map entitled "Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area" which map and all notations, references, data, and other information shown thereon are hereby adopted and made a part of this Chapter. The map, properly attested, shall be on file in the Office of the City Clerk. 
K.  The following definition in Section 202 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
WORKSTATION. 
A defined space or independent principal piece of equipment using hazardous materials with a hazard rating of 3 or higher as ranked by NFPA 704 where a specific function, laboratory procedure or research activity occurs. Approved or listed hazardous materials storage cabinets, flammable liquid storage cabinets or gas cabinets serving a workstation are included as part of the workstation. A workstation is allowed to contain ventilation equipment, fire protection devices, electrical devices, and other processing and scientific equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 6, 11-2-2016)  
15.44.110 - Chapter 3—General Precautions Against Fire. 
A.  Section 311.1 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
311.1 General. Temporarily unoccupied buildings, structures, premises or portions thereof, including tenant spaces, shall be safeguarded and maintained in accordance with Sections 311.1 through 311.4. 
B.  Section 316.7 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
316.7 Roof Guardrails at Interior Courts. Roof openings into interior courts that are bounded on all sides by building walls shall be protected with guardrails. The top of the guardrail shall not be less than 42 inches in height above the adjacent roof surface that can be walked on. Intermediate rails shall be designed and spaced such that a 12-inch diameter sphere cannot pass through. 
Exception: Where the roof opening is greater than 600 square feet in area. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 6, 11-2-2016)  
15.44.120 - Chapter 4—Emergency Planning and Preparedness. 
A.  Chapter 4 of the 2015 International Fire Code is not adopted. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 6, 11-2-2016)  
15.44.130 - Chapter 5—Fire Service Features. 
A.  Section 503.1 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
503.1 Where required. Fire apparatus access roads shall be provided and maintained in accordance with Sections 503.1.1 through 503.1.3 and as per Fire Department access road Standards. 
B.  Section 503.2.1 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet (6096 mm), except for approved security gates in accordance with Section 503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of 13 feet 6 inches (4115 mm). 
Exception: When there are not more than two Group R, Division 3, or Group U occupancies, the access road width may be modified by the fire code official. 
C.  Section 504.5 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
504.5 Access control devices. When access control devices including bars, grates, gates, electric or magnetic locks or similar devices, which would inhibit rapid fire department emergency access to within and throughout the building, are installed, such devices shall be approved by the fire code official. All electrically powered access control devices shall be provided with an approved means for deactivation or unlocking from a single location or otherwise approved by the fire department. Access control devices shall also comply with Chapter 10 entitled Egress in the California Fire Code. 
D.  Section 510.1.1 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
510.1.1 Obstruction by new buildings. When it is determined that a new structure obstructs the line of sight emergency radio communications to existing buildings or to any other locations, the developer of the structure shall provide and install the radio retransmission equipment necessary to restore communications capabilities. The equipment shall be located in an approved space or area within the new structure. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 6, 11-2-2016)  
15.44.140 - Chapter 6—Electrical Equipment, Wiring, and Hazards. 
A.  Section 605.13 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
605.13 Immersion heaters. All electrical immersion heaters used in dip tanks, sinks, vats and similar operations shall be provided with approved over-temperature controls and low liquid level electrical disconnects. Manual reset of required protection devices shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 6, 11-2-2016)  
15.44.150 - Chapter 8—Interior Finish, Decorative Materials, and Furnishings. 
A.  Section 806.1.1 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
806.1.1 Display inside buildings. The display of Christmas trees and other decorative vegetation shall be in accordance with Sections 806.1 through 806.5 and California Code of Regulations, Title 19, Division 1, Section 3.08. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Trees located in areas protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 shall not be prohibited in Groups A, E, M, R-1, and R-2. 
2.  Trees shall be allowed within dwelling units in Group R-2 occupancies. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 6, 11-2-2016)  
15.44.160 - Chapter 9—Fire Protection Systems. 
A.  Section 903.2 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new and existing buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described in this Section or in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.19 of the California Fire Code, whichever is the more restrictive. 
For the purposes of this section, firewalls and fire barriers used to separate building areas shall be constructed in accordance with the California Building Code and shall be without openings or penetrations. 
1.  In other than residential buildings which require the installation of fire sprinklers for all new buildings according to the California Residential Code, an automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all new buildings and structures greater than 1,000 square feet of building area. 
Exceptions: 
a.  Buildings and structures that do not exceed 1,000 square feet of building area and that are not located in the Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area. 
b.  Buildings and structures that are located in the Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area and do not exceed 500 square feet of building area. 
c.  Group S-2 or U occupancies that are not located in the Wildland-Urban Interface and used exclusively for vehicle parking and meeting all of the following conditions: 
i.  Noncombustible construction; 
ii.  Maximum building area not to exceed 5,000 square feet; 
iii.  Structure is open on three (3) or more sides; and 
iv.  Minimum of 10 feet separation from existing buildings unless area is separated by fire walls 
d.  Group S-2 or U occupancies used exclusively for vehicle parking and meeting all of the following conditions: 
i.  Noncombustible construction; 
ii.  Maximum building areas not to exceed 5,000 square feet; 
iii.  Structure is open on three (3) or more sides; and 
iv.  Minimum of 10 feet separation from existing buildings unless area is separated by fire walls. 
2.  An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout existing Group A, B, E, F, I L, M, S and U buildings and structures when additions are made that increase the building area to more than 3,600 square feet or that create conditions described in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.19 of the California Fire Code. 
3.  An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout existing Group R occupancies , when additions are made and the building area is greater than 3,600 square feet. 
4.  An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all new basements regardless of size and throughout existing basements that are expanded by more than 50%. 
5.  Any change in the character of occupancy or in use of any building with a building area equal to or greater than 3,600 square feet which, in the opinion of the fire code official or building official, would place the building into a more hazardous division of the same occupancy group or into a different group of occupancies and constitutes a greater degree of life safety 1 or increased fire risk 2 , shall require the installation of an approved fire automatic fire sprinkler system. 
1 Life Safety—Increased occupant load, public assembly areas, public meeting areas, churches, indoor amusement attractions, buildings with complex exiting systems due to increased occupant loads, large schools/daycare facilities, large residential care facilities with non ambulatory. 
2 Fire Risks—High-piled combustible storage, woodworking operations, hazardous operations using hazardous materials, increased fuel loads (storage of moderate to highly combustible materials), increased sources of ignition (welding, automotive repair with use of flammable liquids and open flames). 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 6, 11-2-2016)  
15.44.170 - Chapter 28—Lumber Yards and Woodworking Facilities. 
A.  Section 2803.8 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
2803.8 Fire protection water supply system. An approved fire protection water supply and hydrant system suitable for the fire hazard involved shall be provided for open storage yards and processing areas. Hydrant systems shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 24. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 6, 11-2-2016)  
15.44.180 - Chapter 33—Fire Safety During Construction and Demolition. 
A.  Section 3304.8 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
3304.8 Fire walls. When firewalls are required in combustible construction, the wall construction shall be completed (with all openings protected) immediately after the building is sufficiently weather-protected at the location of the wall(s). 
B.  Section 3311.1 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
3311.1 Stairways required. Each level above the first story in new multi-story buildings that require two exit stairways shall be provided with at least two usable exit stairways after the floor decking is installed. The stairways shall be continuous and discharge to grade level. Stairways serving more than two floor levels shall be enclosed (with openings adequately protected) after exterior walls/windows are in place. Exit stairs in new and in existing, occupied buildings shall be lighted and maintained clear of debris and construction materials at all times. 
Exception: For new multi-story buildings, one of the required exit stairs may be obstructed on not more than two contiguous floor levels for the purposes of stairway construction (i.e., installation of gypsum board, painting, flooring, etc.). 
C.  Section 3311.1.1 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
Section 3311.1.1 Required Means Of Egress. All new buildings under construction shall have at least one unobstructed means of egress. All means of egress shall be identified in the prefire plan see Section 3308.2. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 6, 11-2-2016)  
15.44.190 - Chapter 49—Requirements for Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Areas. 
A.  The following definition in Section 4902 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE FIRE AREA is a geographical area identified by the state as a "Fire Hazard Severity Zone" in accordance with the Public Resources Code Sections 4201 through 4204 and Government Code Sections 51175 through 51189, or other areas designated by the City to be at a significant risk from wildfires. 
The Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area shall be defined as all areas within the City of Morgan Hill as set forth and delineated on the map entitled "Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area" which map and all notations, references, data and other information shown thereon are hereby adopted and made a part of this Chapter. The map properly attested, shall be on file in the Office of the City Clerk. 
B.  Section 4906.2 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
4906.2 Application. Buildings and structures located in the following areas shall maintain the required hazardous vegetation and fuel management: 
1.  All unincorporated lands designated by the State Board of Forestry and Fire Protection as State Responsibility Areas (SRA) including: 
1.1.  Moderate Fire Hazard Severity Zones 
1.2.  High Fire Hazard Severity Zones 
1.3.  Very-High Fire Hazard Severity Zones 
2.  Land designated as a Very-High Fire Hazard Severity Zone or as a Wildland Urban Interface Fire Area by the City of Morgan Hill. 
C.  Section 4907.1 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
4907.1 General. Defensible space will be maintained around all buildings and structures in State Responsibility Area (SRA) as required in Public Resources Code 4290 and "SRA Fire Safe Regulations" California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Division 1.5, Chapter 7, Subchapter 2, Section 1270. 
Buildings and structures within the Very-High Fire Hazard Severity Zones of a Local Responsibility Area (LRA) shall maintain defensible space as outlined in Government Code 51175 - 51189 and any local ordinance of the City of Morgan Hill. 
Defensible space shall also be provided around water tank structures, water supply pumps and pump houses. 
Persons owning, leasing, controlling, operating or maintaining buildings or structures in the locally adopted Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area but that are not within the Very-High Fire Hazard Severity Zone and persons owning, leasing or controlling land adjacent to such buildings or structures, shall at all times: 
1.  Maintain an effective defensible space by removing and clearing away flammable vegetation and combustible growth from areas within 30 feet (9144 mm) of such buildings or structures. 
Exception: Single specimens of trees, ornamental shrubbery or similar plants used as ground covers, provided that they do not form a means of rapidly transmitting fire from the native growth to any structure. 
2.  Maintain additional effective defensible space by removing brush, flammable vegetation and combustible growth located 30 feet to 100 feet (9144 mm to 30480 mm) when required by the fire code official due to steepness of terrain or other conditions that would cause a defensible space of only 30 feet (9144 mm) to be insufficient. 
Exception: Grass and other vegetation located more than 30 feet (9144 mm) from buildings or structures and less than 18 inches (457 mm) in height above the ground need not be removed where necessary to stabilize the soil and prevent erosion. 
3.  Remove portions of trees, which extend within 10 feet (3048 mm) of the outlet of a chimney. 
4.  Maintain trees adjacent to or overhanging a building free of deadwood; and 
5.  Maintain the roof of a structure free of leaves, needles or other dead vegetative growth. 
6.  Remove flammable vegetation a minimum of 10 feet around liquefied petroleum gas tanks/containers. 
7.  Firewood and combustible materials shall not be stores in unenclosed spaces beneath buildings or structures, or on decks or under eaves, canopies or other projections or overhangs. The storage of firewood and combustible material within the defensible space shall be located a minimum of 30 feet (6096 mm) from structures and separated from the crown of trees by a minimum horizontal distance of 15 feet (4572 mm). 
Exception: Firewood and combustible materials not for consumption on the premises shall be stores as approved by the Fire Code Official. 
8.  Clear areas within 10 feet (3048 mm) of fire apparatus access roads and driveways of non-fire-resistive vegetation growth. 
Exception: Grass and other vegetation located more than 30 feet (9144 mm) from buildings or structures and less than 18 inches (457 mm) in height above the ground need not be removed where necessary to stabilize the soil and prevent erosion. 
D.  Section 4908 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
SECTION 4908 - FIRE PROTECTION PLAN 
4908.1 General. When required by the code official, a fire protection plan shall be prepared. 
4908.2 Content. The plan shall be based upon a site-specific wildfire risk assessment that includes considerations of location, topography, aspect, flammable vegetation, climatic conditions and fire history. The plan shall address water supply, access, building ignition and fire-resistance factors, fire protection systems and equipment, defensible space and vegetation management. 
4908.3 Cost. The cost of fire protection plan preparation and review shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
4908.4 Plan Retention. The fire protection plan shall be retained by the fire code official. 
E.  Section 4909 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
SECTION 4909 IGNITION SOURCE CONTROL 
4909.1 Fireworks. Fireworks shall not be used or possessed in the Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 6, 11-2-2016)  
15.44.200 - Chapter 50—Hazardous Materials—General Provisions. 
A.  Section 5001.2.2.2 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
5001.2.2.2 Health hazards. The material categories listed in this section are classified as health hazards. A material with a primary classification as a health hazard can also pose a physical hazard. 
1.  Highly toxic and toxic materials. 
2.  Corrosive materials. 
3.  Moderately toxic gas. 
4.  Other health hazards. 
B.  Section 5003.1.3.1 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
5003.1.3.1 Toxic, highly Toxic, moderately toxic gases and similarly used or handled materials. The storage, use and handling of toxic, highly toxic and moderately toxic gases in amounts exceeding Table 6004.2 or 6004.3 shall be in accordance with this Chapter and Chapter 60 of the California Fire Code. Any toxic, highly toxic or moderately toxic material that is used or handled as a gas or vapor shall be in accordance with the requirements for toxic, highly toxic or moderately toxic gases. 
C.  Section 5003.1.5 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
5003.1.5 Other health hazards. The storage, use and handling of materials classified as other health hazards including carcinogens, irritants and sensitizers in amounts exceeding 810 cubic feet for gases, 55 gallons for liquids and 5,000 pounds for solids shall be in accordance with this Section 5003. 
D.  Section 5003.1.6 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
5003.1.6 Spill control and secondary containment requirements. A containment system shall be required for all hazardous materials, which are liquids or solids at normal temperature, and pressure (NTP) where a spill is determined to be a plausible event and where such an event would endanger people, property or the environment. Construction shall be substantial, capable of safely and securely containing a sudden release without discharge. Design criteria shall be performance oriented and constructed of physically and chemically compatible materials to resist degradation and provide structural and functional integrity for a period of time reasonably necessary to ensure detection, mitigation, and repair of the primary system. Regardless of quantities, secondary containment shall also comply with Section 5004.2. 
E.  Section 5003.2.2.1 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
5003.2.2.1 Design and construction. Piping, tubing, valves, fittings and related components used for hazardous materials shall be in accordance with the following: 
1.  Piping, tubing, valves, fittings, and related components shall be designed and fabricated from materials compatible with the material to be contained and shall be of adequate strength and durability to withstand the pressure, structural and seismic stress, and exposure to which they are subject. 
2.  Piping and tubing shall be identified in accordance with ASME A13.1 and Santa Clara County Fire Chiefs Marking Requirements and Guidelines for Hazardous Materials and Hazardous Waste to indicate the material conveyed. 
3.  Readily accessible manual valves or automatic remotely activated fail-safe emergency shutoff valves shall be installed on supply piping and tubing at the following locations: 
3.1  The point of use. 
3.2  The tank, cylinder or bulk use. 
4.  Manual emergency shutoff valves and controls for remotely activated emergency shutoff valves shall be identified and the location shall be clearly visible accessible and indicated by means of a sign. 
5.  Backflow prevention or check valves shall be provided when the backflow of hazardous materials could create a hazardous condition or cause the unauthorized discharge of hazardous materials. 
6.  Where gases or liquids having a hazard ranking of Health hazard Class 3 or 4, Flammability Class 4, or Reactivity Class 4 in accordance with NFPA 704 are carried in pressurized piping above 15 pounds per square inch gauge (psig)(103 Kpa), an approved means of leak detection, emergency shutoff and excess flow control shall be provided. Where the piping originates from within a hazardous material storage room or area, the excess flow control shall be located within the storage room or area. Where the piping originates from a bulk source, the excess flow control shall be located as close to the bulk source as practical. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Piping for inlet connections designed to prevent backflow. 
2.  Piping for pressure relief devices. 
7.  Secondary containment or equivalent protection from spills shall be provided for piping for liquid hazardous materials and for highly toxic and toxic corrosive gases above threshold quantities listed in Tables 6004.2 and 6004.3. Secondary containment includes, but is not limited to double walled piping. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Secondary containment is not required for toxic corrosive gases if the piping is constructed of inert materials. 
2.  Piping under sub-atmospheric conditions if the piping is equipped with an alarm and fail-safe-to-close valve activated by a loss of vacuum. 
8.  Expansion chambers shall be provided between valves whenever the regulated gas may be subjected to thermal expansion. Chambers shall be sized to provide protection for piping and instrumentation and to accommodate the expansion of regulated materials. 
F.  Section 5003.2.2.2 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
5003.2.2.2 Additional regulation for supply piping for health hazard materials. Supply piping and tubing for gases and liquids having a health hazard ranking of 3 or 4 shall be in accordance with ASME B31.3 and the following: 
1.  Piping and tubing utilized for the transmission of toxic, highly toxic, or highly volatile corrosive liquids and gases shall have welded, or brazed connections throughout except for connections within an exhausted enclosure if the material is a gas, or an approved method of drainage or containment is provided for connections if the material is a liquid. 
2.  Piping and tubing shall not be located within corridors, within any portion of a means of egress required to be enclosed in fire-resistance-rated construction or in concealed spaces in areas not classified as Group H Occupancies. 
Exception: Piping and tubing within the space defined by the walls of corridors and the floor or roof above or in concealed space above other occupancies when installed in accordance with the California Building Code as required for Group H, Division 5 Occupancies. 
3.  All primary piping for toxic, highly toxic and moderately toxic gases shall pass a helium leak test of 1x10-9 cubic centimeters/second where practical, or shall pass testing in accordance with an approved, nationally recognized standard. Tests shall be conducted by a qualified "third party" not involved with the construction of the piping and control systems. 
G.  Section 5003.3.1 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
5003.3.1 Unauthorized discharges. When hazardous materials are released in quantities reportable under state, federal or local regulations or when there is release or a threatened release that presents a threat to health, property or the environment, the fire code official shall be notified immediately in an approved manner and the following procedures required in accordance with Sections 5003.3.1.1 through 5003.3.1.4. 
H.  Section 5003.5.2 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
5003.5.2 Ventilation ducting. Product conveying ducts for venting hazardous materials operations shall be labeled with the hazard class of the material being vented and the direction of flow. 
I.  Section 5003.5.3 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
5003.5.3 "H" occupancies. In "H" occupancies, all piping and tubing may be required to be identified when there is any possibility of confusion with hazardous materials transport tubing or piping. Flow direction indicators are required. 
J.  Section 5003.9.11 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
5003.9.11 Fire extinguishing systems for workstations dispensing, handling, or using hazardous materials. Combustible and non-combustible workstations, which dispense, handle or use hazardous materials, shall be protected by an approved automatic fire extinguishing system in accordance with Section 2703.10. 
Exception: Internal fire protection is not required for Biological Safety Cabinets that carry NSF/ANSI certification where quantities of flammable liquids in use or storage within the cabinet do not exceed 500 ml. 
K.  Section 5004.2.1 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
5004.2.1 Spill control for hazardous material liquids. Rooms, buildings or areas used for storage of hazardous material liquids shall be provided with spill control to prevent the flow of liquids to adjoining areas. Floors in indoor locations and similar surfaces in outdoor locations shall be constructed to contain a spill from the largest single vessel by one of the following methods: 
1.  Liquid-tight sloped or recessed floors in indoor locations or similar areas in outdoor locations. 
2.  Liquid-tight floors in indoor locations or similar areas provided with liquid-tight raised or recessed sills or dikes. 
3.  Sumps and collection systems. 
4.  Other approved engineered systems. 
Except for surfacing, the floors, sills, dikes, sumps and collection systems shall be constructed of noncombustible material, and the liquid-tight seal shall be compatible with the material stored. When liquid-tight sills or dikes are provided, they are not required at perimeter openings having an open-grate trench across the opening that connects to an approved collection system. 
L.  Section 5004.2.2 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
5004.2.2 Secondary containment for hazardous material liquids and solids. Buildings, rooms or areas used for the storage of hazardous materials liquids or solids shall be provided with secondary containment in accordance with this Section. 
M.  Table 5004.2.2 of the 2016 California Building Code is hereby deleted. 
N.  Section 5004.2.2.2 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
5004.2.2.2 Incompatible materials. Incompatible materials shall be separated from each other in secondary containment systems. 
O.  Chapter 56 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby deleted. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 6, 11-2-2016)  
15.44.210 - Chapter 57—Flammable and Combustible Liquids. 
A.  Section 5704.2.7.5.8 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
5704.2.7.5.8 Overfill prevention. An approved means or method in accordance with Section 5704.2.9.7.6 shall be provided to prevent the overfill of all Class I, II and IIIA liquid storage tanks. Storage tanks in refineries, bulk plants or terminals regulated by Sections 5706.4 or 5706.7 shall have overfill protection in accordance with API 2350. 
An approved means or method in accordance with Section 5704.2.9.7.6 shall be provided to prevent the overfilling of Class IIIB liquid storage tanks connected to fuel-burning equipment inside buildings. 
B.  Section 5704.2.7.5.9 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
5704.2.7.5.9 Automatic filling of tanks. Systems that automatically fill flammable or combustible liquid tanks shall be equipped with overfill protection, approved by the fire code official, that sends an alarm signal to a constantly attended location and immediately stops the filling of the tank. The alarm signal and automatic shutoff shall be tested on an annual basis and records of such testing shall be maintained on-site for a period of five (5) years. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 6, 11-2-2016)  
15.44.220 - Chapter 60—Highly Toxic and Toxic Materials. 
A.  Section 6001.3 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
6001.3 Moderately toxic gases with a LC50 equal to or less than 3000 parts per million. Notwithstanding the hazard class definition in Section 3702, moderately toxic gases with an LC50 less than 3000 parts per million shall additionally comply with the requirements for toxic gases in Section 6004 of this Code. 
B.  The title of Section 6004 of the 2016 California Fire Code to is hereby amended read in its entirety: 
SECTION 6004 - HIGHLY TOXIC, TOXIC, AND MODERATELY TOXIC COMPRESSED GASES, INCLUDING THOSE USED AS REFRIGERANTS. 
C.  Section 6004.1.4 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
6001.1.4 Automatic shut-off valve. An automatic shut-off valve, which is of a fail-safe to close design, shall be provided to shut off the supply of highly toxic gases for any of the following: 
1.  Activation of a manual fire alarm system. 
2.  Activation of the gas detection system. 
3.  Failure of emergency power. 
4.  Failure of primary containment. 
5.  Seismic activity. 
6.  Failure of required ventilation. 
7.  Manual activation at an approved remote location. 
D.  Section 6004.1.5 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
6004.1.5 Emergency Control Station. Signals from emergency equipment used for highly toxic gases shall be transmitted to an emergency control station or other approved monitoring station, which is continually staffed by trained personnel. 
E.  Section 6004.1.6 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
6004.1.6 Maximum threshold quantity. Toxic gases stored or used in quantities exceeding the maximum threshold quantity in a single vessel per control area or outdoor control area shall comply with the additional requirements for highly toxic gases of Section 3704 of this Code. 
Moderately toxic gases stored or used in quantities exceeding the maximum threshold quantity in a single vessel per control area or outdoor control area shall comply with the additional requirements for toxic gases of Section 6004 of this Code. 
F.  Section 6004.1.7 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
6004.1.7 Reduced flow valve. All containers of materials other than lecture bottles containing Highly Toxic material and having a vapor pressure exceeding 29 psia shall be equipped with a reduced flow valve when available. If a reduced flow valve is not available, the container shall be used with a flow-limiting device. All flow limiting devices shall be part of the valve assembly and visible to the eye when possible; otherwise, they shall be installed as close as possible to the cylinder source. 
G.  Section 6004.1.8 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
6004.1.8 Fire extinguishing systems. Buildings and covered exterior areas for storage and use areas of materials regulated by this Chapter shall be protected by an automatic fire sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 13. The design of the sprinkler system for any room or area where highly toxic, toxic and moderately toxic gases are stored, handled or used shall be in accordance with Section 5004.5. 
H.  Section 6004.1.9 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
6004.1.9 Local gas shut off. Manual activation controls shall be provided at locations near the point of use and near the source, as approved by the fire code official. The fire code official may require additional controls at other places, including, but not limited to, the entry to the building, storage or use areas, and emergency control stations. 
Manual activated shut-off valves shall be of a fail-safe-to-close design. 
I.  Section 6004.1.10 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
6004.1.10 Exhaust ventilation monitoring. For highly toxic gases and toxic gases exceeding threshold quantities, a continuous monitoring system shall be provided to assure that the required exhaust ventilation rate is maintained. The monitoring system shall initiate a local alarm. The alarm shall be both visual and audible and shall be designed to provide warning both inside and outside of the interior storage, use, or handling area. 
J.  Section 6004.1.11 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
6004.1.11 Emergency response plan. If the preparation of an emergency response plan for the facility is not required by any other law, responsible persons shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, and filed with the fire code official, a written emergency response plan. If the preparation of an emergency response plan is required by other law, a responsible person shall file a copy of the plan with the fire code official. 
K.  Section 6004.1.12 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
6004.1.12 Cylinder leak testing. Cylinders shall be tested for leaks immediately upon delivery and again immediately prior to departure. Testing shall be approved by the fire code official in accordance with appropriate nationally recognized industry standards and practices, if any. Appropriate remedial action shall be immediately undertaken when leaks are detected. 
L.  Section 6004.1.13 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
6004.1.13 Inert gas purge system. Gas systems shall be provided with dedicated inert gas purge systems. A dedicated inert gas purge system may be used to purge more than one gas, provided the gases are compatible. Purge gas systems inside buildings shall be located in an approved gas cabinet unless the system operates by vacuum demand. 
M.  Section 6004.1.14 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
6004.1.14 Seismic shutoff valve. An automatic seismic shut-off valve, which is of a fail-safe to close design, shall be provided to shutoff the supply of highly toxic, toxic and moderately toxic gases with an LC 50 less than 3000 parts per million upon a seismic event within 5 seconds of a horizontal sinusoidal oscillation having a peak acceleration of 0.3G (1.47m/sec 2 ) and a period of 0.4 seconds. 
N.  Section 6004.2 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
6004.2 Indoor storage and use. The indoor storage or use of highly toxic, toxic and moderately toxic compressed gases shall be in accordance with Sections 6004.2.1 through 6004.2.2.10.3. The threshold quantity for highly toxic, toxic and moderately toxic gases for indoor storage and use are set forth in Table 6004.2. 
O.  Table 6004.2 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
Threshold Quantities for Highly Toxic, Toxic and Moderately Toxic Gases for Indoor Storage and Use 
Highly Toxic 	0 
Toxic 	10 cubic feet 
Moderately Toxic 	20 cubic feet 
 
P.  Section 6004.2.1 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
6004.2.1 Applicability. The applicability of regulations governing the indoor storage and use of highly toxic, toxic, and moderately toxic compressed gases shall be as set forth in Sections 6004.2.1.1 through 6004.2.1.3. 
Q.  Section 6004.2.1.1 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
6004.2.1.1 Quantities not exceeding the maximum allowable quantity per control area. The indoor storage or use of highly toxic, toxic and moderately toxic gases in amounts exceeding the maximum allowable quantity per control area set forth in Table 6004.2 shall be in accordance with Sections 5001, 5003, 6001, 6004.1 and 6004.2. 
R.  Section 6004.2.2 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
6004.2.2 General indoor requirements. The general requirements applicable to the indoor storage and use of highly toxic and toxic compressed gases shall be in accordance with Sections 6004.2.2.1 through 6004.2.2.10.4. 
Moderately toxic gases with an LC 50 less than 3000 parts per million shall comply with the requirements for toxic gases in Sections 6004.2.2.1 through 6004.2.2.10.4. 
All other moderately toxic gases exceeding the threshold quantity shall comply with the requirements for toxic gases in Sections 6004.2.2.1 through 6004.2.2.7. 
S.  Section 6004.2.2.7 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
6004.2.2.7 Treatment systems. The exhaust ventilation from gas cabinets, exhausted enclosures, gas rooms and local exhaust systems required in Section 6004.2.2.4 and 6004.2.2.5 shall be directed to a treatment system. The treatment system shall be utilized to handle the accidental release of gas and to process exhaust ventilation. The treatment system shall be designed in accordance with Sections 6004.2.2.7.1 through 6004.2.2.7.5 and Section 510 of the California Mechanical Code. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Highly toxic, toxic and moderately toxic gases storage. A treatment system is not required for cylinders, containers and tanks in storage when all of the following are provided: 
1.1.  Valve outlets are equipped with gas-tight outlet plug or caps. 
1.2.  Hand wheel-operated valves have handles secured to prevent movement. 
1.3.  Approved containment vessels or containment systems are provided in accordance with Section 6004.2.2.3. 
T.  Section 6004.2.2.10.2 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
6004.2.2.10.2 Alarms. The gas detection system shall initiate a local alarm and transmit a signal to a constantly attended control station when a short-term hazard condition is detected. The alarm shall be both visual and audible and shall provide warning both inside and outside the area where the gas is detected. The audible alarm shall be distinct from all other alarms. 
U.  Section 6004.3 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
6004.3 Outdoor storage and use. The outdoor storage or use of highly toxic, toxic and moderately toxic compressed gases shall be in accordance with Sections 6004.3.1 through 6004.3.4. The threshold quantity for highly toxic, toxic and moderately toxic gases for outdoor storage and use are set forth in Table 6004.3. 
V.  Table 6004.3 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
Threshold Quantities for Highly Toxic, Toxic and Moderately Toxic Gases for Outdoor Storage and Use 
Highly Toxic 	0 
Toxic 	10 cubic feet 
Moderately Toxic 	20 cubic feet 
 
W.  Section 6004.3.1 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
6004.3.1 Applicability. The applicability of regulations governing the outdoor storage and use of highly toxic, toxic, and moderately toxic compressed gases shall be as set forth in Sections 6004.3.1.1 through 6004.3.1.3. 
X.  Section 6004.3.1.1 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
6004.3.1.1 Quantities not exceeding the maximum allowable quantity per control area. The outdoor storage or use of highly toxic and toxic gases in amounts exceeding the threshold quantity per control area set forth in Table 6004.3 shall be in accordance with Sections 5001, 5003, 6001, 6004.1 and 6004.3. 
Moderately toxic gases with an LC50 less than 3000 parts per million in amounts exceeding the threshold quantity in Table 6004.3 shall comply with the requirements for toxic gases in Sections 5001, 5003, 6001, 6004.1 and 6004.3.2.1 through 6004.3.2.4. 
Moderately toxic gases in amounts exceeding the threshold quantity in Table 6004.3 shall comply with the requirements for toxic gases in Sections 5001, 5003, 6001, 6004.1 and 6004.3.2.1 through 6004.3.2.4. 
Y.  Section 6004.3.3 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby amended to read in its entirety: 
6004.3.3 Outdoor storage weather protection for portable tanks and cylinders. Weather protection in accordance with Section 5004.13 shall be provided for portable tanks and cylinders located outdoors and not within gas cabinets or exhausted enclosures. 
The storage area shall be equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 5004.5. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 6, 11-2-2016)  
15.44.230 - Chapter 64—Pyrophoric Materials. 
A.  Section 6405.3.1 of the 2016 California Fire Code is hereby added to read: 
6405.3.1 Silane distribution systems automatic shutdown. Silane distribution systems shall automatically shut down at the source upon activation of the gas detection system at levels above the alarm level and/or failure of the ventilation system for the silane distribution system. 
(Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 6, 11-2-2016)  
Chapter 15.52 - MOVING BUILDINGS 
 
15.52.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms, phrases and words shall be construed as follows: 
A.  "Building" means any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
B.  "Building official" means the building official of the city or his regularly authorized deputy. 
C.  "Person" means a natural person, his heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of them. 
D.  "Structure" means that which is built or constructed, an edifice, or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
E.  "Termite inspector" means any person who is duly licensed by the state to perform the work of pest or termite control or inspection. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 13 (part), 2007: Ord. 64 N.S. § 1, 1956; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.52.020 - Permit required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall move or transport any building or structure from any lot, site or location inside or outside the city to a lot or location inside the city nor shall remove any building or structure from the city without first obtaining a permit from the building official for each building or structure to be moved or removed. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 13 (part), 2007: Ord. 64 N.S. § 2, 1956; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.52.030 - Application. 
To obtain a permit to move or remove a building or structure the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished for that purpose by the building official. Every such application shall contain the following information: 
A.  The location and legal description of the land on which the building or structure to be moved or removed is situated at the time of the application; 
B.  The location and legal description of the land to which the building or structure is to be moved; 
C.  The alterations or additions, if any, to be made to the building or structure to be moved or removed; 
D.  The name and address of the person who will install the foundations and do any other necessary work that may be required at the new site, if the building or structure is to be moved or removed to land within the city; 
E.  The name and address of the person who will move the building or structure to be moved or removed; 
F.  The use made of the building or structure to be moved or removed at the time of the application for a permit to move or remove the building or structure; 
G.  The use to be made of the building or structure if it is to be moved or removed to land within the city; 
H.  Any such other information as may reasonably be required by the building official. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 13 (part), 2007: Ord. 64 N.S. § 3, 1956; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.52.040 - Filing fee. 
Prior to, or at the time of, filing any application for a permit to move or remove a building or structure a fee shall be paid by the applicant to defray the reasonable cost of investigations and other services required of the building official pursuant to this chapter. The filing fee provided for in this section shall be in addition to other permit fees which are required to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, improve and convert any structural, electrical, plumbing and heating work required for any building, or to demolish any building or structure pursuant to other applicable laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 13 (part), 2007: Ord. 64 N.S. § 4, 1956; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.52.050 - Investigations and report. 
A.  The building official upon receipt of an application for a permit to move or remove a building or structure pursuant to this chapter shall make all necessary inspections to determine whether such building or structure may be moved safely without demolishing or destroying the same and without coming in contact with live electrical wires, and shall determine whether or not the proposed location of any building or structure sought to be moved or removed in the city meets other laws or ordinances appertaining thereto. 
B.  Upon the making of inspections and the completion of the investigation of the application for a permit to move or remove any building or structure, the building official shall make and file a written report of his findings and recommendations with every such application for a permit to move or remove a building or structure, and shall certify that the posting required by Section 15.52.070 has been completed. 
C.  The application shall also be examined and reviewed by the planning commission of the city to check compliance with other laws and ordinances of the city. All permits granted must have prior approval of the planning commission. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 13 (part), 2007: Ord. 585 N.S., 1982; Ord. 64 N.S. § 5(a)—(c), 1956; Ord. No. 1935 N.S., § 4(Exh. B), 6-3-2009; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.52.060 - Investigation beyond city limits. 
Where investigations under this chapter are required to be made by the building official beyond the city limits, the applicant shall pay an hourly rate with a one hour minimum from city hall to the site where the inspection is made; this charge shall be additional to other fees required to be paid for the application under this chapter. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 13 (part), 2007: Ord. 64 N.S. § 5(d), 1956; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.52.070 - Site and architectural review—Required documents. 
In addition to the other requirements set forth in Section 15.52.050(D) regarding the contents of the application, the applicant shall submit the requisite number of plans and documents for site and architectural review. The plans shall include, but not be limited to, the site plan, landscape plan, and building elevations. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 13 (part), 2007: Ord. 585 N.S. § B (part), 1982: Ord. 64 N.S. § 12(part), 1956; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.52.080 - Site and architectural review—Findings of community development director. 
No permit to move or remove a building or structure pursuant to this chapter shall be granted until the community development director has determined that the architectural and general outside appearance of the subject building is in keeping with the character of the neighborhood, and the location and design of the building is such that it will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare of the neighborhood in which the building is proposed to be moved. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 13 (part), 2007: Ord. 585 N.S. § B (part), 1982: Ord. 64 N.S. § 12 (part), 1956; Ord. No. 1935 N.S., § 4(Exh. B), 6-3-2009; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.52.090 - Site and architectural review—Intercity and intracity moves. 
The provisions for site approval and architectural control set forth in this section shall apply to all buildings being moved from one location in the city to another location in the city as well as to buildings being moved into the city from outside the city. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 13 (part), 2007: Ord. 585 N.S. § B (part), 1982: Ord. 64 N.S. § 12 (part), 1956; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.52.100 - Site and architectural review—Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by or dissatisfied with, or excepting to any decision made by the community development director may appeal in the manner prescribed in Chapter 18.64 of Title 18. The planning commission shall affirm, reverse or modify the decision appealed from. Action by the planning commission shall be final, unless there is a further appeal to the city council, in which case, the city council action shall be final. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 13 (part), 2007: Ord. 585 N.S. § B (part), 1982: Ord. 64 N.S. § 12 (part), 1956; Ord. No. 1935 N.S., § 4(Exh. B), 6-3-2009; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.52.110 - Termite inspection. 
All buildings referred to in this chapter, before any permit to move them is granted, shall be thoroughly and competently inspected by a licensed termite inspector who shall certify in writing that the buildings are free from termites, vermin, dry rot and/or other pests, fungi or decay. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 13 (part), 2007: Ord. 64 N.S. § 6, 1956; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.52.120 - Notice to public utility companies. 
A copy of the application filed in this chapter shall immediately be sent by the city clerk or building official to any and all public utility companies servicing the city. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 13 (part), 2007: Ord. 64 N.S. § 8, 1956; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.52.130 - Permit issuance. 
If the written report of the building official shows that the building or structure specified in the application may be moved safely without demolishing or destroying it and without coming into contact with live electrical wires, and if that report and the report of the planning commission show that the new location of the building or structure within the city and the building or structure when located on the site will conform with the requirements of all laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the building official shall issue the permit to move or remove the building or structure upon fulfillment of the following conditions by the applicant: 
A.  The person named in the application as the person who will move the building or structure to be moved or removed shall furnish evidence of public liability insurance covering injuries to persons and property by reason of the proposed moving or removing of the building in a reasonable amount to be approved by the building official. 
B.  Where the building is to be moved or removed to land within the city, the applicant or some person on his behalf shall file a performance bond in the amount of one hundred percent of the value of said building as completed and ready for occupancy in the form of cash or surety bond, guaranteeing the performance within ninety days of all necessary work and improvements and the furnishing of all labor and materials necessary to make the building or structure, when moved or removed to such location, comply with any applicable laws and ordinances including but not limited to the various health, building and zoning regulations of the city. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 13 (part), 2007: Ord. 716 N.S., 1985; Ord. 64 N.S. § 9, 1956; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.52.140 - Permit denial. 
In the event the application does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, or in case the application shall request the removal of a building prohibited by this chapter, the building official shall decline to issue the permit, and the deposit made with the building official for the application and all fees paid to him pursuant to this chapter, shall be returned by order of the city council. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 13 (part), 2007: Ord. 64 N.S. § 10, 1956; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.52.150 - Notice on new site. 
A.  No permit to move or remove a building or structure pursuant to this chapter shall be granted until the applicant or his agent has caused a notice to be posted on the land to which the structure is to be moved as provided in this section and this notice has been so posted for a period of thirty days. The notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the land, shall be at least eight inches by ten inches in size, and shall contain the following words in letters at least two inches high: 
BUILDING TO BE MOVED HERE. 
APPLICATION FILED PURSUANT TO MORGAN HILL ORDINANCE NO. 1861, NEW SERIES. 
B.  The thirty days referred to in subsection A of this section shall not begin to run until a formal application has been filed under Section 15.52.030. This section shall apply only to sites within the city. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 13 (part), 2007: Ord. 64 N.S. § 7, 1956; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.52.160 - Red lights, barricade and traffic officer. 
Every person removing a building through, over or across any street within the city shall cause red lights to be displayed during the evening hours on every side of the building, while the building is standing on a street, in such a manner as to warn the public of the obstruction, and shall during the daytime place barricades across the streets in such manner as to protect the public from danger by reason of the removal of the building, and shall, when required by the building official, and when such building is located in any portion of the city where traffic is congested, require the person removing the same to pay the expense of a traffic officer to protect the traveling public from damage and injury. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 13 (part), 2007: Ord. 64 N.S. § 11, 1956; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.52.170 - Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate, or cause or permit to the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 61, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 61, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 15.52.170 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 15.52.170 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. 64 N.S., § 12, adopted in 1956; Ord. 778 N.S., § 2(part), adopted in 1986; Ord. 1861 N.S., § 13(part), adopted in 2007; and Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, adopted Nov. 20, 2013.  
Chapter 15.60 - DEMOLITION PERMITS 
 
15.60.010 - Demolition permit issuance prerequisites. 
No demolition permits shall be issued for any building or structure for which the building official has knowledge from city records or information obtained from civic organizations that verify the building is forty years old or more, until the following procedure is followed: 
A.  The applicant or his agent has caused a notice to be posted on the land, in a conspicuous place, on which the structure is to be demolished for a period of fifteen days, and filed with the building division an affidavit declaring that the posting has been done. The notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the land, shall be at least ten inches in size, and shall contain the following words in letters at least two inches high: 
  NOTICE OF INTENDED DEMOLITION: ANY INTERESTED PERSON MAY APPEAL THE INTENDED DEMOLITION OF THIS BUILDING OR STRUCTURE BY WRITTEN APPEAL FILED WITH THE BUILDING OFFICIAL OF THE CITY OF MORGAN HILL, FIFTEEN (15) DAYS FROM THE DATE OF POSTING HEREOF, BUT NOT AFTER FIFTEENTH (15th) DAY FROM POSTING. 
B.  If no appeal is filed within this fifteen-day period, the permit shall be issued. If an appeal is filed within this fifteen-day period, the permit may be withheld for an additional sixty-day period to allow the applicant time to take steps to secure the purchase or other means of preserving the building. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 16 (part), 2007: Ord. 497, 1979; Ord. No. 2000 N.S., § 15, 1-26-2011; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
Chapter 15.64 - WOOD-BURNING APPLIANCES 
 
15.64.010 - Short title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "wood-burning appliances ordinance" and may be cited as such. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 17 (part), 2007: Ord. 1490 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.64.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to reduce wood smoke pollution and enhance health and quality of life of citizens, as well as to contribute to improvements in regional air quality by reducing air pollutant emission from wood-burning appliances. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 17 (part), 2007: Ord. 1490 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.64.030 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  "E.P.A." means United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
B.  "E.P.A. certified wood heater" means any wood heater that meets the standard in Title 40 Part 60, Subpart AAA, Code of Federal Regulation in effect at the time of installation and is certified and labeled pursuant to those regulations and includes E.P.A. certified wood heater inserts. 
C.  "Fireplace" means any permanently installed masonry or factory-built wood-burning appliance designed to be used with an air-to-fuel ratio greater than or equal to thirty-five to one, except a pellet-fueled wood heater. 
D.  "Garbage" means all solid, semi-solid and liquid wastes generated from residential, commercial and industrial sources, including trash, refuse, rubbish, industrial wastes, asphaltic products, manure, vegetable or animal solids and semi-solid wastes, and other discarded solid and semi-solid wastes. 
E.  "Gas fireplace" means any device designed to burn natural gas in a manner that simulates the appearance of a wood burning fireplace. 
F.  "Masonry fireplace" means a fire chamber of solid masonry units such as bricks, stones, or masonry units constructed on a foundation provided with a suitable chimney. 
G.  "New construction" means construction of new structures and new additions to existing structures. 
H.  "Paints" means all exterior and interior house and trim paints, enamels, varnishes, lacquers, stains, primers, sealers, undercoatings, roof coatings, wood preservatives, shellacs, and other paints or paint-like products. 
I.  "Paint solvents" means all original solvents sold or used to thin paints or to clean up painting equipment. 
J.  "Pellet-fueled wood heater" means any wood burning appliance that operates exclusively on wood pellets. 
K.  "Solid fuel" means wood or any other non-gaseous or non-liquid fuel. 
L.  "Treated wood" means wood of any species that has been chemically impregnated, painted or similarly modified to improve resistance to insects or weathering. 
M.  "Waste petroleum products" means any petroleum product other than gaseous fuels that has been refined from crude oil, and has been used, as a result of use, has been contaminated with physical impurities. 
N.  "Wood-burning appliance" means fireplace, wood heater, or pellet-fired heater or any similar device burning any solid fuel used for aesthetic or space-heating purpose. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 17 (part), 2007: Ord. 1490 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.64.040 - Application. 
A.  Only gas fireplaces, pellet-fueled wood heaters, E.P.A. certified wood-burning appliances or masonry fireplaces, may be installed in any new construction. 
B.  This chapter does not prohibit the repair, reconstruction or replacement of an existing wood-burning appliance or wood-burning appliances that are designed primarily for food preparation. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 17 (part), 2007: Ord. 1490 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.64.050 - Limitation. 
It is unlawful to burn the following in fireplaces or E.P.A. certified wood burning appliances: garbage, treated wood, plastic products, rubber products, waste petroleum products, paints, paint solvents, coal, glossy or colored papers, particle board or salt water driftwood. 
(Ord. 1861 N.S. § 17 (part), 2007: Ord. 1490 N.S. § 2 (part), 2000; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
Chapter 15.65 - SUSTAINABLE BUILDING REGULATIONS 
 
15.65.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to assure that commercial and residential development is consistent with the city's environmental agenda and general plan conservation policies 7a and 7b to create a more sustainable community by incorporating sustainable building measures into the design, construction and maintenance of new and existing buildings. The sustainable building provisions referenced in this chapter are designed to achieve the following objectives: 
a.  Increase energy efficiency in buildings. 
b.  Encourage water and resource conservation. 
c.  Reduce waste generated by construction projects. 
d.  Provide durable buildings that are efficient and economical to own and operate. 
e.  Promote healthy and productive indoor environments for residents, workers and visitors to the city. 
f.  Recognize and conserve the energy embodied in existing buildings. 
(Ord. No. 1953 N.S., § 2, 10-7-2009; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.65.015 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations have the meaning given in this section: 
A.  "Addition" means newly constructed square footage that is added to an existing structure. 
B.  "Applicable project" means any building permit application(s) for new commercial construction, additions or renovations; or for any new residential construction, additions or renovations subject to the minimum standards for compliance as outlined in this chapter. 
C.  "Applicant" refers to any individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation or any other entity that applies to the city for building permits to undertake any construction or renovation project within the city. 
D.  "Build It Green (BIG)" refers to the GreenPoint Rating System designed for residential developments by Build It Green. 
E.  "California Building Energy Efficiency Standard" (Title 24, part 6) refers to the most recent enforced version of the coded section of the California Building Code. 
F.  "City" means the City of Morgan Hill. 
G.  "Commercial project" means any project, other than a city sponsored project, that is not residential. 
H.  "Conditioned buildings" means conditioned space that is heated or cooled 
I.  "Good faith effort to comply" means a project that is subject to the requirements of this chapter has not met the required sustainability standard, but for extenuating reasons or reasons beyond the control of the applicant, the sustainable building compliance official has found that the project meets the standards of good faith effort to comply pursuant to the compliance section outlined in this chapter. 
J.  "GreenPoint Rated" refers to the sustainable building rating system for residential development that was developed by the Build It Green organization. 
K.  "Internal GreenPoint Rated Verification" means verification of compliance of an applicable project by certified GreenPoint Raters, which can be qualified city staff or other qualified professionals retained by the city. 
L.  "Internal LEED AP Verification" means verification of compliance of an applicable project by city staff or other qualified professionals retained by the city with LEED AP certification and/or training. 
M.  "LEED&reg;" means the "Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design" rating system developed by the U.S. Green Building Council. 
N.  "LEED accredited professional (AP)" means an architect, designer, engineer, contractor and/or city staff that is certified through the U.S. Green Building Council to design, review plans, and inspect projects for compliance with the LEED rating system. 
O.  "LEED&reg;/USGBC verification" means verification by the LEED AP project architect and/or LEED AP and results in LEED certification of the project by the U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC.) 
P.  "Mixed use" means a building that includes both commercial and residential uses within the same building envelope. 
Q.  "Multifamily residential" means a building envelope that contains four or more attached dwelling units; or attached residential units that share electrical, mechanical, and/or water service; or attached units that share enclosed common space, such as hallways for condominiums. 
R.  "New construction, commercial (nonresidential)" means the construction of new or replacement retail, office, industrial, warehouse, service, or similar building(s), or additions to such building(s). 
S.  "New construction, residential" means the construction of a new or replacement single-family, including secondary dwelling units, or of new or replacement multifamily residential building(s) or additions to such building(s). 
T.  "Non-conditioned buildings" means space that is not heated or cooled. 
U.  "Permit valuation" refers to the cost for construction of new buildings, additions and/or renovations as determined by the building official. Valuations are subject to change based on the annual Consumer Price Index (CPI) for new construction. 
V.  "Qualified sustainable building professional" means a person trained through the USGBC as a LEED accredited professional or through Build It Green as a certified GreenPoint rater, who can design, review plans, and inspect applicable projects for compliance with the sustainability standards outlined in the minimum standards for compliance provisions of this chapter. 
W.  "Renovation" means any rehabilitation, repair, remodeling, change, or modification to an existing building, where changes to floor area and the footprint of the building are negligible. The permit valuation of renovation improvements shall be determined by the building official. The sustainable building compliance official may exclude from such valuation the cost of (a) seismic upgrades, (b) accessibility upgrades, (c) photovoltaic panels or other renewable energy source (d) heritage buildings, (e) fire, flood, wind, earthquake, or other natural disaster damage repairs (f) swimming pools, or (g) temporary structures. Renovation valuation thresholds identified in the minimum standards for compliance shall be adjusted annually to reflect changes in the city's valuation per square foot for new construction in Morgan Hill, using valuations based on the annual Consumer Price Index (CPI.) 
X.  "Renewable energy" means derived from resources that are naturally regenerative or practically inexhaustible, such as geothermal, solar, thermal gradient and wind energy. 
Y.  "Scope of work" means all construction work that is being undertaken for a project that requires building permits. 
Z.  "Sustainable (green) building" means a whole systems approach to the design, construction and operation of buildings in a manner that substantially mitigates the environmental, economic, and social impacts of buildings. Sustainable building practices recognize the relationship between the natural and built environments and seek to minimize the use of energy, water and other natural resources and provide for a healthy, productive indoor environment. 
AA.  "Sustainable building compliance official (SBCO)" means the building official or his or her designee that is certified as a LEED AP and a GreenPoint rater or is experienced with sustainable building principles. 
BB.  "Sustainable building project checklist" refers to the Build It Green or LEED&reg; checklists used to calculate a sustainability rating for commercial and residential development. 
CC.  "Sustainability standard" means the minimum number of points or rating level that must be attained for a particular applicable project, as outlined in the minimum standards for compliance of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1953 N.S., § 2, 10-7-2009; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.65.020 - Applicability. 
This chapter applies to any building permit application(s) for new commercial and mixed use construction, additions or renovations; or for any new residential construction, additions or renovations subject to the minimum standards for compliance as outlined in Section 15.65.30 of this chapter. 
This chapter shall not apply to any project for which a planning entitlement application has been granted (excluding sustainable checklists used at the time of residential development control system allotment commitments); or a building permit application that has been submitted prior to the effective date of this ordinance; or to permits that are solely for grading, retaining walls, or publicly owned utility structures such as wells and booster stations. 
For additions, remodels or tenant improvements, the sustainable building compliance official excludes the following from the valuation cost: 
•  Seismic upgrades 
•  Accessibility upgrades 
•  Photovoltaic panels or other renewable energy source 
•  Heritage buildings 
•  Fire, flood, wind, earthquake, or other natural disaster damage repairs 
•  Swimming pools 
•  Temporary structures 
Renovation valuation thresholds identified in the minimum standards for compliance shall be adjusted annually to reflect changes in the city's valuation per square foot for new construction in Morgan Hill, using valuations based on the annual Consumer Price Index (CPI.) 
(Ord. No. 1953 N.S., § 2, 10-7-2009; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.65.030 - Minimum standards for compliance. 
All projects subject to this chapter shall be constructed using the current guidelines, sustainable building rating systems and sustainable project checklist outlined in Tables 1, 2 and 3 below upon applying for a building permit, unless another version of the checklist was previously approved by a planning entitlement (excluding checklist used at the time of residential development control system allotment commitments.) Failure to comply with any of the terms of this chapter shall subject the applicant of the applicable project to a full range of enforcement mechanisms set forth in Compliance Section 15.65.050 of this chapter. 
All projects must, at minimum, demonstrate compliance with the California Building Energy Efficiency Standards (Title 24, part 6) of the California Building Code. 
Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be listed as a condition of approval on any design review approval issued by the city for a project to require the project to meet the minimum standards for compliance thresholds identified in this section. 
A.  New Residential Construction and Renovation: Residential development involving new construction shall use either the most current Build It Green (BIG) or LEED &reg; for homes rating system when applying for a building permit unless another version of the checklist was previously approved through a planning entitlement (excluding a checklist that was used at the time of residential development control system allotment commitments) and shall meet the sustainability standard and verification method outlined in Table 1 below. Applicants are encouraged to certify their projects with Build It Green or the U.S. Green Building Council. 
If a project consists of an addition and a remodel, the higher minimum standard shall apply. Projects must meet the minimum category points in energy, water, resource and indoor air quality within the BIG checklist or any other required points in the LEED or Build It Green's checklist. Community points from Build It Green's checklist are excluded from the minimum sustainability standard. 
The Build It Green multi-family checklist shall only be used when: 
1.  The attached units share mechanical or electrical features; or 
2.  Attached units share enclosed common space, such as hallways for condominiums; or 
3.  There are four or more attached units or single-family dwelling units within the building envelope. 
Table 1: Sustainable Residential Development Standards 
Applicable Project 	
Residential, New Construction 	Minimum Sustainability Standard 	Party Verification 
New Single Family or Multifamily Developments 	=2,000 sf per unit 	>2,000 sf per unit 	Internal GreenPoint Rated Verification for BIG checklist or 
Internal LEED &reg;AP Verification for LEED&reg; checklist 
	70 BIG points* or 
LEED&reg; Certified 	70 BIG points + 1 point per additional 70 sf (150 point maximum)* 
If using the LEED&reg; rating system, must obtain LEED&reg; Silver Certification 	
Residential, New Construction Additions 	Minimum Sustainability Standard 	Verification 
Addition <250 square feet 	Not Applicable 
Addition =250 square feet 	25 points on BIG existing homes checklist* 	Internal GreenPoint Rated Verification 
Addition =700 square feet 	50 points on BIG existing homes checklist* 	Internal GreenPoint Rated Verification 
Renovations and Remodels 	
Permit valuation <$100,000 	Not Applicable 
Permit valuation** =$100,000 	25 points on BIG existing homes checklist* 	Internal GreenPoint Rated Verification 
Permit valuation** =$250,000 	50 points on BIG existing homes checklist* 	Internal GreenPoint Rated Verification 
 
Note: All projects must, at minimum, demonstrate compliance with the California Building Energy Efficiency Standards (Title 24, part 6) of the California Building Code. 
*Community points in Build It Green's checklist are excluded from the sustainability standard and the project is required to meet minimum point requirements within the checklist categories (energy, water, resource, and indoor air quality.) 
** Valuations are subject to change based on the annual Consumer Price Index (CPI) for new construction or other adopted valuation method adopted by the City of Morgan Hill. 
B.  New Commercial Construction and Renovation: Commercial development involving new construction shall use the most current version of the LEED &reg; rating system and meet the sustainability standard for applicable projects outlined in Table 2 below. If a project consists of a remodel and an addition, the project shall use the highest minimum standard that would apply to the applicable project. Applicants are encouraged to apply for LEED &reg; certification through the U.S. Green Building Council. 
Table 2: Sustainable Commercial Development Standards 
Applicable Project Type 	Sustainability Standard 	Verification 
Commercial, New Construction and Additions 	
Additions <1,000 square feet 	Not Applicable 
New/Additions Construction =1,000 square feet 	16 LEED&reg; Points 	Internal LEED&reg; AP 
Verification 
New/Additions =5,000 square feet 	LEED&reg; Silver 	
Commercial, Renovations/Tenant Improvements 	
Permit valuation <$350,000 	Not Applicable 
Small, renovations** =$350,000 permit valuation 	10 LEED&reg; Points 	Internal LEED&reg; AP 
Verification 
Medium, renovations** =$500,000 permit valuation 	LEED&reg; Certified 	
Large, renovations** =$1,500,000 	LEED&reg; Silver 	
 
Note: All projects must, at minimum, demonstrate compliance with the California Building Energy Efficiency Standards (Title 24, part 6) of the California Building Code. 
** Valuations are subject to change based on the annual Consumer Price Index (CPI) for new construction or other adopted valuation method adopted by the City of Morgan Hill. 
C.  New Mixed Use Construction and Renovation: Mixed use development involving new construction shall use the most current version of the LEED &reg; or Build It Green rating system and meet the sustainability standard for applicable projects outlined in Table 3 below. If a project consists of a remodel and an addition, the project shall use the highest minimum standard that would apply to the applicable project. Applicants are encouraged to apply for LEED certification through the U.S. Green Building Council. 
Table 3: Mixed Use Development Thresholds and Standards 
Applicable Project Type 	Standard 	Verification 
Mixed Use, New Construction 
New =10,000 square feet 	The project shall comply with residential minimum sustainability standards for the residential portion of the development; and 
For the commercial portion, the development shall be required to: 	Internal GreenPoint rated verification and/or LEED&reg; AP Verification 
	• Exceed California Title 24 energy requirements by 10-15% 	
	• Provide a built-in recycling center per LEED standards in an easily accessible location, such as the kitchen facility. 	
	• Use LEED&reg; approved renewable or 10 to 20 percent recycled content carpeting and/or flooring to the extent that is it is included within the project's scope of work. 	
	• Use LEED&reg; approved low VOC adhesives, paints, flooring, and furnishings to the extent that it is included within the project's scope of work. 	
New =10,000 square feet 	Same standards apply as in Mixed Use New Construction =10,000. In addition, the development shall provide bicycle storage and a changing room facility that includes shower(s.) The changing room can be in the restroom instead of a separate room. 	
Mixed Use, Additions, Tenant Improvements and Remodels 	For additions and remodels, only that component of the project triggering compliance with the minimum standards for compliance in Tables 1 or 2 shall apply. If the project is a major renovation of both residential and commercial components, the applicant shall be allowed to use standards for new mixed use buildings. 	
 
Note: All projects must, at minimum, demonstrate compliance with the California Building Energy Efficiency Standards (Title 24, part 6) of the California Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 1953 N.S., § 2, 10-7-2009; Ord. No. 1966 N.S., § 1, 12-16-2009; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.65.035 - Incentives for compliance for renovations and additions. 
A.  For commercial renovations and new additions: A LEED verification shall not be required for commercial renovation and addition projects defined in Table 2 of the minimum standards for compliance that install a renewable energy system that supplies over sixty percent of the energy use for the building. The applicant shall provide the building division with documentation detailing the current and/or expected energy use of the building and the amount of energy the renewable energy system will provide before issuance of a building permit. A final sign off on the building permit shall not be provided until the renewable energy system has been installed. If the applicant fails to install the system, the applicant shall be subject to the full range of enforcement mechanisms set forth in this chapter. Existing photovoltaic systems that provide sixty percent of the energy use for the building are not eligible to apply for this incentive. 
B.  For residential renovations and additions: A BIG verification shall not be required for residential renovation and addition projects defined in Table 1 of the minimum standards for compliance that: 
1.  Install a renewable energy system that supplies over sixty percent of the energy use for the building. The applicant shall provide the building division with documentation detailing the current and/or expected energy use of the building and the amount of energy the renewable energy system will provide before issuance of a building permit. A final sign off on the building permit shall not be provided until the renewable energy system is installed. If the applicant fails to install the system, the applicant shall be subject to the full range of enforcement mechanisms set forth in this chapter; or 
2.  Install a solar water heating system. The applicant shall provide the building division with documentation of the type and model of the current water heater and the amount of energy the solar water heater will provide before issuance of a building permit. Building inspection staff shall verify the existing water heater is not a solar water heater. A final sign off on the building permit shall not be provided until the renewable energy system is installed. If the applicant fails to install the system, the applicant shall be subject to the full range of enforcement mechanisms set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1953 N.S., § 2, 10-7-2009; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.65.040 - Submission of documentation. 
A.  Design Review Documentation: In conjunction with an application for a design review permit, the applicant shall submit a letter of acknowledgement indicating that the applicable project will achieve the sustainability standards defined in this chapter. The letter shall also indicate how many points the applicable project will achieve in each category and/or level of LEED certification, and shall include the contact information of the potential qualified sustainable building professional that will ensure that the plans meet the sustainability standards outlined in this chapter. The letter shall also commit to compliance with the California Building Energy Efficiency Standards (Title 24, part 6). 
B.  Building Permit Documentation: Upon submittal of an application for a building permit, any applicable project shall include the most current sustainable building project checklist unless another version of the checklist was previously approved by a planning entitlement (excluding sustainable checklists used at the time of residential control development system allotment commitment). The application must also contain all necessary documentation to clearly demonstrate compliance with the California Building Energy Efficiency Standard (Title 24, part 6). 
If the project requires plans, the sustainable project checklist shall be incorporated with the building plans on a separate plan sheet and shall indicate in the general notes or individual detail drawings the measures to be used to attain the sustainability standards defined in this chapter and the California Building Energy Efficiency Standard (Title 24, part 6), reflecting any changes proposed since the planning entitlement phase (if a planning entitlement was required.) 
Applicants are encouraged to consult with a qualified sustainable building professional before submitting plans and/or applying for a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 1953 N.S., § 2, 10-7-2009; Ord. No. 1966 N.S., § 1, 12-16-2009; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.65.045 - Review of documentation. 
A.  Approval: Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the building division shall certify with an approval letter that the project meets the minimum standards for compliance (or meets point level allowed under the exceptions provisions of this chapter) and that the plans (if submitted) reflect the points in the sustainable building project checklist. No building permit shall be issued until the permitting documentation has been approved under this section or unless an exemption has been granted under the hardship and infeasibility section of this chapter. 
B.  Non-approval: If the building division determines that the permitting documentation is incomplete or fails to indicate that the applicable project will meet the minimum standards of compliance in this chapter, the building division shall either: 
1.  Return the permitting documentation to the applicant marked "denied," including a statement of reasons for the denial; or 
2.  Return the permitting documentation to the applicant marked "further explanation required" and detail the additional information needed. 
C.  Resubmission: If the permitting documentation is returned to the applicant, the applicant may re-submit the permitting documentation with additional information as may be required or may apply for an exemption under the hardship and infeasibility section of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1953 N.S., § 2, 10-7-2009; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.65.050 - Compliance. 
A.  Building Inspections, Verification and Occupancy: The building division inspection staff or other qualified professionals retained by the city shall verify that the sustainable building measures indicated in the approved permitting documentation are being implemented at the foundation inspection, framing inspection, or other as needed inspections, and prior to final inspection/issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
Throughout each inspection stage, the applicant shall be required to provide evidence of compliance to the building division to satisfy the requirements of the minimum standards for compliance in this chapter. This information shall include, but is not limited to: 
1.  Any documentation that would be required by the California Building Energy Efficiency Standard (Title 24, part 6) and the LEED or the GreenPoint rated system for certification. The applicant may be required to provide supporting information from qualified professionals (e.g. civil engineer, electrical engineer, Title 24 consultant, commissioning agent, etc.) to certify compliance with each point on the checklist. 
Applicants with projects that are registered with the U.S. Green Building Council are encouraged to submit proof of registration and provide online access to the U.S. Green Building Council's website to the building division in order to easily monitor the documentation submittals by the applicant; 
2.  Documentation that verifies incorporation of the design and construction related credits specified in the project approval; 
3.  Any additional information that the applicant believes is relevant to determining that a good faith effort has been made to comply with this chapter. 
B.  Substitution of Credits: During the compliance review, flexibility may be exercised by the sustainable building compliance officer to substitute approved points with other points in the LEED &reg; and GreenPoint rating systems. Substitution shall occur only at the request of the applicant. Any substitution credits shall not result in reduced minimum category point requirements within a sustainable building project checklist or required points established in a development agreement. The sustainable building compliance officer may at no time approve a project that fails to comply with the California Building Energy Efficiency Standard (Title 24, part 6). 
C.  Non-Compliance: If, as a result of any inspection, the building division determines that the project does not or is unlikely to comply with the sustainability measures in the approved permitting documentation and/or plans, a stop-work order may be issued if the sustainable building compliance official determines that continuation of construction activities will jeopardize the project's ability to meet the required sustainability standard. The stop-work order shall remain in effect until the sustainable building compliance official determines that the project will be brought into compliance with the approved permitting documentation and this chapter. 
D.  Final Determination of Compliance: Prior to the scheduling of a final building inspection for an applicable project, the building division shall review all documentation submitted by the applicant and determine that the project has demonstrated compliance with the California Building Energy Efficiency Standard (Title 24, part 6) and whether the applicant has achieved the minimum standards for compliance set forth in this chapter; or demonstrates that measures are in place to assure compliance not later than one year after approval of the final building inspection; or the applicant has made a good faith effort, as defined below, to comply. 
If the building division determines that the applicant has met the minimum requirements of this chapter for the project, the final building inspection may proceed, provided the project has received approval of all other inspections required by the building official. If the building division determines that the required sustainability standard has not been achieved based on the provisions of this chapter, the sustainable building compliance official shall find one of the following: 
1.  Good Faith Effort to Comply: At a minimum, all aspects of the proposed project must comply with the California Building Energy Efficiency Standard (Title 24, part 6). An applicant must submit a written request to the sustainable building official for approval of a good faith effort to comply. The granting or denial of the good faith effort to comply shall be provided to the applicant in writing within thirty days of the applicant's written request by the sustainable building compliance official. If a good faith effort to comply is granted, the final building inspection may proceed. 
Determination of a good faith effort to comply shall be made separately for each incomplete item on the sustainable building project checklist. Granting of a good faith effort to comply does not preclude the need for the applicant to comply with the other items on the sustainable building checklist, such as meeting minimum category point requirements within the checklist. However, the sustainable building compliance official shall, at minimum, verify that the project as a whole will still demonstrate compliance with the California Building Energy Efficiency Standard (Title 24, part 6) assuming all incomplete items are never completed. 
The sustainable building compliance official shall determine that the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter when finding that at least ninety percent of the required sustainability credits have been achieved and either: 
i.  Measures are in place to assure full compliance not later than one year after approval of the final building inspection; or 
ii.  The incomplete measures involve sustainable building materials and technologies that are no longer available or not yet commercially available, and the applicant will comply by incorporating other measures not later than one year after approval of the final building inspection; or 
iii.  The cost for the incomplete sustainable building measure or documentation is disproportionate to the overall cost of the project, and the applicant will comply by incorporating other measures on the checklist not later than one year after approval of the final building inspection. That is, the cost for the sustainability measure or documentation exceeds three percent of the total cost of construction. The building division shall verify the construction costs. The applicant shall be responsible for providing documentation, such as, but not limited to, invoices and estimates from at least three separate sources, to support their positions. 
The applicant shall submit evidence that the sustainability measure(s) will be in compliance not later than one year after approval of the final building inspection and may be required to submit a deposit/bond to the building division. The sustainable building compliance official will determine the amount of deposit/bond required based on the cost of the sustainability measure(s). 
The applicant shall be responsible for submitting documentation or contacting the building division for an inspection when the sustainable building measure(s) is in place within one year of the date of final inspection approval. If the applicant complies within the one year timeframe, the deposit/bond shall be released in full to the applicant. If the applicant fails to complete measures within the allotted timeframe, the deposit shall be used to enhance the city's sustainable building program. 
2.  Non-Compliant Project: If the sustainable building compliance official determines that the applicant has not made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter or if the applicant fails to submit the necessary documentation within the required time period for associated inspections and plan reviews, or if the sustainable building compliance official determines that the project will not comply with the California Building Energy Efficiency Standard (Title 24, part 6), then the project shall be deemed non-compliant. The final inspection and approval for the project shall be withheld. A final inspection shall not take place until the applicant has implemented equivalent alternate measures approved by the sustainable building compliance official; or the applicant has been granted an exception under the provisions of this chapter. 
E.  The sustainable building compliance official shall have the responsibility to administer and monitor compliance with the sustainable building requirements set forth in this chapter and to grant good faith efforts to comply, exceptions and exemptions from the requirements, where so authorized. 
F.  Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be listed as a condition of approval on any design review permit or other discretionary permit approval, and on the building plans for building permit approval for any applicable project. 
(Ord. No. 1953 N.S., § 2, 10-7-2009; Ord. No. 1966 N.S., § 1, 12-16-2009; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.65.055 - Exceptions. 
If an applicant believes circumstances exist that make it a hardship and/or not feasible to complete up to ten percent of the required points defined in the minimum standards for compliance section of this chapter and the applicant can demonstrate to the sustainable building compliance official that the project will comply with the California Building Energy Efficiency Standard (Title 24, part 6) without these points, then the Sustainable Building Compliance Official may authorize a maximum of ten percent of the required points to be waived based on one of the following findings: 
1.  There is a lack of commercially available sustainable building materials and technologies to comply with the project's scope of work; or 
2.  The project's scope of work does not allow for enough sustainable checklist points without interfering with other areas outside the project's scope of work. 
3.  The cost to utilize sustainable building practices, technologies and/or provide documentation exceeds three percent of the project's construction cost. The project's construction costs shall be verified by building division staff. The applicant may be required to provide evidence to the Building Division, such as but not limited to, invoices and estimates from three different sources for each sustainable building measure(s) that the applicant believes is contributing to over three percent of the construction cost. The applicant is still required to obtain points that would equate up to three percent of the total construction costs. 
The applicant must apply in writing to the sustainable building compliance official for an exception and shall indicate the circumstances that create a hardship or make it infeasible to fully comply with this chapter. Determination of exception shall be made separately for each item on the sustainable building project checklist that the exemption applies to. Granting of an exception to comply for one or more items does not preclude the need for the applicant to meet required and minimum category point requirements within the checklist. As necessary, projects that are subject to development agreements shall apply for a development agreement amendment to modify the project's sustainability commitments. At no time shall an exception be granted which may cause a proposed or permitted project to fail to comply with the California Building Energy Efficiency Standard (Title 24, part 6). 
The decision of the sustainable building compliance official shall be provided to the applicant in writing within thirty days of applicant's written request. If an exception is granted, the applicant shall be required to comply with this chapter in all other respects. 
If the sustainable building compliance official determines that it is reasonably possible for the applicant to fully meet the requirements of this chapter or that granting a specific exception might result in a failure to comply with the California Building Energy Efficiency Standard (Title 24, part 6), the request shall be denied and the sustainable building compliance official shall notify the applicant in writing within thirty days of the applicant's written request. The project and compliance documentation shall be modified to comply with this chapter prior to further review of any pending planning or building application. 
(Ord. No. 1953 N.S., § 2, 10-7-2009; Ord. No. 1966 N.S., § 1, 12-16-2009; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.65.060 - Hardship or infeasibility exemption. 
At the time of applying for a building permit, if an applicant believes that circumstances exist that make it a hardship or infeasible to meet the requirements of this chapter, the applicant may request in writing to the sustainable building compliance official an exemption of one or more items on the sustainable building project checklist. The applicant shall indicate the maximum threshold of compliance that is feasible for the project; and circumstances that create a hardship or make it infeasible to fully comply with this chapter. As necessary, projects that are subject to a development agreement shall apply for an amendment to modify the project's sustainability standards. The sustainable building official shall have the authority to grant or deny an exemption based on one of the following, however, at no time shall an exemption be granted which may cause a proposed or permitted project to fail to comply with the California Building Energy Efficiency Standard (Title 24, part 6): 
1.  There are not enough sustainable building measures available within the sustainable building project checklist that are compatible with the project's scope of work; or 
2.  There is a lack of commercially available sustainable building materials and technologies to comply within the project's scope of work; or 
3.  The project is or within a non-conditioned building. Non-conditioned spaces that are attached to condition spaces are not eligible to apply under this finding; or 
The decision of the sustainable building compliance official shall be provided to the applicant in writing within thirty days of applicant's written request. 
Granting of Exemption: If the sustainable building compliance official determines that it is a hardship or is infeasible for the applicant to fully meet the requirements of this chapter based on the information provided, the sustainable building compliance official shall determine the maximum feasible threshold of compliance reasonably achievable for the project which complies with the California Building Energy Efficiency Standard (Title 24, part 6). If an exemption is granted, the applicant shall be required to comply with this chapter in all other respects and shall be required to achieve the threshold of compliance determined to be achievable by the sustainable building compliance official. 
Denial of Exemption: If the sustainable building compliance official determines that it is reasonably possible for the applicant to fully meet the requirements of this chapter or that granting the requested exemption would potentially cause the project to fail to comply with the California Building Energy Efficiency Standard (Title 24, part 6), the request shall be denied. The project and compliance documentation shall be modified to comply with this chapter prior to further review of any pending planning or building application. 
(Ord. No. 1953 N.S., § 2, 10-7-2009; Ord. No. 1966 N.S., § 1, 12-16-2009; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.65.070 - Appeal. 
A.  Any aggrieved applicant or person may appeal the determination of the sustainable building compliance official regarding: (1) the granting or denial of an exemption pursuant to the hardship and infeasibility section of this chapter, (2) the granting or denial of a good faith effort to comply pursuant to this chapter, or (3) the granting or denial of exceptions pursuant to this chapter to the community development director. 
Any appeal must be filed in writing with the community development department not later than fourteen days after the date of the determination by the sustainable building compliance official. The appeal shall state the alleged error or reason for the appeal. 
The appeal shall be processed and considered by the community development director in accordance with Appendix B of the 2016 California Building Code. 
The applicant may not appeal any provision required by the 2016 California Building Energy Efficiency Standards (Title 24, part 6) of the California Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 1953 N.S., § 2, 10-7-2009; Ord. No. 1966 N.S., § 1, 12-16-2009; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013; Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 7, 11-2-2016)  
15.65.075 - Enforcement. 
It is unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter for an applicant to fail to plan or build the project in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1953 N.S., § 2, 10-7-2009; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013; Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 62, 5-2-2018)  
Chapter 15.66 - SWIMMING POOLS 
 
15.66.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect small children from the danger of falling into outdoor swimming or wading pools. 
(Ord. No. 2000 N.S., § 17, 1-26-2011; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.66.020 - Swimming or wading pool defined. 
"Swimming or wading pool," as used in this chapter, means an artificial basin, chamber or tank constructed of impervious material, which is attached to land in a permanent manner or is intended as a permanent installation, and having a depth of eighteen inches or more, and used, or intended to be used, for swimming, diving, wading or recreational bathing. 
(Ord. No. 2000 N.S., § 17, 1-26-2011; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.66.030 - New construction to conform with chapter provisions—Submittal of plans. 
On and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, no person who owns or is in possession of any premises, whether as legal or equitable owner, purchaser under contract, tenant or licensee, shall construct, install or place, or permit to be constructed, installed or placed, on or within such premises, any outdoor swimming or wading pool unless the same is enclosed or protected in the manner provided in this chapter. After such date, no building permit shall be issued for any such swimming or wading pool unless the plans for the same have been submitted and approved by the building department of the city and comply with both the Uniform Building Code and the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2000 N.S., § 17, 1-26-2011; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.66.040 - Enclosure protection required—Specifications. 
A.  Each outdoor swimming or wading pool constructed, installed, or placed within any premises on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be completely enclosed by a fence, wall, or other structure. Such fence, wall, or structure shall be not less than five feet in height at all points and shall be located a minimum of four feet from the nearest edge of the pool. The surrounding fence, wall, or other structure may consist of a house, building, or other permanent construction. Openings in all required enclosure fencing shall have intermediate rails or an ornamental pattern such that a sphere four inches in diameter cannot pass through. 
B.  Each gate or door in the surrounding fence, wall, or other structure, including those which open from a garage into the enclosure, but excepting doors in any surrounding building or structure other than a fence, shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device which shall , be inaccessible from the outside area of the fence. 
(Ord. No. 2000 N.S., § 17, 1-26-2011; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013; Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 8, 11-2-2016)  
15.66.050 - Enclosure protection required—Exception. 
Any person who is required by the terms of this chapter to provide an adequate enclosure for his or her swimming or wading pool, may elect to provide an adequate cover for the pool. An adequate cover is one which covers the entire surface of the swimming pool so as to prevent access by a small child and which will support seventy-five pounds of weight at any point of its surface. The person who elects to provide a cover for his or her pool as provided in this chapter shall keep the cover in place at all times when the pool is not in use. It is unlawful to fail to keep the cover in place at all times when the pool is not in use. 
(Ord. No. 2000 N.S., § 17, 1-26-2011; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013; Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 63, 5-2-2018)  
15.66.060 - Governmental agencies exempt from chapter provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to swimming or wading pools, owned, operated and maintained by governmental bodies or political subdivisions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2000 N.S., § 17, 1-26-2011; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.66.070 - Existing installations—Determination and conformance to chapter provisions. 
A.  From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the city building inspector or his or her authorized representative shall determine whether any existing swimming or wading pool which was constructed, installed, or placed within any premises in the city prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter constitutes a health or safety hazard by virtue of such pool not being completely enclosed by a fence, wall, or other structure as provided in Section 15.66.040 of this chapter or by an adequate cover as provided in Section 15.66.050 of this chapter. 
B.  Should the building inspector determine that a hazard exists as defined in this chapter, he or she may order the person legally responsible for the premises to comply with the provisions of this chapter in order to alleviate the unsafe or unhealthful condition. The building inspector shall in his or her order specify a reasonable time not to exceed thirty days for compliance with the order. It is unlawful to fail to comply with such order. 
(Ord. No. 2000 N.S., § 17, 1-26-2011; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013; Ord. No. 2221 N.S., § 8, 11-2-2016; Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 63, 5-2-2018)  
15.66.080 - Appeal procedures. 
A.  Any person claiming to be aggrieved by an order of the city building inspector issued pursuant to this chapter may appeal the same by filing a written notice thereof with the city clerk. This appeal notice must be filed within ten days of receipt of the order of the building inspector, and must set forth the reasons and grounds for the appeal. 
B.  The city council upon consideration of the appeal, may amend, modify or vacate the order of the building inspector, and the decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2000 N.S., § 17, 1-26-2011; Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, 11-20-2013)  
15.66.090 - Violation. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this chapter or to fail to comply with the proper order of the building inspector as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 63, 5-2-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2276 N.S., § 63, adopted May 2, 2018, amended § 15.66.090 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 15.66.090 pertained to violation—penalty and derived from Ord. No. 2000 N.S., § 17, adopted Jan. 26, 2011; and Ord. No. 2095 N.S., § 2, adopted Nov. 20, 2013.  
Chapter 15.80 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
 
15.80.010 - Statutory authorization. 
The Legislature of the State of California has in Governmental Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local government the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the city of Morgan Hill adopts the following floodplain management regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
15.80.020 - Findings of fact. 
A.  The flood hazard areas of the city of Morgan Hill are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
B.  When floodplains are developed without taking appropriate precautions, flood heights, frequencies, and velocities increase, causing a greater threat to humans, damage to property, destruction of natural floodplain functions and adverse impacts to water quality. 
C.  These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contribute to the flood loss. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
15.80.030 - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by legally enforceable regulations applied uniformly throughout the city of Morgan Hill to all publicly and privately owned land within flood prone, mudslide, or flood-related erosion areas. These regulations are designed to: 
A.  Protect human life and health; 
B.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
C.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
D.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
E.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
F.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage; 
G.  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
H.  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
15.80.040 - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions to: 
A.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
B.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
C.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters; 
D.  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
E.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
15.80.050 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
"Accessory structure" means a structure that is either: 
1.  Solely for the parking of no more than two cars; or 
2.  A small, low cost shed for limited storage, less than one hundred fifty square feet and one thousand five hundred dollars in value. 
"Accessory use" means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
"Adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point. 
"Appeal" means a request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
"Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
"Area of special flood hazard": See "special flood hazard area (SFHA)." 
"Base flood" means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter. 
"Base flood elevation (BFE)" means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-30, VE and V1-V30 that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
"Basement" means any area of the building having its lowest floor more than two feet subgrade, i.e., below ground level on all sides. 
"Biennial report" means the report completed by communities participating in the National Flood Insurance Program that describes the community's progress in the previous two years in implementing floodplain management measures and on its needs for remapping and technical assistance. This report is submitted annually or biennially as determined by the administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program. 
"Building": See "structure." 
"Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR)" means the comment from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) on a proposed project that would, upon construction, affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective Base flood elevations (BFEs), or the special flood hazard area (SFHA). The letter does not revise an effective flood insurance rate map (FIRM), it indicates whether the project, if built as proposed, would be recognized by FEMA. 
"Crawlspace" means the enclosed area contained inside the foundation walls and below the habitable floor of a structure. Crawlspaces having the lowest floor two feet or less below grade level on all sides shall not be considered a basement. 
"Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
"Encroachment" means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
"Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before June 18, 1980. 
"Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
"Flood, flooding, or flood water" means: 
1.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and 
2.  The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. 
"Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway. 
"Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
"Flood insurance study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
"Floodplain or flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See "Flooding." 
"Floodplain administrator" is the city official appointed by title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
"Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
"Floodplain management regulations" means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
"Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing, see FEMA Technical Bulletin 1 (Openings in Foundation Walls and Walls of Enclosures, 2008), Technical Bulletin 3 (Non-Residential Floodproofing - Requirements and Certification, 1993), and Technical Bulletin 7 (Wet Floodproofing Requirements, 1993), and subsequent amendments and/or revisions thereto. 
1.  "Dry floodproofing" means floodproofing measures that are designed to prevent floodwaters from entering a structure. Dry floodproofing techniques may include, but are not limited to, installation of closure and sealants, watertight walls, small floodwalls or levees, flood shields, and watertight doors. 
2.  "Wet floodproofing" means floodproofing measures that minimize damage to a structure and its contents from floodwater that is allowed into the structure. 
"Flood-related erosion" means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical level or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusually and unforeseeable event which results in flooding. 
"Flood-related erosion area" or "flood-related erosion prone area" means a land area adjoining the shore of a lake or other body of water, which due to the composition of the shoreline or bank and high water levels or wind-driven currents, is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage. 
"Flood-related erosion area management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood-related erosion damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood-related erosion control works, and floodplain management regulations. 
"Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as "regulatory floodway." 
"Floodway encroachment lines" means the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state and local floodplain maps. 
"Floodway fringe" is that area of the floodplain on either side of the "regulatory floodway" where encroachment may be permitted. 
"Fraud and victimization" as related to Sections 15.80.240, 15.80.245, and 15.80.250, Variances, of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city council will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty to one hundred years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
"Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
"Governing body" is the local governing unit, i.e., city council that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. 
"Hardship" as related to Sections 15.80.240, 15.80.245, and 15.80.250, Variances, of this chapter means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The city council requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
"Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
"Historic structure," for floodplain management purposes, means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on the city's master list of historic structures, provided this local inventory is consistent with state-approved or certified historic preservation programs as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
"Letter of map revision (LOMR)" means FEMA's modification to an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM), or both. LOMRs are generally based on the implementation of physical measures that affect the hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective base flood elevations (BFEs), or the special flood hazard area (SFHA). The LOMR officially revises the FIRM or FBFM, and sometimes the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report, and when appropriate, includes a description of the modifications. The LOMR is generally accompanied by an annotated copy of the affected portions of the FIRM, FBFM, or FIS report. 
"Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F)" means FEMA's modification of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) shown on the FIRM based on the placement of fill outside the existing regulatory floodway. 
"Levee" means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
"Levee system" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
"Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. See "basement" definition. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor provided it conforms to the applicable non-elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to: 
1.  The flood openings standard in Section 15.80.160.C.3; 
2.  The anchoring standards in Section 15.80.160.A; 
3.  The construction materials and methods standards in Section 15.80.160.B; and 
4.  The standards for utilities in Section 15.80.170. 
"Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
"Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale; also see "existing manufactured home park or subdivision." 
"Market value" means the current estimated fair market value of a structure, excluding the current estimated fair market value of the land on which the structure is located and the current estimated fair market value of any landscaping, and any detached accessory structures on such land. The current tax assessed value of the structure as provided by the county tax assessor's office shall be used as the market value of the structure where the cost of the proposed improvement to the structure does not exceed forty-five percent. In the event the cost of the improvement to the structure exceeds forty-five percent of the current tax assessed value of the structure, the market value shall be determined from an independent appraisal prepared by a qualified professional appraiser using a building cost estimating method recognized by the building construction industry, which shall be reviewed and accepted by the floodplain administrator. 
"Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
"Mixed-use structure" means any structure that has only nonresidential uses in areas of the structure at or below the base flood elevation, but has residential uses in areas of the structure above the base flood elevation with access to residential uses dry floodproofed. 
"Mudslide" means a condition where there is a river, flow or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside, usually as a result of a dual condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on the ground, preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain. 
"Mudslide (i.e., mudflow) prone area" means an area with land surfaces and slopes of unconsolidated material where the history, geology, and climate indicate a potential for mudflow. 
"New construction," for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after June 18, 1980, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
"New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after June 18, 1980; also see "existing manufactured home park or subdivision." 
"Obstruction" includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
"One-hundred-year flood, or "100-year Flood": See "base flood." 
"Principal structure" means a structure used for the principal use of the property as distinguished from an accessory use. 
"Public safety and nuisance" as related to Sections 15.80.240, 15.80.245, 15.80.250, Variances, of this chapter means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
"Regulatory floodway": See "floodway." 
"Remedy a violation" means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
"Repetitive loss" means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty-five percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
"Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
"Sheet flow area": See "area of shallow flooding." 
"Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH. 
"Start of construction" includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
"Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
"Substantial damage" means: 
1.  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred; or 
2.  Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty-five percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. This is also known as "repetitive loss." 
"Substantial improvement or substantially improved" means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure taking place during a five-year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. For each structure, the five-year period begins on the date of the first improvement or repair of that structure subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
2.  Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
"Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
"Violation" means the failure of any structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
"Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
"Watercourse" means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
15.80.060 - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city of Morgan Hill. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
15.80.070 - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the flood insurance study (FIS) for the city of Morgan Hill dated December 1979 and accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs) dated June 18, 1980, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator. The study, FIRMs, and FBFMs are on file at the city of Morgan Hill's Development Services Center located at 17575 Peak Avenue, Morgan Hill, CA 95037. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
15.80.080 - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the term of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
15.80.090 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
15.80.100 - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be 
A.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
B.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
C.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
15.80.110 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city of Morgan Hill, the city council, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
15.80.115 - Severability. 
This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
15.80.120 - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development, including manufactured homes, begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 15.80.070. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator. The applicant shall provide the following minimum information: 
A.  Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, as required showing: 
1.  Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, storage of materials and equipment and their location; 
2.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other utilities; 
3.  Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any proposed fill, and drainage facilities; 
4.  Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable; 
5.  Base flood elevation information as specified in Section 15.80.070 or Section 15.80.140.C; 
6.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures - in zone AO, elevation of highest adjacent grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all structures; and 
7.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential or mixed-use structure will be floodproofed, as required in Section 15.80.160.C.2 and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin 3 (Non-Residential Floodproofing - Requirements and Certification, 1993) and subsequent amendments and/or revisions thereto. 
B.  Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect that the nonresidential or mixed-use, floodproofed building meets the floodproofing criteria in Section 15.80.160.C.2. 
C.  For a crawlspace foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 15.80.160.C.3 and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin 1 (Openings in Foundation Walls and Walls of Enclosures, 2008) and Technical Bulletin 7 (Wet Floodproofing Requirements, 1993) and subsequent amendments and/or revisions thereto. 
D.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
E.  All appropriate certifications listed in Section 15.80.140.E. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
15.80.130 - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
The city engineer or his or her designee is appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
15.80.140 - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
A.  Permit Review. Review all development permit applications to determine whether: 
1.  Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, including determination of substantial improvement and substantial damage of existing structures; 
2.  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; 
3.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding; 
4.  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city of Morgan Hill; and 
5.  All letters of map revision (LOMRs) for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. 
B.  Development of Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage Procedures. 
1.  Using FEMA publication FEMA 213, "Answers to Questions About Substantially Damaged Buildings," develop detailed procedures for identifying and administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial damage, to include defining "Market Value." 
2.  Assure procedures are coordinated with other departments/divisions and implemented by city staff. 
C.  Review, Use and Development of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.80.070, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer any section in this chapter. Any such information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption. 
All new developments located in an area without a base flood elevation specified on the FIRM shall provide the floodplain administrator with a proposed base flood elevation. A base flood elevation shall be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication, FEMA 265, "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas - A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations" dated July 1995, and subsequent amendments and/or revisions thereto. 
At the discretion of the floodplain administrator, the applicant may be required to provide a hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations and floodway boundaries for the development proposal. The applicant shall be responsible for the peer review costs associated with the floodplain administrator's review of the flood analysis. 
D.  Notification of Other Agencies. 
1.  In alteration or relocation of a watercourse within the city of Morgan Hill: 
a.  Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation; 
b.  Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); and 
c.  Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
2.  Base flood elevation changes due to physical alterations: 
a.  Within six months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR). 
b.  All LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition. 
Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements are based on current data. 
3.  Changes in corporate boundaries: 
Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate limits. 
E.  Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following: 
1.  Certification required by Section 15.80.160.C.1 and Section 15.80.190 (lowest floor elevations); 
2.  Certification required by Section 15.80.160.C.2 (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential and mixed-use structures); 
3.  Certification required by Sections 15.80.160.C.3 (wet floodproofing standard); 
4.  Certification of elevation required by Section 15.80.180.A (subdivisions and other proposed development standards); 
5.  Certification required by Section 15.80.200.B (floodway encroachments); 
6.  Reports required by Section 15.80.210 (mudflow standards); 
7.  Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to FEMA. 
F.  Map Determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 15.80.150. 
G.  Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 15.80.080. 
H.  Biennial Report. Complete and submit biennial report to FEMA. 
I.  Planning. Assure city's general plan is consistent with floodplain management objectives herein. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
15.80.150 - Appeals. 
The city council shall hear and decide appeals pursuant to Section 15.80.250 when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
Appeals shall be submitted in writing to the floodplain administrator by an applicant on an official city application form accompanied by a fee, as established by resolution of the city council, within ten calendar days of the determination which is the cause for the appeal. The appeal application shall contain all grounds for the appeal and shall include a statement of the specific facts and all documentation regarding the appeal. 
When an appeal has been filed, the floodplain administrator shall prepare a report on the matter, including all of the application materials submitted, and schedule the matter for city council hearing within 90 days of receiving the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
15.80.160 - Standards of construction. 
In all areas of special flood hazards, city permits will not be issued unless plans comply with the following standards: 
A.  Anchoring. 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
2.  All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 15.80.190. 
B.  Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvement of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be constructed: 
1.  With flood resistant materials, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage for areas below the base flood elevation; 
2.  Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
3.  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and 
4.  If the new construction or substantial improvement is located within zones AH or AO, it shall be constructed so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
C.  Elevation and Floodproofing. (See Section 15.80.050, Definitions, for "new construction," "substantial damage" and "substantial improvement.") 
1.  Residential construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement as follows: 
a.  In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height at least one foot above the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified. 
b.  In an A zone, without base flood elevations specified on the FIRM (unnumbered A zone), elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation, as determined under Section 15.80.140.C. 
c.  In AE, AH and A1-30 zones, elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation. 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed surveyor, and verified by the floodplain administrator or city building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
2.  Nonresidential and Mixed-use construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential or mixed-use structures shall either be elevated to conform with Section 15.80.160.C.1 or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities: 
a.  Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under Section 15.80.160.C.1 so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
c.  Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect that the standards of Section 15.80.160.C.2.a and b are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
3.  Flood openings. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect; or 
b.  For non-engineered openings: 
1)  Have a minimum of two openings on different sides having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; 
3)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; and 
4)  Buildings with more than one enclosed area must have openings on exterior walls for each area to allow floodwater to directly enter. 
4.  Manufactured homes. 
a.  See Section 15.80.190. 
5.  Garages and low-cost accessory structures. 
a.  Attached garages. 
1)  A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the base flood elevation, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters. See Section 15.80.160.C.3. Areas of the garage below the base flood elevation must be constructed with flood resistant materials. See Section 15.80.160.B. 
2)  A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the above requirements or be dry floodproofed. For guidance on below-grade parking areas, see FEMA Technical Bulletin 6 (Below-Grade Parking Requirements, 1993), and subsequent amendments and/or revisions thereto. 
b.  Detached garages and accessory structures. 
1)  "Accessory structures" used solely for parking (two-car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost sheds), as defined in Section 15.80.050, may be constructed such that its floor is below the base flood elevation, provided the structure is designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements: 
i.  Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking or limited storage; 
ii.  The portions of the accessory structure located below the base flood elevation must be built using flood-resistant materials; 
iii.  The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement; 
iv.  Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory structure must be elevated or floodproofed a minimum of one foot above the base flood elevation; 
v.  The accessory structure must comply with the floodway encroachment provisions in Section15.80.200; and 
vi.  The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters in accordance with Section15.80.160.C.3. 
2)  Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the above standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards in Section 15.80.160. 
6.  Crawlspace construction. This sub-section applies to buildings with crawlspaces up to two feet below grade. Below-grade crawlspace construction in accordance with the requirements listed below will not be considered basements. 
a.  The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Crawlspace construction is not allowed in areas with flood velocities greater than five feet per second unless the design is reviewed by a qualified design professional, such as a registered engineer; 
b.  The crawlspace is an enclosed area below the base flood elevation and, as such, must have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. For guidance on flood openings, see FEMA Technical Bulletin 1 (Openings in Foundation Walls and Walls of Enclosures, 2008) and subsequent amendments and/or revisions thereto; 
c.  Crawlspace construction is not permitted in V zones. Open pile or column foundations that withstand storm surge and wave forces are required in V zones; 
d.  Portions of the building below the base flood elevation must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. This includes not only the foundation walls of the crawlspace used to elevate the building, but also any joists, insulation, or other materials that extend below the base flood elevation; and 
e.  Any building utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated a minimum of one foot above base flood elevation or designed so that floodwaters cannot enter or accumulate within the system components during flood conditions. 
f.  Requirements for all below-grade crawlspace construction, in addition to the above requirements, to include the following: 
1)  The interior grade of a crawlspace below the base flood elevation must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior grade (LAG), shown as D in figure 3 of FEMA Technical Bulletin 11 (Crawlspace Construction for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas, 2001); 
2)  The height of the below-grade crawlspace, measured from the interior grade of the crawlspace to the top of the crawlspace foundation wall, must not exceed four feet at any point, shown as L in figure 3 of FEMA Technical Bulletin 11 (Crawlspace Construction for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas, 2001); 
3)  There must be an adequate drainage system that removes floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period of time after a flood event, not to exceed seventy-two hours; and 
4)  The velocity of floodwaters at the site should not exceed five feet per second for any crawlspace. For velocities in excess of five feet per second, other foundation types should be used. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
15.80.170 - Standards for utilities. 
A.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
1.  Infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; and 
2.  Discharge from the systems into floodwaters. 
B.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
15.80.180 - Standards for subdivisions and other proposed development. 
A.  All new subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than fifty lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall: 
1.  Identify the special flood hazard areas (SFHA) and base flood elevations (BFEs). 
2.  Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed structures and pads on the final plans. 
3.  If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the following as-built information for each structure shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an application for a letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) to the floodplain administrator: 
a.  Lowest floor elevation. 
b.  Pad elevation. 
c.  Lowest adjacent grade. 
B.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
C.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
D.  All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
15.80.190 - Standards for manufactured homes. 
A.  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, on sites located: (1) Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (2) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall: 
1.  Within a special flood hazard area (SFHA) on the city's flood insurance rate map, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
B.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within a special flood hazard area (SFHA) on the city's flood insurance rate map that are not subject to the provisions of Section 15.80.190.A will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the: 
1.  Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six inches in height above grade. 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the city building inspector and/or the floodplain administrator to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
15.80.195 - Standards for recreational vehicles. 
A.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones AE, AH and A1-30 on the city's flood insurance rate map will either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days; or 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
3.  Meet the permit requirements of Section 15.80.120 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 15.80.190.A. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
15.80.200 - Floodways. 
Since floodways are an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
A.  Until a regulatory floodway is adopted, no new construction, substantial development, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones AE and A1-30, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city of Morgan Hill. 
B.  Within an adopted regulatory floodway, prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other development unless certification by a registered civil engineer is provided demonstrating that the proposed encroachment shall not result in any increase in the base flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
C.  If subsections A and B of this section are satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Sections 15.80.160, 15.80.170, 15.80.180, 15.80.190, 15.80.195, 15.80.200, 15.80.210, and 15.80.220. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
15.80.205 - Engineered fill. 
All proposed developments with engineered fill within a special flood hazard area (SFHA) shall follow the guidelines for ensuring that structures built on fill are reasonably safe from flooding. See FEMA Technical Bulletin 10 (Ensuring that Structures Built on Fill In or Near Special Flood Hazard Areas are Reasonably Safe From Flooding, 2001), and subsequent amendments and/or revisions thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
15.80.210 - Mudslide (i.e., mudflow) prone areas. 
A.  The floodplain administrator shall review permits for proposed construction of other development to determine if it is proposed within a mudslide area. 
B.  Permits shall be reviewed to determine that the proposed site and improvement will be reasonably safe from mudslide hazards. Factors to be considered in making this determination include but are not limited to the: 
1.  Type and quality of soils; 
2.  Evidence of groundwater or surface water problems; 
3.  Depth and quality of any fill; 
4.  Overall slope of the site; and 
5.  Weight that any proposed development will impose on the slope. 
C.  Within areas which may have mudslide hazards, the floodplain administrator shall require that: 
1.  A site investigation and further review be made by persons qualified in geology and soils engineering; 
2.  The proposed grading, excavations, new construction, and substantial improvement be adequately designed and protected against mudslide damages; 
3.  The proposed grading, excavations, new construction, and substantial improvement not aggravate the existing hazard by creating either on-site or off-site disturbances; and 
4.  Drainage, planting, watering, and maintenance not endanger slope stability. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
15.80.220 - Flood-related erosion-prone areas. 
A.  The floodplain administrator shall require permits for proposed construction and other development within all flood-related erosion-prone areas as known to the community. 
B.  Permit applications shall be reviewed to determine whether the proposed site alterations and improvements will be reasonably safe from flood-related erosion and will not cause flood-related erosion hazards or otherwise aggravate the existing hazard. 
C.  If a proposed improvement is found to be in the path of flood-related erosion or would increase the erosion hazard, such improvement shall be relocated or adequate protective measures shall be taken to avoid aggravating the existing erosion hazard. 
D.  Within flood-related erosion-prone areas, a setback is required for all new development from the ocean, lake, bay, riverfront, or other body of water to create a safety buffer consisting of a natural vegetative or contour strip. This buffer shall be designed according to the flood-related erosion hazard and erosion rate, in relation to the anticipated "useful life" of structures, and depending upon the geologic, hydrologic, topographic, and climatic characteristics of the land. The buffer may be used for suitable open space purposes, such as for agricultural, forestry, outdoor recreation and wildlife habitat areas, and for other activities using temporary and portable structures only. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
15.80.240 - Variances. 
The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only. Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance. 
The variance criteria set forth in this section of this chapter are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners. 
It is the duty of the city council to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. 
A.  Variances Requiring City Council Approval. Requests for a variance shall be submitted in writing to the floodplain administrator by an applicant on an official city application form accompanied by all required documentation and a fee, as established by resolution of the city council. 
When a variance request has been filed, the floodplain administrator shall prepare a report on the matter, including all of the application materials submitted, and schedule the matter for city council hearing within 90 days of receiving the variance request. 
B.  Administrative Variances. The floodplain administrator shall approve or deny an application requesting an administrative variance after receipt of a complete application. Administrative variances may only be granted to existing structures with substantial improvements to allow the structure to deviate from certain higher standards in this chapter that exceed the minimum National Flood Insurance Program standards. Requests for an administrative variance must demonstrate that complying to the higher standards will pose a financial burden and/or will conflict with the city's architectural or aesthetic requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
15.80.245 - Conditions for variances. 
A.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Sections 15.80.120, 15.80.140, 15.80.160, 15.80.170, 15.80.180, 15.80.190, 15.80.195, 15.80.200, 15.80.205, 15.80.210, and 15.80.220 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
B.  Variances do not need to be issued for any "accessory structures" (as defined in Section 15.80.050) within a special flood hazard area. All accessory structures shall meet the standards in Section 15.80.160.C.5. 
C.  Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
D.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the "minimum necessary" considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means that the city council need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the city council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance. 
E.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted by the city council shall be given written notice over the signature of a city official that: 
1.  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars for one hundred dollars of insurance coverage; and 
2.  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the Office of the Santa Clara County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
The applicant will be required to indemnify and hold harmless the city for any incident which may result from the issuance of the variance. 
F.  The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
15.80.250 - Appeal board. 
The city council shall act as the appeal board and shall hear and decide the appeals and non-administrative requests for variances from the requirements in this chapter. The appeal or non-administrative variance request shall be considered by the city council at a public hearing to be held, noticed and conducted in accordance with the provisions in California Government Code Sections 65905(b), and 65091. Consideration shall be limited to the evidence and matters presented in the first instance to the floodplain administrator and to the specific grounds of the appeal or variance; provided, however, that the city council may, by motion duly passed, elect in its discretion to grant a hearing de novo. The applicant shall have the burden of establishing cause why the action appealed from should be altered, reversed or modified, or why the variance should be granted. The decision of the city council on the appeal or variance request shall be final and shall be effective on the date the decision is rendered. 
A.  In passing upon requests for variances, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the: 
1.  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
2.  Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3.  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property; 
4.  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
5.  Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
6.  Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
7.  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
8.  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
9.  Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
10.  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and 
11.  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges. 
B.  Variances shall only be issued upon a: 
1.  Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional "hardship" (as defined in Section 15.80.050 of this chapter) to the applicant; and 
3.  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (as defined in Section 15.80.050 - see "Public safety and nuisance"), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in Section 15.80.050) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
C.  Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvements, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of subsections A through D of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance. 
D.  Upon consideration of the factors of Section 15.80.245.A and the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter, and as permitted by California Government Code Section 65909. 
(Ord. No. 2261 N.S., § 2, 9-27-2017)  
Title 17 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 17.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.04.010 - Statutory authority—Title. 
The ordinance codified in this title is adopted to supplement and implement the Subdivision Map Act, Section 66410, et seq. of the Government Code of the state, and may be cited as the "subdivision ordinance of the city." 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.04.020 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this title to regulate and control the division of land within the city and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act concerning the design, improvement and survey data of subdivisions, the form and contents of all maps provided for by the Subdivision Map Act and the procedure to be followed in securing the official approval of the planning commission, the city engineer, the community development department and city council regarding such maps. To accomplish this purpose, the regulations outlined in this chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, to promote orderly growth and development and to promote open space, conservation, protection and proper use of land and to insure provision for adequate traffic circulation, utilities and services. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.04.030 - Conformity to general plan, specific plan and zoning ordinances. 
No land shall be subdivided and developed for any purpose which is not in conformity with the general plan, any specific plan of the city or specifically authorized by the precise zoning ordinance of the city or Chapter 8.40, hazardous materials, as existing or amended. 
(Ord. 847 N.S. § 6, 1987: Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.04.040 - Applicability. 
The regulations set forth in this title shall apply to all subdivision or parts thereof within the city and to the preparation of subdivision maps thereof and to other maps provided for by the Subdivision Map Act. Each such subdivision and each part thereof lying within the city shall be made and each such map shall be prepared and presented for approval as hereafter provided for and required. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.04.050 - Modification of requirements. 
Whenever, in the opinion of the planning commission, the land involved in any subdivision is of such size and shape, or is subject to such title limitations of record, or is affected by such topographical location or conditions, or is to be devoted to such use that it is impossible or impracticable in the particular case for the subdivider to conform fully to the regulations contained in this title, the planning commission may make such modifications thereof as, in its opinion, are reasonably necessary or expedient and in conformity with the State Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
Chapter 17.08 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.08.010 - Advisory agency. 
"Advisory agency" means a designated official or an official body charged with the duty of making investigations and reports on the design and improvements of proposed divisions of real property, the imposing of requirements or conditions thereon, or having the authority to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove maps. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.08.020 - Block. 
"Block" means the area of land within a subdivision which is entirely bounded by streets, highways or ways, except alleys or the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.08.030 - Condominium. 
"Condominium means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on such real property, such as an apartment, office or store. A condominium may include in addition, a separate interest or other portions of such real property. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.08.040 - Conversion. 
"Conversion" means the creation of separate ownership of existing real property together with a separate interest in space of residential, industrial or commercial buildings thereon. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.08.050 - Design. 
"Design" means: 
A.  Street alignments, grades and widths; 
B.  Drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities, including alignments and grades thereof; 
C.  Location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way; 
D.  Fire roads and fire breaks; 
E.  Lot size and configuration; 
F.  Traffic access; 
G.  Grading; 
H.  Land to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes; and 
I.  Such other specific requirements in the plan and configuration of the entire subdivision as may be necessary or convenient to insure conformity to or implementation of the general plan or any adopted specific plan. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.08.055 - Development. 
"Development" means the uses to which the land which is the subject of the map shall be put, the buildings to be constructed on it and all alterations of the land and construction incident thereto. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 1, 1993)  
17.08.060 - Environmental impact report (EIR). 
"Environmental impact report (EIR)" means a detailed statement setting forth the environmental effects and considerations pertaining to a project as specified in Section 22100 of the California Environmental Quality Act, and may mean either a draft or a final EIR. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.08.070 - Final map. 
"Final map" means a map showing a subdivision for which a tentative and final map is required by the Subdivision Map Act or this title, prepared in accordance with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act designed to be recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.08.080 - General plan. 
"General plan" means the general plan of the city of Morgan Hill, California, and any amendment thereto. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.08.090 - Improvement. 
A.  "Improvement" means and refers to such street work, storm drainage, utilities and landscaping to be installed, or agreed to be installed, by the subdivider on the land to be used for public or private streets, highways and easements, as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final map thereof; or to such other specific improvements or type of improvements, the installation of which, either by the subdivider, by public agencies, by private utilities, by any other entity approved by the local agency or by a combination thereof, is necessary or convenient to insure conformity to or implementation of the general plan or any adopted specific plan. 
B.  Improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the city standard specifications and details and/or when applicable with standards as adopted by local utility companies and approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.08.095 - Improvement plan. 
"Improvement plan" means the plan for lot size and configuration and other physical requirements in plan and configuration of the entire subdivision including public improvements described in Sections 66418 and 66419 of Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 2, 1993)  
17.08.100 - Lot. 
"Lot" means a parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or portions by description, as on a subdivision or record of survey map, or by metes and bounds, for purposes of sale, lease or separate use. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.08.110 - Lot line adjustment. 
"Lot line adjustment" means a minor shift or rotation of an existing lot line or other adjustments where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not created, as approved by the community development department. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.08.120 - Map Act. 
"Map Act" means the Subdivision Map Act of the state of California. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.08.130 - Merger. 
"Merger" means the joining of two or more contiguous parcels of land under one ownership into one parcel. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.08.140 - Parcel map. 
"Parcel map" means a map showing a division of land of four or less parcels as required by this title, prepared in accordance with the provisions of this title and the Map Act. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.08.150 - Peripheral street. 
"Peripheral street" means an existing street whose right-of-way is contiguous to the exterior boundary of the subdivision. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.08.160 - Remainder. 
"Remainder" means that portion of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land within a subdivision which was not divided for the purpose of sale, lease or financing. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 3, 1993: Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.08.170 - Subdivider. 
"Subdivider" means a person, firm, corporation, partnership or associate who proposes to divide, divides or causes to be divided real property into a subdivision; except that employees and consultants of such persons or entities, acting in such capacity, are not "subdividers." 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.08.180 - Subdivision. 
A.  "Subdivision" means the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved contiguous land shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easements or railroad rights-of-way. "Subdivision" means and includes a condominium project, as defined in this chapter or in Section 1350 of the Civil Code of the state or a community apartment project, as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code of the state, or the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative, as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code of the state. Any conveyance of land to a governmental agency, public entity or public utility shall not be considered a division of land for purposes of computing the number of parcels. 
B.  "Subdivision" does not include: 
1.  Buildings divided into apartments, offices, stores or similar space within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings, mobile home parks or trailer parks for the purpose of lease or financing; 
2.  Land divided by mineral, oil or gas leases; or 
3.  Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the Health and Safety Code of the state; 
4.  A lot line adjustment between two or more adjacent parcels, where land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not created, provided the lot line adjustment is approved by the community development department. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.08.190 - Subdivision improvement standards. 
"Subdivision improvement standards" means standard details, standard specifications and other standards approved by the city engineer that shall govern the improvements to be constructed pursuant to this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.08.200 - Tentative map. 
"Tentative map" means and refers to a map made for the purpose of showing the design and improvements of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around it. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.08.205 - Vesting tentative map. 
"Vesting tentative map" refers to a map which meets the requirements of subdivision (a) of Section 66424.5 and Section 66452 of the Subdivision Map Act. When the city approves or conditionally approves a vesting tentative map, that approval shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, polices and standards in effect the date the city has determined that the application for approval of the vesting tentative map is complete pursuant to Section 65943 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 4, 1993)  
17.08.210 - Zoning ordinance. 
"Zoning ordinance" means Title 18 of this code, or any ordinance enacted under zoning law. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
Chapter 17.12 - ADMINISTRATION 
Sections: 
 
17.12.010 - City attorney—Responsibilities. 
The city attorney shall be responsible for approving as to form all subdivision improvement agreements and subdivision improvement securities. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.12.020 - City council—Responsibilities. 
A.  The city council shall have final jurisdiction in the approval of final maps and improvement agreements and the acceptance by the city of such lands and/or improvements as may be proposed for dedication to the city for subdivisions. 
B.  The city council shall act as the appeal board for hearing appeals of the approval, conditional approval or denial of tentative subdivision maps. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.12.030 - City engineer—Responsibilities. 
The city engineer shall be responsible for: 
A.  Establishing design and construction details, standards and specifications; 
B.  Determining if proposed subdivision improvements comply with the provisions of this title and the Map Act and for reporting the findings together with any recommendations for approval, or conditional approval, of the tentative map to the community development director; 
C.  The processing and certification of final maps, reversion to acreage maps, and amended maps; the processing and approval of subdivision improvement plans, lot line adjustments, mergers and certificates of compliance; 
D.  The inspection and approval of subdivision improvements; 
E.  The acceptance of private improvements (improvements not to be maintained by the city.) 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.12.040 - Community development department (CDD)—Responsibilities. 
The community development department shall be responsible for the processing of tentative maps, final and parcel maps, and for the collection of all required deposits and fees. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.12.050 - Community development director—Responsibilities. 
The community development director shall be responsible for the management of the community development department in carrying out the responsibilities imposed upon it by this title. The community development director shall be responsible for: 
A.  Investigating proposed subdivisions for conformity to the general plan, specific plans and zoning ordinances of the city and reporting his finding together with recommendations for approval or conditional approval to the planning commission; 
B.  Examining and certifying that final maps are in substantial conformance to the approved tentative map. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.12.060 - Planning commission—Responsibilities. 
The planning commission shall be responsible for approving, conditionally approving or denying the application for tentative map approval of subdivisions and reporting its action to the city council. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
Chapter 17.16 - MAPS GENERALLY 
Sections: 
 
17.16.010 - Necessity. 
The necessity for tentative, final and parcel maps shall be governed by the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.16.015 - Exceptions to requirements for division of land. 
A tentative and final subdivision or parcel map is not required in the following cases: 
A.  The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar space within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings, mobile home parks or trailer parks; 
B.  Mineral, oil or gas leases; 
C.  Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the Health and Safety Code; 
D.  A lot line adjustment between two or more existing adjacent parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created, provided the lot line adjustment is approved by the city; 
E.  Boundary line or exchange agreements to which the State Lands Commission or a local agency holding a trust grant of submerged lands is a party; 
F.  Any separate assessment under Section 2188.7 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
G.  Except for a situation when a parcel or final map was approved by the city council, the conversion of a community apartment project as defined by Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code, to a condominium, as defined by Section 783 of the Civil Code, but only if the requirements of Section 66412(G) of the Subdivision Map Act are met; 
H.  Except for a situation when a parcel or final map was approved by the city council, the conversion of a stock cooperative, as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code to a condominium, as defined in Section 783 of the Civil Code, but only if all the requirements of Section 66412(h) of the Subdivision Map Act are met; 
I.  The financing or leasing of any parcel of land, or any portion thereof, in conjunction with the construction of commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel, unless the project is subject to review under other city ordinances regulating design and improvement; 
J.  The financing or leasing of existing separate commercial or industrial buildings on a single parcel; 
K.  The construction, financing or leasing of dwelling units pursuant to Section 65852.1 of the Government Code nor to second units pursuant to Section 65852.2, but this Ordinance shall be applicable to the sale or transfer, but not leasing, of those units; 
L.  Placement and operation of windmills on property. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 5, 1993)  
17.16.020 - Division of land—Five or more parcels. 
A.  A preliminary, tentative and final map shall be required for all divisions of land when determined by the community development director that such land may be divided into five or more parcels, five or more condominiums as defined in Section 783 of the State Civil Code, a community apartment project containing five or more parcels, or for the conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing five or more dwelling units, except where: 
1.  The land before division contains less than five acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway and no dedications or improvements are required by the legislative body; or 
2.  Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of twenty acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or highway; or 
3.  The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of the city council as to street alignments and widths; or 
4.  Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less than forty acres or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section. 
B.  A parcel map shall be required for these subdivisions described in subsections (A)(1) through (4) of this section. 
C.  A division of land for industrial or commercial use may be filed as a parcel map rather than as a tentative and final subdivision map, if requested by the property owner. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. §§ 6, 7, 1993; Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.16.030 - Division of land—four or less parcels. 
A.  A tentative map and parcel map shall be required for all divisions of lands which create four or less parcels except for: 
1.  Divisions of land created by short-term leases (terminable by either party on not more than thirty days notice in writing) of a portion of an operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation defined as such by Section 230 of the Public Utilities Code; provided, however, that upon a showing made to the community development director based upon substantial evidence that public policy necessitates such a map, this exception shall not apply; 
2.  Lot line adjustments, provided: 
a.  No additional parcels or building sites have been created, 
b.  The adjustment does not create the potential to further divide either of the two parcels into more parcels than would have been otherwise possible, 
c.  There are no resulting violations of this code; 
3.  When the parcel map is waived by the community development director as provided by Section 17.24.230 of this title; provided, however, that the community development director may require that such waiver not be granted unless the community development director first finds that the proposed division of land complies with requirements established by the Subdivision Map Act and city's ordinances enacted pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act, including but not limited to requirements as to area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, and environmental protection. The community development director may require planning commission review where the complexity of the issues exceeds the scope which normally permits administrative approval of such divisions or adjustments; 
4.  Land conveyed to or from a government agency, public entity, public utility or land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to that utility, for rights-of-way, unless a showing is made in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates a parcel map; 
5.  The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of the city council as to street alignments and widths. 
B.  A plat map, in a form as required by the city engineer, and a certificate of compliance in accordance with Section 17.52.030 of this title shall be required for lot line adjustments, mergers, certificates of compliance and parcel map waivers. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. §§ 8—10, 1993; Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.16.040 - Fees and deposits. 
All persons submitting maps as required by this title shall pay all fees and/or deposits as provided by the city's resolution establishing fees and charges, or as provided by this title. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.16.050 - Tax liens payable on subdivision land. 
A.  Prior to the filing of the final map or parcel map with the city, the subdivider shall, in accordance with procedures established by the county, file with the county recorder of the county of Santa Clara, a certificate or statement from the official computing redemptions in any public agency in which any part of the subdivision is located showing that according to the records of that officer there are no liens against the subdivision or any part thereof for unpaid state, county, city or local taxes or special assessments collected as taxes except taxes or special assessments not yet payable. 
B.  Whenever any part of the subdivision is subject to a lien for taxes or special assessments collected as taxes which are not yet payable, the final map or parcel map shall not be recorded until the owner or subdivider does both of the following: (1) files with the clerk of the board of supervisors of the county of Santa Clara, a certificate or statement prepared by the appropriate state or local official giving his or her estimate of those taxes or assessments; (2) executes and files with the clerk of the board of supervisors of the county of Santa Clara, security conditioned upon payment of all state, county, city and local taxes and the current installment of principal and interest of all special assessments collected as taxes, which at the time the final map is recorded are a lien against the property but which are not yet payable. 
C.  If the land being subdivided is a portion of a larger parcel shown on the last preceding tax roll as a unit, or whenever lands subject to a special assessment or bond which may be paid in full is divided by the line of a lot or a parcel of the subdivision, or whenever land subject to a special assessment for payment of a bond would be divided by the lien of the lot or parcel of the subdivision, or whenever lands subject to a special assessment for payment of a bond would be divided by the line of the lot or parcel of the subdivision, then the procedures of subdivisions (b) through (e) of Section 66493 of the Subdivision Map Act shall be followed. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 11, 1993).  
17.16.060 - Annexation of subdivision land. 
A.  When any area in a subdivision as to which a final map has been finally approved by the county board of supervisors and filed for record pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act, is thereafter annexed to the city, the final map and any agreements relating to the subdivision shall continue to govern the subdivision. 
B.  When any area in a subdivision, or a proposed subdivision as to which a tentative map or vesting tentative map has been filed, but a final map has not been finally approved, or where a parcel map is required but the parcel map has not yet received final approval, is annexed to the city, all procedures and regulations required by the city shall be deemed to commence as of the effective date of the annexation and the map shall comply with the requirements of any applicable ordinances of the City. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 12, 1993)  
17.16.070 - Record title ownership for dedications. 
Where dedications or offers of dedication are not required, the statement shall be signed and acknowledged by the subdivider only. If the subdivider does not have a record title ownership interest in the property to be divided, the city may require that the subdivider provide the city with satisfactory evidence that the persons with record title ownership have consented to the proposed division. For purposes of this section, "record title ownership" means fee title of record unless a leasehold interest is to be divided, in which case record title ownership means ownership of record of the leasehold interest. Record title ownership does not include ownership of mineral rights or other subsurface interests which have been severed from the ownership of the surface. No additional survey requirements shall be included which do not affect record title interests. Whenever a certificate or acknowledgement is made by separate instrument, there shall appear on the final map a reference to the separately recorded document. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 13, 1993)  
17.16.080 - Certificate of correction for map. 
A.  After a final map or a parcel map is filed in the office of the county recorder, it may be amended by a certificate of correction or an amending map in compliance with the procedure set forth in Sections 66469 through 66472 of the Subdivision Map Act of any of the following purposes: 
1.  To correct an error in any course or distance shown thereon; 
2.  To show any course or distance that was omitted therefrom; 
3.  To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the map; 
4.  To indicate monuments set after the death, disability, retirement from practice or replacement of the engineer or surveyor charged with setting monuments; 
5.  To show the proper location or character of any monument which has been changed in location or character originally shown at the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character; 
6.  To correct any other type of map error or omission as approved by the county surveyor or city engineer which does not affect any property right. Such errors and omissions may include, but are not limited to, lot numbers, acreage, street names and identification of adjacent record maps. As used in this subsection, "error" does not include changes in courses or distances from which an error is not ascertainable from the date as shown on the final or parcel map. 
B.  Procedures shall follow those described in Sections 66469 through 66472 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 14, 1993)  
Chapter 17.20 - MAP REQUIREMENTS—FIVE OR MORE PARCELS 
Sections:  
Article I. - Preliminary Maps 
 
17.20.010 - Form and contents. 
The contents and form and submittal of preliminary maps shall be governed by the provisions of Article I of this chapter. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.020 - Submission procedures. 
Prior to the filing of an application for a tentative subdivision map for a subdivision of five or more parcels, the subdivider shall submit plans and data related to the design, layout, grading, existing noise levels and other features proposed for the development as may be required by the community development department. The data obtained shall be submitted to the community development department for preliminary review and comment. Upon receipt of the community development department comments, the subdivider shall cause to be prepared a tentative subdivision map pursuant to the provisions of Article II of this chapter. The tentative subdivision map may be submitted in lieu of a preliminary map. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
Article II. - Tentative Subdivision Maps 
 
17.20.030 - General requirements. 
The form and contents, submittal and approval of tentative subdivision maps shall be governed by the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.040 - Form and contents. 
A.  The tentative map shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the community development department and shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer. 
B.  The tentative map shall be clearly and legibly drawn on one sheet and contain not less than the following: 
1.  A title which shall contain the subdivision number, subdivision name and type of subdivision; 
2.  Name and address of legal owner, subdivider and person preparing the map (including registration number); 
3.  Sufficient legal description to define the boundary of the proposed subdivision; 
4.  Date, north arrow, scale and contour interval; 
5.  Existing and proposed land use; 
6.  A vicinity map showing roads, adjoining subdivisions, creeks, railroads and other data sufficient to locate the proposed subdivision and show its relation to the community; 
7.  Existing topography of the proposed site and at least one hundred feet beyond its boundary, including but not limited to: 
a.  Existing contours at two-foot intervals if the existing ground slope is less than ten percent and at not less than five-foot intervals for existing ground slopes equal to or greater than ten percent. Contour intervals shall not be spread more than one hundred fifty feet apart. Existing contours shall be represented by dashed lines or by screened lines, 
b.  Type, circumference and dripline of existing trees as defined by Chapter 12.32 of this code on removal of significant trees on public and private property. Any trees proposed to be removed shall be so indicated, 
c.  The approximate location and outline of existing structures identified by type. Buildings to be removed shall be so marked, 
d.  The approximate location of all areas subject to inundation or stormwater overflow and the location, width and direction of flow of each watercourse, 
e.  The location, pavement and right-of-way width, grade and name of existing streets or highways, 
f.  The widths, location and identity of all existing easements, 
g.  The location and size of existing sanitary sewers, water mains and storm drains. The approximate slope of existing sewers and storm drains shall be indicated. The location of existing overhead utility lines on peripheral streets, 
h.  The approximate location of the sixty, sixty-five and seventy CNEL (community noise equivalent level) contours, if any; 
8.  Proposed improvements to be shown shall include but not be limited to: 
a.  The location, grade, centerline radius and arc length of curves, pavement and right-of-way width and name of all streets. Typical sections of all streets shall be shown, 
b.  The location and radius of all curb returns and cul-de-sacs, 
c.  The location, width and purpose of all easements, 
d.  The angle of intersecting streets if such angle deviates from a right angle by more than four degrees, 
e.  The approximate lot layout and the approximate dimensions of each lot and of each building site. Engineering data shall show the approximate finished grading on each lot, the preliminary design of all grading, the elevation of proposed building pads, the top and toe of cut and fill slopes to scale and the number of each lot, 
f.  Proposed contours at two-foot intervals shall be shown if the existing ground slope is less than ten percent and not at less than five-foot intervals for existing ground slopes greater than or equal to ten percent. A separate grading plan may be submitted, 
g.  Proposed recreation sites, trails and parks for private or public use, 
h.  Proposed common areas and areas to be dedicated to public open space, 
i.  The location and size of sanitary sewers, water mains and storm drains. Proposed slopes and approximate elevations of sanitary sewers and storm drains shall be indicated; 
9.  The name or names of any geologist or soils engineer whose services were required in the preparation of the design of the tentative map; 
10.  The source and date of existing contours; 
11.  All lettering size shall be one-eighth-inch minimum; 
12.  Certificates for execution by the secretary of the planning commission indicating the approval of the tentative map and the date thereof by the planning commission, and a certificate by the city clerk indicating the approval by the city council if the map was reviewed by the city council; 
13.  If the subdivider plans to develop the site as shown on the tentative map in units, then he shall show the proposed units and their proposed sequence of construction on the tentative map; 
14.  The community development department may waive any of the requirements set out in this section whenever it finds that the type of subdivision is such as not to necessitate compliance with these requirements, or that other circumstances justify such waiver. The community development department may require other such drawings, data or other information as deemed necessary. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.050 - Accompanying data and reports. 
A.  The tentative map shall be accompanied by the following data or reports: 
1.  Soils Report. A preliminary soils report in accordance with the city's grading ordinance shall be submitted. If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soil problems which, if not corrected, could lead to structural defects, the soils report accompanying the final map shall contain an investigation of each lot within the subdivision. Additional information regarding soils and subsoils may be required pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.45 of this code; 
2.  Title Report. A preliminary title report, showing the legal owners at the time of filing the tentative map; 
3.  Geologic/Geotechnical Report. Unless the requirement is waived by the community development department, an applicant for a tentative map or a tentative parcel map shall furnish the report or reports required by Chapter 18.45 of this code prior to such application being deemed complete for processing. 
4.  School Site. The subdivider shall obtain from the Morgan Hill Unified School District their intention, in writing, concerning the necessity for a school site, if any, within the subdivision and shall present this information to the community development department prior to the consideration of the tentative map by the planning commission; 
5.  Environmental Impact Study. The various time limits set forth in this article for taking action on tentative maps shall not be deemed to commence until the subdivision is found exempt or an initial study is completed and a negative declaration or environmental impact report, as appropriate, is prepared, processed and considered in accordance with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act. The subdivider shall provide such additional data and information and deposit and pay such fees as may be required for the preparation and processing of environmental review documents; 
6.  Utility Certification. Certification in writing from all utilities that the proposed subdivision can be adequately served. The city engineer may defer the required certification until after the filing of the tentative map; 
7.  Other Reports. Any other data or reports deemed necessary by the community development department. 
B.  Subsections (A)(1), (A)(3), (A)(4) and (A)(6) of this section shall not apply to condominium conversions. 
(Ord. 1176 §§ 4, 5, 1994; Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.060 - Community development department—Submission. 
The tentative map shall be considered for filing only when such map conforms to Section 17.20.040 of this chapter and when all accompanying data or reports, as required by Section 17.20.050 of this chapter have been submitted and accepted by the community development department. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.070 - Community development department—Review—Subdivision conference. 
A.  The community development department shall forward copies of the tentative map to the affected public agencies which may, in turn, forward to the community development department their findings and recommendations thereon. 
B.  Within ten days of the filing of the tentative map, the community development department shall send a notice of the filing of the tentative map to the governing board of the Morgan Hill Unified School District. Such notice shall also contain information about the location of the proposed subdivision, the number of units, density and any other information which would be relevant to the affected school district. Such governing board may review the notice and may send a written report thereon to the agency required by law to approve such tentative map. The report shall indicate the impact of the proposed subdivision on the school district and shall make such recommendations as the governing board of the district deems appropriate. In the event the school district fails to respond within a twenty-day period from receipt of notice of the tentative map, such failure shall be deemed approval of the proposed subdivision by the school district. The planning commission shall consider the report from the school district in approving or conditionally approving the tentative map. This section shall not apply to subdivision of four lots (units) or less. 
C.  Upon completion of review by the community development department and prior to the date the tentative map is scheduled for planning commission action, the community development department may hold a subdivision conference on its own initiative. A subdivision conference shall be held if requested by the subdivider. Advance written notice of the subdivision conference shall be given to the subdivider or his agent and to all affected agencies. The results of the subdivision conference shall be reported to the planning commission. A copy of the report shall be served to the subdivider at least three days prior to any hearing or action on such map by the planning commission. 
D.  Any requests for exceptions to the various conditions to be considered by the planning commission shall be filed, in writing, with the community development director not later than the first working day following the subdivision conference. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.080 - Public hearings—Planning commission—Powers and duties. 
A.  Upon receipt of a valid application, completion of the subdivision conference, and having received from the community development department their report and recommendations for the proposed tentative subdivision map, the community development director shall set the matter for public hearing. At least ten calendar days before the public hearings, the director shall cause notice to be given of the time, date and place of such hearing including a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected, and the street address, if any, of the property involved. 
B.  The notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, published and circulated in the city. 
C.  In addition to notice by publication, the city shall give notice of the hearing by mail or delivery to all persons, including businesses, corporations or other public or private entities, shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within three hundred feet of the property which is the subject of the proposed change. 
D.  In addition, in the case of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment project or stock cooperative project, notice shall be given as required by Government Code Section 66451.3 
E.  In the event that the proposed change has been requested by a person other than the property owner as such property owner is shown on the last equalized assessment roll, the city shall also give mailed notice to the owner of the property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
F.  In addition, notice shall be given by first-class mail to any person who has filed a written request with the community development director. Such a request may be submitted at any time during the calendar year and shall apply for the balance of such calendar year. The city may impose a reasonable fee on persons requesting such notice for the purpose of recovering the cost of such mailing. 
G.  Substantial compliance with these provisions therewith to notice shall be sufficient and a technical failure to comply shall not affect the validity of any action taken pursuant to the procedures set forth in this section. 
H.  The planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the tentative map and shall report its decision to the city council and the subdivider within fifty days after the tentative map has been accepted for filing or within fifty days after certification of the environmental report if an EIR has been prepared, adoption of a negative declaration, or a determination by the city that the project is exempt from the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act, as amended. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.090 - Approval conditions. 
A.  In approving or conditionally approving the tentative subdivision map, the planning commission shall find that the proposed subdivision, together with its provisions for its design and improvements, is consistent with applicable general or specific plans adopted by the city. 
B.  The planning commission may modify or delete any of the conditions of approval recommended in the community development department's report, except conditions required by city ordinance or by the city engineer, related to public health and safety or standards approved by the city engineer, or add additional requirements as a condition of its approval. 
C.  If no action is taken by the planning commission within the time limit as specified, the tentative map as filed shall be deemed to be approved, insofar as it complies with other applicable provisions of the State Subdivision Map Act, this title and other city ordinances, and it shall be the duty of the city clerk to certify the approval. Tentative maps deemed approved under this section shall only be so deemed once (1) the city has completed notification pursuant to Section 17.20.080; and (2) the planning commission has made the necessary findings as provided by the Subdivision Map Act subject to standard conditions ordinarily applied to tentative maps, a copy of which standard conditions is on file with the community development department. Such conditions of a map deemed approved under this section shall be in effect from the date that the map is deemed approved, whether or not the planning commission has specifically applied the conditions to the map. In taking such actions the city shall act in an expeditious manner and shall not unreasonably withhold or delay its action to complete approval of the tentative maps. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 15, 1993; Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.095 - City limitations on indemnifications and hold harmless. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection B, the city will not require, as a condition of a tentative, parcel or final map application or approval, that the subdivider or an agent of the subdivider defend, indemnify or hold harmless the city or its agents, officers and employees from any claim, action or proceeding against the city as a result of the action or inaction of the city council, planning commission or other city agency in reviewing, approving or denying the map. 
B.  The city may require, as a condition for a tentative, parcel or final map application or approval, that the subdivider defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city council or its agents, officers and employees from any claim, action or proceeding against the city council or its agents, officers or employees to attack, set aside, void or annul an approval by the city concerning the subdivision which action is brought within the time period provided for in Section 66499.37 of the Subdivision Map Act. Provided, however, that any condition imposed pursuant to this section shall include the requirement that the city promptly notify the subdivider of any claim, action or proceeding and that the city cooperate fully in the defense and, if the city fails to do so, the subdivider shall not thereafter be responsible to defend, indemnify, or hold the city harmless. 
C.  The city may participate in the defense of any claim, action or proceeding, in which case the city will pay its own attorney's fees and costs and defend the action in good faith. 
D.  The subdivider shall not be required to pay or perform any settlement unless the settlement is approved by the subdivider. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 16, 1993)  
17.20.100 - Denial—Planning commission criteria. 
A.  The tentative subdivision map may be denied by the planning commission on any of the grounds provided by city ordinances or the State Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  The planning commission shall deny approval of the tentative map if it makes any of the following findings: 
1.  That the proposed map is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans; 
2.  That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans; 
3.  That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development; 
4.  That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development; 
5.  That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat; 
6.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems; 
7.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the governing body may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements for access or for use will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This subsection shall apply only to easements of records or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction and no authority is granted to a legislative body to determine that the public at large has acquired easements for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.120 - Extension of time. 
The time limits set forth in Section 17.20.110 of this chapter for acting on the tentative map may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the planning commission or the city council. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.130 - Appeals—Subdivider. 
If the subdivider disagrees with any action by the planning commission with respect to the tentative subdivision map, he may, within ten days of such decision file an appeal with the city clerk. The council shall consider the appeal within thirty days or at its first regular meeting subsequent to such appeal, unless the subdivider consents to a continuance. This appeal shall be a public hearing after notice has been given pursuant to Section 17.20.080 of this chapter. In addition, notice shall be given to the subdivider and the planning commission and upon conclusion of the public hearing, the council shall within ten days declare its findings. The council may sustain, modify, reject or overrule any recommendations or rulings of the planning commission and may make such findings as are not inconsistent with the provisions of this title or the State Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 17, 1993: Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.140 - Appeals—Interested persons adversely affected. 
Any interested person adversely affected by a decision of the planning commission may file a complaint with the city council concerning such decision. Any such complaint shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days after the action which is the subject of the complaint. No complaint shall be considered after the ten-day period. The city council may, at its discretion, reject the complaint within ten days or set the matter for hearing. If the city council rejects the complaint, the complainant shall be notified of such action. If the matter is set for hearing, a public hearing shall be held within thirty days after filing of the complaint pursuant to the procedures contained in Section 17.20.130 of this chapter with additional notice being given to the affected interested persons. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 18, 1993: Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.150 - Appeals—General plan and specific plan conformity. 
Any interested person may appeal any decision of the planning commission relative to conformity to the general plan or any specific plan of the city to the city council. Such appeal and hearing thereon shall be in accordance with Section 17.20.130 of this chapter, with additional notice to be given to the appellant. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.160 - Appeals—Tenant. 
Any tenant of the property being subdivided in the course of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment project or stock cooperative project may appeal from any action of the planning commission pursuant to Government Code Section 66452.5. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.170 - Expiration. 
A.  The approval or conditional approval of a tentative subdivision map shall expire twenty-four months from the date of the adoption of the resolution by the planning commission approving or conditionally approving the map. An extension to the expiration date may be approved as provided in subsection B of 17.20.180 of this chapter. The period of time specified in subsection A of Section 17.20.180 of this chapter, shall not include any period of time during which a development moratorium, imposed after approval of the tentative map, is in existence; provided, however, that the length of the moratorium does not exceed five years. Once a moratorium is terminated, the map shall be valid for the same period of time as was left to run on the map at the time that the moratorium was imposed. However, if the remaining time is less than one hundred twenty days, the map shall be valid for one hundred twenty days following the termination of the moratorium. 
B.  The period of time specified in subsection A of this section shall not include any period of time during which a lawsuit has been filed and is pending in a court of competent jurisdiction involving the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map only if a stay of the time period is approved by the city council. Within ten days of the service of the initial petition or complaint upon the city, the subdivider shall, in writing, to the community development director, request a stay in the time period of the tentative map. Within forty days after receiving such request, the city council shall either stay the time period for up to five years or deny the requested stay. The request for the stay shall be a hearing with notice to the subdivider and to the appellant, and upon conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall, within ten days, declare its findings. 
C.  Expiration of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall terminate all proceedings and no final map or parcel of all or any portion of the real property included within such tentative map shall be filed without first processing a new tentative map. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.180 - Extensions. 
A.  Request by Subdivider. The subdivider or his engineer may request an extension of the expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved tentative subdivision map by written application to the community development department. The application shall be filed before the map is to expire and shall state the reasons for requesting the extension. 
B.  Planning Commission Action. The community development director shall review the request and submit the application for the extension, together with a report, to the planning commission for approval, conditional approval or denial. A copy of the report shall be forwarded to the subdivider prior to the planning commission meeting on the extension. The resolution adopted by the planning commission approving or conditionally approving an extension shall specify the new expiration date of the tentative subdivision map. 
C.  Time Limit of Extension. In no case shall the time at which the approved or conditionally approved tentative map expires be extended more than three years beyond the date at which the original approval or conditional approval by planning commission or city council under this chapter expires, except as provided in Section 66452.6 of the Subdivision Map Act or other provision of state law. By signed development agreement pursuant to Government Code Section 65864 through Section 65869.5, the city may require the subdivider to limit time for extensions, as provided in such development agreement. 
D.  Conditions of Approval. As a condition of the extension of a tentative subdivision map, the planning commission may impose new conditions or revise existing conditions on the approved tentative map as recommended by the community development department in its report or as it may find necessary. 
E.  Appeal of Conditions of Extension. The subdivider may appeal any action of the planning commission on the extension to the city council within fifteen days of such action in conformance to Section 17.20.130 of this chapter. 
F.  Fee. The fee for processing an extension shall be provided by the city's resolution. 
G.  If a subdivider is required to expend one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars or more to construct, improve or finance the construction or improvement of public improvements outside the boundaries of the tentative map, excluding improvements of public rights-of-way which abut the boundary of the property, each filing of the final map authorized by Section 66456.1 of the Subdivision Map Act shall extend the expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map by thirty-six months from its expiration, provided in this section, or the date of the previously filed final map, whichever is later. The extension shall not extend the tentative map more than ten years from its approval or conditional approval. However, a tentative map on property subject to a development agreement authorized by Government Code Section 65864 and following may be extended for the period of time provided for in the agreement, but not beyond the duration of the agreement. The number of phased final maps which may be filed shall be determined by the planning commission at the time of approval or conditional approval of the tentative map. 
The amount of one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars shall be increased by the registrar of contractors according to the adjustment for inflation set forth in the statewide cost index for Class "B" construction as determined by the State Allocation Board at its January meeting. "Public improvements" as used in this section, include traffic controls, streets, roads, highways, bridges, overcrossing, street interchanges, flood control or storm drain facilities, sewer facilities, water facilities and lighting facilities. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. §§ 19, 20, 1993; Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.190 - Amendments to approved tentative map. 
A.  Minor changes in the tentative map may be approved by the community development department upon application by the subdivider or on its own initiative, provided: 
1.  No lots, units or building sites are added; 
2.  Such changes are consistent with the intent and spirit of the original tentative map approval; 
3.  There are no resulting violations of this code or conformance to Section 17.20.130 of this chapter. 
B.  Any revision shall be approved by the community development director and the city engineer. The amendment shall be indicated on the approved map and certified by the community development director and the city engineer. 
C.  Amendments of the tentative map other than minor shall be presented to the planning commission for approval. Processing shall be in accordance with Sections 17.20.070 and 17.20.080 of this chapter. 
D.  Any approved amendment shall not alter the expiration date of the tentative map. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
Article III. - Final Maps 
 
17.20.200 - General requirements. 
A.  The form, contents, accompanying data and filing of the final map shall conform to the provisions of this article. 
B.  The final map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.210 - Survey required. 
A.  An accurate and complete survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. All monuments, property lines, centerlines of streets, alleys and easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into the survey. The allowable error of closure on any portion of the final map shall not exceed 1/10000 for field closures and 1/20000 for calculated closures. 
B.  At the time of making the survey for the final map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with the standards described in Section 8771 of the Business and Professions Code so that another engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey. At least one exterior boundary line shall be monumented prior to recording the final map. Other monuments shall be set as required by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.220 - Form and specifications. 
A.  The form of the final map shall conform to the Subdivision Map Act and as provided in this article. 
B.  The final map shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester base film. Certificates, affidavits and acknowledgements may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on polyester base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility. 
C.  The size of each sheet shall be eighteen by twenty-six inches. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch. The scale of the map shall be not less than one inch equals one hundred feet or as may be necessary to show all details clearly, and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown. When four or more sheets including the certificate sheet are used, a key sheet will be included. 
D.  All printing or lettering on the map shall be of one-eighth inch minimum height and of such shape and weight as to be readily legible on prints and other reproductions made from the original drawings. 
E.  The final form of the final map shall be as approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.230 - Contents—General requirements. 
The contents of the final map shall conform to the Subdivision Map Act and as provided in Sections 17.20.240 through 17.20.340 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.240 - Contents—Boundary. 
The boundary of the subdivision shall be designated by a heavy black line in such a manner as not to obliterate figures or other data. Map exclusions may be processed in the manner described in Section 66499.21 and following of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 21, 1993: Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.250 - Contents—Title. 
Each sheet shall have a title showing the subdivision number and name and the location of the property being subdivided with reference to maps which have been previously recorded, or by reference to the plat of a United States Survey. The following words shall appear in the title, "In the City of Morgan Hill." 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.260 - Contents—Certificates. 
The following certificates shall appear only once on the cover sheet. 
A.  Owner's Statement. A statement signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title interest in the subdivided real property, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the final map is required except as provided in subdivision (a) of Section 66436 of the Subdivision Map Act. A notary acknowledgement shall be deemed complete for recording without the official seal of the notary, so long as the name of the notary, the county of the notary's principal place of business, and the notary's commission expiration date are typed or printed below or immediately adjacent to the notary's signature and acknowledgement. 
B.  Engineer's Certificate. 
1.  A certificate by the engineer or surveyor responsible for the survey and final map shall appear on the map. The certificate shall give the date of the survey, state that the survey and final map were made by or under the direction of the engineer or surveyor, and that the survey is true and complete as shown. 
2.  The certificate shall also state that all monuments are of the character and occupy the position indicated, or that they will be set in such positions on or before a specified later date. The certificate shall also state that the monuments are, or will be, sufficient to enable the survey to be retraced. 
3.  The certificate shall state that the map complies to the Subdivision Map Act and the provisions of this title. 
C.  City Engineer's Certificate. A certificate by the city engineer stating that the map has been examined and that it is in accord with the tentative map and any approved alterations thereof, complies with the Subdivision Map Act of the state and the provisions of this title, and is technically correct. 
(Ord.  635 N.S. § A (part), 1983) 
D.  Planning Commission Certificate. A certificate by the secretary of the planning commission stating that the tentative map was approved by resolution of the planning commission. The date and number of the resolution shall appear in the certificate. 
E.  City Clerk's Certificate. A certificate for execution by the city clerk stating the date and number of the resolution adopted by the city council approving the final map and stating that the city council accepted, accepted subject to improvement or rejected on behalf of the public, any real property offered for dedication for public use in conformity with the terms of the offer of dedication. 
F.  Certificate of Soils and Geologic Report. When a soils report, a geologic report, or soils and geologic reports have been prepared specifically for the subdivision, such fact shall be noted on the final map, together with the date of such report or reports, and the name of the engineer making the soils report and geologist making the geologic report and the location where the reports are on file. The certificate shall read, "A soils and/or geologic report for Subdivision No._______ was prepared by me or under my direction and was filed with the City on _______." 
G.  County Recorder's Certificate. 
1.  A certificate to be executed by the county recorder stating that the map has been accepted for filing; that the map has been examined and that it complies with the provisions of state laws and local ordinances governing the filing of the final maps. 
2.  The certificate shall show who requested the filing of the map, the time and date the map was filed and the book and page where the map was filed. 
H.  County Clerk's Certificate. A certificate to be executed by the county clerk stating that all taxes due have been paid or that a tax bond assuring the payment of all taxes which are a lien but not yet payable has been filed with the county. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.270 - Contents—Scale, north point and basis of bearings. 
There must appear on each map sheet the scale, the north point and the basis of bearings based on Zone III of the California Coordinates, and the equation of the bearing to true north. The basis of bearings shall be approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.280 - Contents—Linear, angular and radial data. 
Sufficient linear, angular and radial data shall be shown to determine the bearings and lengths of monument lines, street centerlines, the boundary lines of the subdivision and of the boundary lines on every lot and parcel which is a part thereof. Length, radius and total central angle or radial bearings of all curves shall be shown. Ditto marks shall not be used in the dimensions and data shown on the map. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.290 - Contents—Monuments. 
The location and description of all existing and proposed monuments shall be shown. Standard city monuments shall be set at (or from offsets as approved by the city engineer) the following locations; 
A.  The intersection of street centerlines; 
B.  Beginning and end of curves in centerlines; 
C.  At other locations as may be required by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.300 - Contents—Lot numbers. 
Lot numbers shall begin with the number one in each subdivision and shall continue consecutively with no omissions or duplications except where contiguous lands, under the same ownership, are being subdivided in successive units, in which event lot numbers may begin with the next consecutive number following the last number in the preceding unit. Each lot shall be shown entirely on one sheet of the final map, unless approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.310 - Contents—Adjoining properties. 
The adjoining corners of all adjoining subdivisions shall be identified by subdivision number, or name when not identified by official number, and reference to the book and page of the filed map showing such subdivision, and if no such subdivision is adjacent, then by the name of the owner and reference to the recorded deed by book page number for the last recorded owner of such adjacent property. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.320 - Contents—City boundaries. 
City boundaries which cross or join the subdivision shall be clearly designated. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.330 - Contents—Street names. 
The names of all streets, alleys or highways within or adjoining the subdivision shall be shown. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.340 - Contents—Easements. 
A.  Easement for roads or streets, paths, stormwater drainage, sanitary sewers or other public use as may be required, shall be dedicated to the public for acceptance by the city or other public agency, and the use shall be specified on the map. If at the time the final map is approved, any streets, paths, alley or storm drainage easements are not accepted by the city council, the offer of dedication shall remain open and the city council may, by resolution at any later date, accept and open the streets, paths, alleys or storm drainage easements for public use, which acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
B.  All easements of record shall be shown on the map, together with the name of the grantee and sufficient recording data to identify the conveyance, e.g., recorder's serial number and date, or book and page of official records. 
C.  Easements not disclosed by the records in the office of the county recorder and found by the surveyor or engineer to be existing, shall be specifically designated on the map, identifying the apparent dominant tenements for which the easement was created. 
D.  The sidelines of all easements of record shall be shown by dashed lines on the final map with the widths, lengths and bearings of record. The width and location of all easements shall be approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.345 - Contents—Designated remainder. 
The map shall show the location of each parcel and its relation to surrounding surveys. If the map includes a "designated remainder" parcel and the gross area of the "designated remainder" parcel is five acres or more, that remainder parcel need not be shown on the map and its location need not be indicated as a matter of survey, but only by deed reference to the existing boundaries of the remainder parcel. A parcel designated as "not a part" shall be deemed to be a "designated remainder" for the purposes of this section. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 23, 1993)  
17.20.350 - Preliminary submittal. 
The subdivider shall submit four sets of prints of the final map to the city engineer for checking. The preliminary prints shall be accompanied by two copies of the following data, plans, reports and documents in a form as approved by the city engineer. 
A.  Improvement Plans. Improvement plans as required by Sections 17.32.060 through 17.32.130 of this title. 
B.  Soils Report. A soils report to the requirements of the city engineer. 
C.  Title Report. A title report showing the legal owners at the time of submittal of the final map. 
D.  Improvement Bond Estimate. The improvement bond estimate shall include all improvements within public rights-of-way, easements or common areas and utility trench backfill as provided by the developer, except for those utility facilities installed by a utility company under the jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission. 
E.  Deeds for Easements or Rights-of-Way. Deed for easements or rights-of-way required for roads or drainage purposes which have not been dedicated on the final map. Written evidence acceptable to the city in the form of rights of entry or permanent easements across private property outside the subdivision permitting or granting access to perform necessary construction work and permitting the maintenance of the facility. 
F.  Traverse Closures. 
1.  Traverse closures for the boundary blocks, lots, easements, street centerlines and monument lines. 
2.  The error of field closures in the traverse around the subdivision and around the interior lots or blocks shall not exceed one part in twenty thousand. 
G.  Hydrology and Hydraulic Calculations. Complete hydrology and hydraulic calculations of all storm drains. Complete hydraulic calculations for all sewer mains. 
H.  Organization Documents. The submittal of the final map or parcel map shall include the proposed declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions, and all other organizational documents for the subdivision in a form as prescribed by Section 1355 of the Civil Code of the State. All documents shall be subject to review by the city engineer and city attorney. 
I.  Any additional data, reports or information as required by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.360 - Return for corrections. 
Upon completing the preliminary check, the city engineer shall notice the required connections on the preliminary prints, reports and data and return one set to the subdivider's engineer for revision. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.370 - Resubmittal. 
The subdivider's engineer shall submit two sets of the revised map, reports and data to the city engineer. After checking the revisions, one set shall be returned to the subdivider's engineer marked "Approved as Submitted," "Approved When Corrected as Noted" or "Revise and Resubmit." 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.380 - City engineer—Approval. 
A.  Upon receipt of an approved print, the subdivider shall submit the original tracing of the revised map, prepared in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter and corrected to its final form, and signed by all parties required by the Map Act and this chapter to execute the certificates on the map, to the city engineer. 
B.  The city engineer and community development director shall sign the appropriate certificates and transmit the original to the city clerk within twenty days from the time the final map is submitted to him by the subdivider for approval. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.390 - City council—Approval. 
A.  The final map, upon execution by the city engineer and community development director, together with the subdivision improvement agreement, shall be filed with the city clerk who will place the map and subdivision agreement on the council agenda for approval. The city council shall receive the final map and subdivision improvement agreement for consideration within ten days after their filing with the city clerk, or at its next regular meeting, whichever is later. The city council shall, at the meeting at which it receives the map, or at its next regular meeting after the meeting at which it receives the map, approve the map if it conforms to all of the requirements of this chapter and of the Subdivision Map Act applicable at the time of approval or conditional approval of the tentative map and any rulings made thereunder. If the map does not conform, the city council shall disapprove the map. The city council shall have approved the subdivision improvement agreement before approving the final map. 
B.  If the subdivision improvement agreement and final map are approved by the city council, it shall instruct the city manager or city engineer to execute the agreement on behalf of the city. If the subdivision improvement agreement and/or final map is unacceptable, the city council shall make their recommended corrections, instruct the city engineer to draft a new agreement and/or revise the final map and defer approval until an acceptable agreement and/or final map has been resubmitted. 
C.  If the city council does not approve or disapprove the map within the time prescribed by this chapter, or any authorized extension thereof, and the map conforms to all requirements and rulings, it shall be deemed approved and the city clerk shall certify or state the city council's approval on the map. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. §§ 24, 25, 1993: Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.400 - City council—Denial. 
A.  The city council shall deny approval of the final map upon making any of the findings contained in Section 17.20.100 of this chapter. 
B.  The city council shall not deny approval of the final map if it has previously approved a tentative map for the proposed subdivision and if it finds that the final map is in substantial compliance with the previously approved tentative map. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.410 - County recorder—Filing. 
Upon approval of the final map by the city council and receipt of the improvement security by the city engineer, the city clerk shall execute the appropriate certificate on the certificate sheet and forward the map, or have an authorized agent forward the map, to the clerk of the county board of supervisors for transmittal to the county recorder. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.20.420 - Submittal by units. 
Multiple final maps relating to an approved or conditionally approved tentative map may be filed prior to the expiration of the tentative map; provided, however, that the subdivider, at the time the tentative map is filed, informs the community development director of the subdivider's intention to file multiple final maps on the tentative map. In providing such notice, the subdivider shall not be required to define the number or configuration of the proposed multiple maps. However, the planning commission shall approve the sequence of map approvals. The filing of a final map on a portion of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall not invalidate any part of the tentative map. Each final map which constitutes a part, or unit, of the approved tentative map shall have a separate subdivision number. The subdivision improvement agreement to be executed by the subdivider shall provide for the construction of such improvements as may be required to constitute a logical and orderly development of the whole subdivision by units. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
Chapter 17.24 - MAP REQUIREMENTS—FOUR OR LESS PARCELS 
Sections:  
Article I. - Tentative Parcel Map 
 
17.24.010 - General regulations. 
The form and contents, submittal and approval of tentative parcel maps shall conform to the provisions of this section. The tentative parcel map shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.24.020 - Form. 
The tentative map shall be clearly and legibly drawn on one sheet. The scale shall be approved by the city engineer and all lettering shall be one-eighth inch minimum in height. The final form shall be approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.24.030 - Form and content. 
A.  The tentative map shall show the following information: 
1.  Name and address of legal owner, subdivider and the person preparing the map (including registration number); 
2.  Assessor's parcel number; 
3.  Date prepared, north arrow, scale and contour interval; 
4.  Existing and proposed land use; 
5.  Title; 
6.  A vicinity map, sufficient to show the relation to the local community; 
7.  Existing topography of the site and at least one hundred feet from its boundary, including but not limited to: 
a.  Existing contours at two-foot intervals, if the existing ground slope is less than ten percent and not less than five-foot intervals for existing ground slopes greater than or equal to ten percent. Existing contours shall be represented by screened or dashed lines, 
b.  Type, circumference and dripline of existing trees as defined by Chapter 12.32 of this code on removal of significant trees on public and private property. Any trees proposed to be removed shall be so indicated, 
c.  The approximate location and outline of existing structures identified by type. Structures to be removed shall be so marked, 
d.  The location, width and direction of flow of each watercourse, 
e.  The location, pavement and right-of-way width and grade and name of existing streets or highways, 
f.  Location and type of street improvements, 
g.  The location, size and slope of existing storm drains. The location of existing overhead utility lines on peripheral streets, 
h.  The location, width and identity of existing easements; 
8.  Any improvements proposed by the owner shall be shown; 
9.  If the site is to be graded, proposed contours shall be shown or an approved grading plan shall be submitted; 
10.  The proposed lot layout and lot areas; 
11.  Proposed easements or rights-of-way; 
12.  The source and date of existing contours; 
13.  A preliminary report of title showing the current vested owner; 
14.  A soils and/or geotechnical/geology report may be required pursuant to Chapter 18.45 of this code; 
15.  A statement by the engineer or surveyor responsible for the preparation of the map shall state that all monuments are of the character and occupy the positions indicated, or that they will be set in those positions on or before a specified date and that the monuments are, or will be, sufficient to enable the survey to be retraced; 
16.  The location of each parcel and its relation to surrounding surveys; 
17.  If the map includes a "designated remainder" parcel and the gross area of the "designated remainder" parcel is five acres or more, that remainder parcel need not be shown on the map and its location need not be indicated as a matter of survey, but only by deed reference to the existing boundaries of the remainder parcel. A parcel designated as "not a part" shall be deemed to be a "designated remainder" for the purposes of this section. 
B.  The city engineer may waive any of the foregoing requirements upon finding that the location or nature of the proposed minor subdivision is such as not to necessitate compliance with these requirements; or may require additional information as deemed necessary. 
(Ord. 1176 N.S. § 6, 1994; Ord. 1143 N.S. §§ 26—28, 1993; Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.24.040 - Submission to community development department. 
Any person making a division of land for which a parcel map is required shall, in accordance with the provisions of this article, file three prints of the tentative parcel map, together with any deposits toward plan checking and review fees as may be required to the community development department. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.24.050 - Review and notice of public hearings. 
A.  The tentative parcel map shall be reviewed by the community development department for compliance to all applicable city ordinances and the State Subdivision Map Act. Upon completion of the review and upon receipt of a valid application for a tentative parcel map, the community development director, at least ten days prior to his action and determination on the map, shall cause notice to be given of the time during which public comments may be submitted to the community development director. Such notice shall include a general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description of the area affected and the street address, if any, of the property involved. The notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, published and circulated in the city in the manner prescribed in Government Code Sections 65090 and 65091. 
B.  In addition to notice by publication, the city shall give notice of the hearing by mail or delivery to all persons, including businesses, corporations or other public or private entities, shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within three hundred feet of the property which is the subject of the proposed change. 
C.  In the event that the proposed change has been requested by a person other than the property owner as such property owner is shown on the last equalized assessment roll, the city shall also give mailed notice to the owner of the property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
D.  In addition, notice shall be given by first-class mail to any person who has filed a written request with the community development director. Such a request may be submitted at any time during the calendar year and shall apply for the balance of such calendar year. The city may impose a reasonable fee on persons requesting such notice for the purpose of recovering the cost of such mailing. 
E.  Substantial compliance with these provisions therewith to notice shall be sufficient, and a technical failure to comply shall not affect the validity of any action taken pursuant to the procedures set forth in this section. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 29, 1993; Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.24.060 - Community development director action. 
The community development director shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the tentative parcel map, and shall make findings supporting his decision. In approving the application, the community development director may impose any reasonable conditions to ensure compliance. All actions of the community development director shall be final, unless appealed under the procedure Section 18.74.120 of this code. If the map is approved, it shall be signed and dated by the city engineer and the community development director. A letter of the action taken, along with any conditions imposed, shall be sent to the subdivider and engineer. If the subdivision is denied, the subdivider or engineer shall be so notified in writing with a statement of reasons for the denial. 
(Amended during 7/08 supplement; Ord. 1323 N.S. § 1, 1997: Ord. 1143 N.S. § 30, 1993: Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.24.070 - Approval or denial. 
A.  In approving or conditionally approving the tentative parcel map, the community development director shall find that the proposed subdivision, together with its provisions for its design and improvements, is consistent with applicable general or specific plans adopted by the city. 
B.  The tentative parcel map may be denied for any reason provided by city ordinances, resolutions or the State Subdivision Map Act. The community development director shall deny approval of the tentative parcel map if he makes any of the findings contained in Section 17.20.100 of this title. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 31, 1993: Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.24.080 - Approval—Conditions. 
A.  In approving the tentative parcel map, the community development director may impose as conditions of filing a parcel map any or all but not limited to the following requirements: 
1.  Frontage improvements; 
2.  On-site improvements; 
3.  Off-site improvements; 
4.  Dedications; 
5.  Applicable fees; 
6.  A soils and/or engineering geology report. 
B.  These requirements shall be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The subdivider or the engineer shall be notified in writing of all of the conditions imposed. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 32, 1993; Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.24.090 - Appeals—Subdivider. 
If the subdivider disagrees with any action by the community development director, he or she may within ten days of the decision, appeal to the planning commission with respect to the tentative map, pursuant to Section 18.64.020 et seq. of the municipal code. If the subdivider disagrees with the action by the planning commission, he or she may, within ten days of the receipt of such decision, appeal such action to the city council in accordance with Section 17.24.100 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 33, 1993: Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.24.100 - Appeals—Interested persons adversely affected. 
A.  Any interested person adversely affected by the decision of the community development director may appeal to the planning commission, pursuant to Section 18.64.020 et seq. of the municipal code, by filing an appeal with the community development director within ten days of such decision. Notice of appeal shall be in the manner prescribed in Section 18.64.060 through 18.64.100 of the municipal code. The planning commission shall either affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the community development director following the filing of such appeal. Action by the planning commission shall be final, unless there is a further appeal to the city council. Any person adversely affected by the decision of the planning commission with respect to the tentative parcel map may, within ten days of such decision, file an appeal with the city clerk. The city council shall consider the appeal within thirty days. This appeal shall be a public hearing with notice being given pursuant to Section 17.20.080 of this title and with additional notices to be given to the subdivider and to the affected interested persons. Upon conclusion of the public hearings, the city council shall within ten days declare its findings. The city council may sustain, modify, reject or overrule any recommendations or rulings of the planning commission and may make such findings as are consistent with the provisions of this section or the State Subdivision Map Act. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 34, 1993: Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.24.110 - Expiration. 
A.  The approval or conditional approval of the tentative parcel map shall expire twenty-four months from the date of its approval. 
B.  The period of time specified shall not include any period of time during which a lawsuit has been filed and is pending in a court of competent jurisdiction involving the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map only if a stay of the time period is approved by the city council. Within ten days of the service of the initial petition or complaint upon the city, the subdivider shall, in writing, to the community development director request a stay in the time period of the tentative map. Within forty days after receiving such request, the city council shall either stay the time period for up to five years or deny the requested stay. The request for the stay shall be a hearing with notice to the subdivider and to the appellant, and upon conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall, within ten days, declare its findings. 
C.  The expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map shall terminate all proceedings and no parcel map of all or any portion of the real property included within such tentative parcel map shall be filed without first processing a new tentative parcel map. 
D.  Where the time limits for a tentative map under Section 66463.5 or other section of the Subdivision Map Act would be longer than the time limits contained herein for a tentative parcel map, the longer time limits for a tentative map will apply to a tentative parcel map to the extent provided by a signed development agreement. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 35, 1993; Ord. 980 N.S. § 2, 1990; Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.24.120 - Extensions. 
A.  Request by Subdivider. The subdivider or his engineer may request an extension of the expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map by written application to the community development department. The application shall be filed prior to the expiration date and shall state the reasons for requesting the extension. 
B.  Community Development Department Action. 
1.  The community development department shall review the request for extension for approval, conditional approval or denial. In no case shall the time at which the approved or conditionally approved tentative map expires be extended more than three years beyond the date at which the original approval or conditional approval under this chapter expires, except as provided in Section 66452.6 of the Subdivision Map Act or other provisions of state law. By signed development agreement pursuant to Government Code Section 65864 through Section 675869.5, the city may require the subdivider to limit time for extensions, as provided in the development agreement. 
2.  Conditions of approval of the extension shall be in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
3.  If the community development department denies a subdivider's application for extension, the subdivider may appeal to the city council within fifteen days after the community development department has denied the extension. Appeals shall be in accordance with Section 17.20.130 of this title. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 36, 1993; Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.24.130 - Amendments to approved tentative parcel map. 
A.  Amendments to the tentative map or conditions of approval thereof may be approved by the community development department, upon application by the subdivider or on its own initiative, provided: 
1.  No lots, units or building sites are added; 
2.  Such changes are consistent with the intent of the original tentative map approval; 
3.  There are no resulting violations of this code. 
B.  Any revision shall be approved by the city engineer. The revision shall be denoted on the approved tentative map and/or in writing to the subdivider, whichever is appropriate. 
C.  Any amendment shall not affect the expiration date of the approved tentative map. 
D.  The community development director or city engineer may require a new tentative parcel map application in lieu of the procedures set out in this section when, in their opinion, requested changes are substantial enough to warrant refiling and reprocessing. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
Article II. - Parcel Maps 
 
17.24.140 - General requirements. 
The form and contents, submittal, approval and filing of parcel maps shall conform to the provisions of this chapter and the State Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.24.150 - Survey required. 
An accurate and complete survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. All monuments, property lines, centerlines of streets, alleys and easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into the survey. The allowable error of closure on any portion of the parcel map shall not exceed 1/10000 for field closures and 1/20000 for calculated closures. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.24.160 - Form. 
The form of the parcel map shall conform to final map form requirements as specified by Article III of Chapter 17.20 of this title. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.24.170 - Contents. 
A.  The contents of the parcel map shall conform to final map content requirements as specified by Article III of Chapter 17.20 of this title, and as modified herein. 
B.  Certificates shall be in accordance with Sections 66449 and 66450 of the Government Code. 
C.  Lots shall be designated by letters commencing with "A." 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 37, 1993; Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.24.180 - Preliminary submittal. 
A.  The subdivider shall submit three sets of prints of the parcel map to the city engineer for checking. The preliminary prints shall be accompanied by two copies of the data, plans, reports and documents as required for final maps by Article III of Chapter 17.20 of this title, Preliminary Submittal, and as modified herein. The city engineer may waive any of the requirements upon finding that the location and nature of the proposed subdivision is such as not to necessitate compliance with the requirements of Article III of Chapter 17.20 of this title. 
B.  Any additional information or documents required shall be as specified with the conditions of approval of the tentative map. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.24.190 - Return to subdivider's engineer for corrections. 
Upon completing preliminary check, the city engineer shall note the required corrections on the preliminary prints, reports and data and return one set to the subdivider's engineer for revision. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.24.200 - Resubmittal. 
The subdivider's engineer shall submit two sets of the revised map, reports and data to the city engineer. After checking the revisions, one set shall be returned to the subdivider's engineer marked, "Approved as Submitted," "Approved When Corrected as Noted" or "Revise and Resubmit." 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.24.210 - Planning commission approval. 
Upon receipt of an approved print, the subdivider shall submit the original tracing of the revised map, prepared in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter and corrected to its final form, and signed by all parties required by the Map Act and this chapter to execute the certificates on the map, to the planning commission. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.24.220 - Filing with county recorder. 
The city clerk or authorized agent shall transmit the approved parcel map directly to the county recorder. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.24.230 - Waiver of requirements. 
A.  The community development director may waive the parcel map for the following: 
1.  Division of real property or interests therein created by probate eminent domain procedures, partition or other civil judgments or decrees; or 
2.  A division of property resulting from the conveyance of land, or interest therein, to a public agency for a public purpose, such as school sites, public building sites or rights-of-way for streets, sewers, utilities, drainage, etc.; or 
3.  The community development director may waive the parcel map upon making a finding that the proposed division of land complies with requirements as to area, improvement and design, flood water drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection and other requirements of this chapter, local ordinance and the Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  Upon waiving the parcel map requirement, the city engineer shall cause to be filed with the county recorder a certificate of compliance for the land to be divided. 
C.  A parcel map waived by the community development director may be conditioned to provide for payment of park, drainage and other fees by a method approved by the community development director. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
Chapter 17.28 - LAND DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS 
Sections: 
 
17.28.010 - Required dedications designated. 
A.  As a condition of approval of a final map or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all parcels of land within the subdivision that are needed for streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters' rights, easements and other public easements, including open space, drainage and utility easements. In addition, the subdivider shall improve or agree to improve all streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters' rights, drainage, public utility easements and other public easements. 
B.  Dedication of, or offers to dedicate interest in real property for specified public purposes shall be made by a statement on the final map, signed and acknowledged by those parties having any record title interest in the real property being subdivided, subject to the provisions of Section 66436 of the Subdivision Map Act, and in addition, if directed by the city engineer, by a certificate or certificates pursuant to Section 66477.5 of the Subdivision Map Act. In the event any street shown on the final map is not offered for dedication, the statement may contain a declaration to this effect. If the statement appears on a final map and if the map is approved by the city council, the use of the street or streets by the public shall be permissive only. An offer of dedication of real property for street or public utility easement purposes shall be deemed not to include any public utility facilities located on or under the real property unless, and only to the extent that, an intent to dedicate the facilities is expressly declared in the statement. 
C.  Improvements shall be in accordance with Chapter 17.32 of this title. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 38, 1993: Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.28.020 - Waiver of direct street access. 
A.  The city may require as a condition of approval of any subdivision the waiver of direct access rights to proposed or existing streets from any property within the subdivision and abutting thereon. 
B.  Any such waiver shall become effective in accordance with its provisions and shall be contained in the owners certificate of the final map or parcel map. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
Article I. - Park Land Dedication 
 
17.28.030 - Statutory authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the Subdivision Map Act of the state. The park and recreational facilities for which dedication of land and/or payment of a fee is required by this chapter agree in accordance with the park and bikeways master plan (recreation element) of the city, adopted by the city on March 2, 1983, and any amendments thereto. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.28.040 - Prerequisite to map approval. 
As a condition of approval of a final subdivision map or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or both, at the option of the city, for park or recreational purposes at the time and according to the standards and formula contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.28.050 - Acreage required—Per number of persons. 
It is found and determined that the public interest, convenience, health, welfare and safety require that ten acres of property for each one thousand persons residing within the city be devoted to local park and recreational purposes. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.28.060 - Acreage required—Formula. 
Where a park or recreational facility has been designated in the city's park and bikeways master plan, an element of the general plan of the city, and is to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall dedicate land for a local park sufficient in size and topography to serve the residents of the subdivision. The amount of land to be provided shall be determined pursuant to the following standards and formula: 
Formula Based on Population Estimate 
Single-family (R-1 density): 
Using: 3.36 per dwelling unit and 3 acres per 1,000 persons 
Then: 3.36 persons 	× 	 3 acres  	=.010 acres/D.U. 
D.U.  		1,000 persons 	
 
Multifamily (R-2 density and above): 
Using: 2.94 persons 	× 	 3 acres  	= .0088 acres/D.U. 
D.U.  		1,000 persons 	
 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.28.070 - Fees in lieu of land dedication—General formula. 
If there is no park or recreational facility designated in the city's park and bikeways master plan to be located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the subdivision the subdivider shall, in lieu of dedicating land, pay a fee equal to the value of the land prescribed for dedication in Section 17.28.060 hereof and in an amount determined in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.28.110 of this chapter, such fee to be used for a local park which will serve the residents of the area being subdivided. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.28.080 - Fees in lieu of land dedication—Fifty parcels or less. 
If the proposed subdivision contains fifty parcels or less, the subdivider shall pay a fee equal to the land value of the portion of the local park required to serve the needs of the residents of the proposed subdivision as prescribed in Section 17.28.060 of this chapter, and in an amount determined in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.28.110 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.28.090 - Fees in lieu of land dedication—Use of money. 
The money collected under this chapter shall be used only for the purpose of providing park or recreational facilities reasonably related to serving the subdivision by way of the purchase of necessary land or, if the park public works director deems that there is sufficient land available in the subdivision, for improving of such and for park and recreational purposes. 
(Ord. 1215 N.S. § 1, 1995: Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.28.100 - Both dedication and fee required—When. 
In subdivisions of over fifty lots, the subdivider shall both dedicate land and pay a fee in lieu thereof in accordance with the following formula: 
A.  When only a portion of the land to be subdivided is proposed in the city's park and bikeways master plan as the site for a local park, such portion shall be dedicated for local park purposes and a fee computed pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.28.110 of this chapter shall be paid for any additional land that would have been required to be dedicated pursuant to Section 17.28.060. 
B.  When a major part of the local park or recreational site has already been acquired by the city and only a small portion of land is needed from the subdivision to complete the site, such remaining portion shall be dedicated and a fee computed pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.28.110 of this chapter shall be paid in an amount equal to the value of the land which would otherwise have been required to be dedicated pursuant to Section 17.28.060 of this chapter, such fees to be used for the improvement of the existing park and recreational facility or for the improvement of other local parks and recreational facilities in the area serving the subdivision. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.28.110 - Amount of fee in lieu of park land dedication. 
A.  When a fee is required to be paid in lieu of park land dedication, the amount of such fee shall be based upon the average estimated fair market value of the land being subdivided. 
B.  The fair market value shall be as determined by the community development department based upon the average estimated fair market value of the land in its subdivided form. Such determination shall be made at the time of final map or parcel map approval. If the subdivider objects to the fair market value determination, the subdivider may request the city to obtain an appraisal of the property by a qualified real estate appraiser mutually agreed upon by the city and the subdivider, which appraisal will be considered by the city in determining the fair market value. All costs required to obtain such appraisal shall be borne by the subdivider. 
C.  The amount of fee to be paid in lieu of park land dedication shall be the value of the land which would otherwise be required to be dedicated pursuant to Section 17.28.060 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.28.120 - Determination of land or fee—Criteria. 
A.  Whether the city accepts land dedication or elects to require payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, shall be determined by consideration of the following: 
1.  Recreation element of the city's general plan; 
2.  Topography, geology, access and location of land in the subdivision available for dedication; 
3.  Size and shape of the subdivision and land available for dedication; 
4.  Feasibility of dedication; 
5.  Availability of previously acquired park property. 
B.  The determination of the city as to whether land shall be dedicated, or whether a fee shall be charged, or a combination thereof, shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.28.130 - Credit for private recreation or open space—Replacement of existing development. 
A.  Where a substantial private park and recreational area is provided in a proposed subdivision and such space is to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision, credit shall be given against the requirement of land dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof if the public works director finds that all the following standards are met: 
1.  That yards, court areas, setbacks and other open areas required to be maintained by the zoning and building ordinances and regulations shall not be included in the computation of such private open space; 
2.  That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by the reported written agreement, conveyance or restrictions; 
3.  That the use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenant, which runs with the land in favor of the future owners of property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the city or its successor; 
4.  That the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access and location; 
5.  That facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial accordance with the provisions of the recreational element of the general plan; and 
6.  That the open space for which credit is given is a minimum of two acres and provides a minimum of four of the local park basic elements listed below, or a combination of such and other recreational improvements that will meet the specific recreational park needs of the future residents of the area: 
Criteria List 	Acres 
Children's play apparatus area 	.50— .75 
Landscape park-like and quiet areas 	.50—1.00 
Family picnic area 	.25— .75 
Game court area 	.25— .50 
Turf playfield 	1.00—3.00 
Swim pool (42' × 75' with adjacent deck 	
and lawn areas) 	.25— .50 
Recreation center building 	.15— .25 
 
B.  Where the proposed subdivision will replace existing previously occupied dwelling units, credits shall be given against the requirement of land dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof if the public works director finds that existing previously occupied dwelling units will be removed. Credit shall be given on a unit-by-unit basis. 
C.  Before credit is given the public works director shall make written findings that the standards set out in subsections A and B of this section are met. 
(Ord. 1215 N.S. § 2, 1995: Ord. 848 N.S. § 3, 1987: Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.28.140 - Determination of land or fee—Procedure. 
A.  At the time of approval of the tentative subdivision map, the public works director shall determine, after a report, pursuant to Section 17.28.120 of this chapter, whether the land is to be dedicated or in lieu fees are to be paid by the subdivider or any combination of land and fees. 
B.  The recommendation by the public works director shall include the following: 
1.  The amount of land required; or 
2.  That a fee be charged in lieu of land; or 
3.  That land and a fee be required; and/or 
4.  That a stated amount of credit be given for private recreation facilities or unique natural and special features, etc.; 
5.  The location of the park land to be dedicated or use of in lieu fees; 
6.  The approximate time when development of the park or recreation facility shall commence. 
C.  This action shall be reviewed by the planning commission for concurrence. If concurrence is not obtained, this matter will be forwarded to the city council for final determination. In making its determination, the council shall be guided by the same standards contained in this chapter where applicable. 
D.  At the time of the filing of the final subdivision map, the subdivider shall dedicate the land and/or pay the fees as determined by the city. 
E.  Open space covenants for private park or recreational facilities shall be submitted to the city prior to approval of the final subdivision map and shall be recorded concurrently with the final subdivision map. 
(Ord. 1215 N.S. § 3, 1995: Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.28.150 - Exempt developments and projects. 
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to industrial/commercial subdivisions, condominium projects or stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building, which is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are added. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
Article II. - School Site Dedication 
 
17.28.160 - Prerequisite to map approval. 
As a condition of approval of a final subdivision map, a subdivider who develops or completes the development of one or more subdivisions within a school district shall dedicate to the school district such lands as the city council deems to be necessary for the purpose of constructing, thereon, schools necessary to assure the residents of the subdivision adequate elementary school service. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.28.170 - School district—Commitment requirements. 
The requirement of dedication shall be imposed at the time of approval of the tentative map. If within thirty days after the requirement of dedication is imposed by the city the school district does not offer to enter into a binding commitment with the subdivider to accept the dedication, the requirement shall be automatically terminated. The required dedication may be made any time before, concurrently with or up to sixty days after the filing of the final map. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.28.180 - School district—Payments to subdivider for site dedication. 
The school district shall, if it accepts the dedication, repay to the subdivider or his successors the original cost to the subdivider of the dedicated land, plus a sum equal to the total of the following amounts: 
A.  The cost of any improvements to the dedicated land from the date of the school district's offer to enter into the binding commitment to accept the dedication; 
B.  The taxes assessed against the dedicated land from the date of the school district's offer to enter into the binding commitment to accept the dedication; 
C.  Any other costs incurred by the subdivider in maintenance of such dedicated land, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering such land. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
Article III. - Reservation of Land 
 
17.28.190 - Prerequisite to map approval. 
As a condition of approval of a map, the subdivider shall reserve sites, appropriate in area and location, for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses according to the standards and formula contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.28.200 - General standards. 
Where a park, recreational facility, fire station, library or other public use is shown on an adopted specific plan or adopted general plan containing a community facilities element, recreation element and/or a public building element, the subdivider may be required by the city to reserve sites as so determined by the city in accordance with the definite principles and standards contained in the specific plan or general plan. The reserved area must be of such size and shape as to permit the balance of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in an orderly and efficient manner. The amount of land to be reserved shall not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible. The reserved area shall conform to the adopted specific plan or general plan and shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as to permit an efficient division of the reserved area in the event that it is not acquired within the prescribed period. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.28.210 - Public agencies—Agreement to acquire. 
The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall, at the time of approval of the final map or parcel map, enter into a binding agreement to acquire such reserved area within two years after the completion and acceptance of all improvements, unless such period of time is extended by mutual agreement. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.28.220 - Public agencies—Payment to subdivider. 
The purchase price shall be the market value thereof at the time of the filing of the tentative map plus the taxes against such reserved area from the date of the reservation and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of such reserved area, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering such reserved area. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.28.230 - Termination of agreements. 
If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not enter into such a binding agreement, the reservation of such area shall automatically terminate. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
Chapter 17.32 - IMPROVEMENTS AND IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
17.32.010 - General requirements. 
A.  The subdivider shall construct all required improvements both on- and off-site according to approved standards. 
B.  No final map shall be presented to the council or parcel maps to the city engineer for approval until the subdivider either completes the required improvements, or enters into an agreement with the city agreeing to do such work. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.32.020 - Improvements—Required conditions. 
A.  General Requirements. 
1.  All improvements as may be required as conditions of approval of the tentative map or city ordinance, together with but not limited to, the following shall be required of all subdivisions. 
2.  Requirements for construction of on-site and off-site improvements for subdivisions of four or less parcels shall be noted on the parcel map, or waiver of parcel map or the subdivision improvement agreement recorded prior to or concurrent with the parcel map. 
3.  Completion of improvements shall be in accordance with Sections 17.32.260 and 17.32.270 of this chapter. 
B.  Storm Drainage. Stormwater runoff from the subdivision shall be collected and conveyed by an approved storm drain system. The storm drain system shall be designed for ultimate development of the watershed. The storm drain system shall provide for the protection of abutting and off-site properties that would be adversely affected by any increase in runoff attributed to the development; off-site storm drain improvements may be required to satisfy this requirement. 
C.  Sanitary Sewers. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by an approved sanitary sewer system. 
D.  Water Supply. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by an approved domestic water system. 
E.  Utilities. 
1.  Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by gas (if required), electric, telephone and cablevision facilities. All utilities within the subdivision and along peripheral streets shall be placed underground except those facilities exempted by the Public Utilities Commission regulations. 
2.  For subdivision of five or more parcels, the developer may appeal the undergrounding requirement along peripheral streets to the city council. Such appeal shall be in accordance with Sections 17.20.130 through 17.20.160 of this title. The appeal shall be accompanied by an estimate from each utility company for the approximate cost per linear foot and total cost to underground its facilities along the peripheral street. The developer shall pay all fees as may be charged by each utility company to make the required estimate. 
3.  The city council may, at its discretion, accept a fee in lieu of the undergrounding of existing facilities along peripheral streets. The amount of fee shall not be less than the amount established by the city engineer for the normal cost of undergrounding of existing utilities along residential streets. In-lieu fees shall be deposited in a special undergrounding account to be used as approved by the city council for future under grounding of utilities through the city. 
4.  For subdivisions where the ultimate development potential is four or fewer lots, undergrounding is not required for fully developed properties and for partially developed or undeveloped properties, the underground requirements may be waived or modified by the city engineer upon finding: 
a.  The subdivision is within an area where existing utilities have not been undergrounded; 
b.  Overhead utilities will have no significant visual impact. 
5.  If the undergrounding requirement is waived as allowed by the findings set out in subsections (E)(4)(a) and (E)(4)(b) of this section, the in lieu fee as established by the city engineer shall be paid. 
(Ord. 1323 N.S. § 2, 1997; Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.32.030 - Design—General requirements. 
The design and layout of all required improvements both on- and off-site, private and public, shall conform to generally acceptable engineering standards and to such standards as are approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.32.040 - Design—Energy conservation. 
A.  The design of a subdivision for which a tentative map is required, pursuant to Chapter 17.16 of this title, shall provide, to the extent feasible, for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision. 
B.  Examples of passive or natural heating opportunities in subdivision design include design of lot size and configuration to permit orientation of a structure in an east-west alignment for southern exposure. 
C.  Examples of passive or natural cooling opportunities in subdivision design include design of lot size and configuration to permit orientation of a structure to take advantage of shade or prevailing breezes. 
D.  In providing for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the design of a subdivision, consideration shall be given to local climate, to contour, to configuration of the parcel to be subdivided, and to other design and improvement requirements, and such provision shall not result in reducing allowable densities or the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or structure under applicable planning and zoning in force at the time the tentative map is filed. 
E.  The requirements for this chapter do not apply to condominium projects which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing building when no new structures are added. 
F.  For the purpose of this chapter, "feasible" means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social and technological factors. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.32.050 - Design—Access. 
A.  The subdivision shall abut upon or have an approved access to a public street. 
B.  Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall have an approved access to a public or private street. 
C.  Street layout shall be designed to provide for future access to, and not impose undue hardship upon, property adjoining the subdivision. 
D.  Reserve strips, or non-access at the end of streets or at the boundaries of subdivisions, shall be dedicated unconditionally to the city when required. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.32.060 - Improvement plans—General requirements. 
A.  Improvement plans shall be prepared under the direction of and signed by a registered civil engineer licensed by the state. 
B.  Improvement plans shall include but not be limited to grading, storm drains, landscaping, streets and related facilities. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.32.070 - Improvement plans—Form—Specifications. 
A.  Plans, profiles and details shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced on twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch sheets. The blank sheets shall be provided by the city. 
B.  Plan and profiles shall be drawn to the scale of one inch equals forty feet or larger unless approved by the city engineer. Details shall be drawn to such scale that clearly shows the facility being constructed. The scales for various portions of the plans shall be shown on each sheet. 
C.  A vicinity map shall be shown on the first sheet of all sets of plans. 
D.  A north arrow shall be shown on each sheet when applicable. 
E.  Plans shall be laid out to orient north to the top or right edge of the sheet unless approved otherwise by the city engineer. 
F.  All lettering shall be one-eighth-inch minimum. 
G.  If the plans include three or more sheets, a cover sheet showing the streets, lots, easements, storm drains, index and vicinity map shall be included. 
H.  The form of all plans shall conform to such additional requirements as may be established by the city engineer. The final form of all plans shall be as approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.32.080 - Improvement plans—Contents. 
A.  The improvement plans shall show complete plans, profiles and details for all required improvements to be constructed, both public and private (including common areas). 
B.  Reference may be made to the city's or state's standard plans in lieu of duplicating the drawings thereon. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.32.090 - Improvement plans—Supplementary plans and calculations. 
Hydrology, hydraulic plans and calculations, bond estimates and any structural calculations as may be required, shall be submitted with the improvement plans to the city engineer. All calculations shall be legible, systematic and signed and dated by a registered civil engineer licensed by the state and in a form as approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.32.100 - Improvement plans—Submission—Review. 
The subdivider shall submit two sets of improvement plans and two copies of all computations to the city engineer for review. Upon completion of his review, one set of the preliminary plans, with the required revisions indicated thereon, will be returned to the subdivider's engineer. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.32.110 - Improvement plans—Approval. 
A.  After completing all required revisions, the subdivider's engineer shall transmit the originals of the improvement plans to the city engineer for his signature. 
B.  Upon finding that all required revisions have been made and that the plans conform to all applicable city ordinances, and conditions of approval of the tentative map, the city engineer shall sign and date the plans. The originals shall be retained by the city and a reproducible copy sent to the subdivider's engineer. 
C.  Approval by the city engineer shall in no way relieve the subdivider or his engineer from responsibility for the design of the improvements and for any deficiencies resulting from the design thereof or from any required conditions of approval for the tentative map. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.32.120 - Revisions to approved plans—Subdivider's request. 
Requests by the subdivider or the engineer for revisions to the approved plans appearing necessary or desirable during construction shall be submitted in writing to the city engineer and shall be accompanied by two sets of revised drawings showing the proposed revision. If the revision is acceptable, the reproducible copies shall be submitted to the city engineer's office for initialing. The copies shall be returned to the subdivider's engineer. Construction of any proposed revision will not be permitted to commence until revised plans have been signed by the city. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.32.130 - Revisions to approved plans—City engineer's request. 
When revisions are deemed necessary by the city engineer to protect public health and safety, or as field conditions may require, a request in writing shall be made to the subdivider and his engineer. The subdivider's engineer shall revise the reproducible copies and transmit the copies to the city engineer for initialing within such time as specified by the city engineer. Construction of all or any portion of the improvements may be stopped by the city engineer until revised drawings have been signed by the city. 
B.  The subdivider may appeal revisions required by the city engineer to the city council by filing an appeal with the city clerk within two working days following receipt of the request to revise the plans. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.32.140 - Deferred improvement agreements—Subdivisions of four or less parcels. 
A.  The frontage improvements along existing peripheral streets may be deferred when deemed necessary by the planning commission. Deferral may be allowed when the city engineer finds that construction is impractical due to physical constraints, or the surrounding neighborhood is absent of similar improvements. When improvements are deferred, the subdivider shall enter into an agreement with the city for the installation of all frontage improvements at such time in the future as required by the city. The agreement shall provide: 
1.  Construction of such improvements shall commence within ninety days of the receipt of the notice to proceed from the city; 
2.  In event of default by the owner, his successors or assigns, the city is authorized to cause such construction to be done and charge the entire cost and expense to the owner, his successors or assigns, including interest from the date of notice of such cost and expense until paid; 
3.  This agreement shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder at the expense of the owner and shall constitute notice to all successors and assigns of the title to such real property of the obligation herein set forth, and also a lien in such amount as will fully reimburse the city, including interest as herein above set forth, subject to foreclosure in event of default in payment. 
4.  In the event of litigation occasioned by any default of the owner, his successors or assigns, the owner, his successors or assigns agree to pay all costs involved, including reasonable attorney's fees, and that the same shall become a part of the lien against such real property. 
5.  The term "owner" includes not only the present owner but also his heirs, successors, executors, administrators and assigns, it being the intent of the parties hereto that the obligations herein undertaken shall run with the real property and constitute a lien there against. 
B.  The agreement shall not relieve the owner from any other requirements specified herein. The construction of deferred improvements shall conform to the provisions of this title and all applicable sections of this code in effect at the time of construction. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.32.150 - Deferred improvement agreements—Remainders. 
For a designated remainder parcel described in this title, the fulfillment of construction requirements for improvements shall not be required until a permit or other grant of approval for development of the remainder parcel shall be issued by the city or until the construction of the improvements is required pursuant to an agreement between the subdivider and the city, or until a certificate of compliance is required. In the absence of that agreement, the city may require fulfillment of the construction requirements within a reasonable time following approval of the final map and prior to issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of a remainder parcel upon the finding of the city that fulfillment of the construction requirements is necessary for reasons of: 
A.  The public health and safety; or 
B.  The required construction is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area. 
A designated remainder may subsequently be sold without any further requirement for the filing of a parcel map or a final map, although the city may require a certificate of compliance or a conditional certificate of compliance with which improvements designated by the city engineer are mandatory. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 39, 1993)  
17.32.160 - Improvement agreement—Preparation—Contents. 
The agreement shall be prepared and signed by the city engineer and approved as to form by the city attorney. The agreement shall provide for: 
A.  Construction of all improvements per the approved plans and specifications; 
B.  Completion of improvements within the time specified by Section 17.32.260 of this chapter; 
C.  Right by city to modify plans and specifications; 
D.  Warranty by subdivider that construction will not adversely affect any portion of adjacent properties; 
E.  Payment of inspection fees in accordance with the city's resolution establishing fees and charges. 
F.  Payment of in-lieu fees for undergrounding of utilities on peripheral streets; payment of in-lieu fees for park dedication; 
G.  Payment of drainage fees; 
H.  Improvement security as required by this chapter; 
I.  Maintenance and repair of any defects or failures and causes thereof; 
J.  Release of the city from all liability incurred by the development and payment of all reasonable attorney's fees that the city may incur because of any legal action arising from the development; 
K.  Any other deposits, fees or conditions as required by city ordinance or resolution and as may be required by the city engineer; 
L.  Reimbursement of provisions, if applicable, as further addressed in Section 17.32.165 below. 
(Ord. 1604 N.S. § 1, 2003; Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.32.165 - Improvement agreement—Reimbursement provisions. 
Whenever an applicant is required, as a condition of approval for a development permit, to construct any facility or improvement (or a portion thereof) which facility or improvement is determined by the city to exceed the need directly attributable to and reasonably related to the given development project, a reimbursement provision shall be offered to the applicant. The provision shall govern reimbursements for actual construction costs, and shall be applied with respect to that portion of the improvement or facility which exceeds the need therefor caused by the development. 
(Ord. 1604 N.S. § 2, 2003)  
17.32.170 - Improvement agreement—Security required. 
A.  Any improvement agreement, contract or act required or authorized by the Subdivision Map Act, for which security is required, shall be secured in accordance with Section 66499 of the Government Code of the state, and as provided herein. The form of performance bonds shall be as described in Section 66499.1 of the Subdivision Map Act or a substitute prescribed by the city engineer. The form of labor and material bond shall be as described in Section 66499.2 of the Subdivision Map Act or a substitute prescribed by the city engineer. The amounts of performance and labor and materials bonds shall be as described in Section 66493 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  No final map or parcel map shall be signed by the city engineer or recorded until all improvement securities required by this chapter have been received and approved. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 40, 1993; Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.32.180 - Security—Types. 
A.  The form of security shall be one or the combination of the following at the option and subject to the approval of the city: 
1.  Bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties; 
2.  A deposit, either with the local agency or a responsible escrow agent or trust company, at the option of the city, or money or negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing deposits of public moneys; 
3.  An instrument of credit or a set aside letter from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the state or federal government and pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed for payment. 
B.  The provisions of the bond or bonds shall be in accordance with Sections 66499.1 and 66499.2 of the State Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.32.190 - Security—Amount. 
A.  A performance bond or security in the amount of one hundred percent of the estimated construction cost to guarantee the construction or installation of all improvements shall be required of all subdivisions. An additional amount of one hundred percent of the estimated construction cost shall be required to guarantee the payment to the subdivider's contractor, subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment for the construction or installation of improvements. 
B.  If a set aside is used as security, an additional twenty percent of the estimated construction cost will be required in addition to the one hundred fifty percent as stated in subsection A of this section. 
C.  The estimate of improvement costs shall be as approved by the city engineer and shall provide for: 
1.  Not less than five percent nor more than ten percent of the total construction cost for contingencies; 
2.  Increase for projected inflation computed to the estimated midpoint of construction; 
3.  All utility installation costs or a certification acceptable to the city engineer from the utility company that adequate security has been deposited to insure installation; 
4.  In addition to the full amount of the security, there shall be included costs and reasonable expenses and fees, including attorney's fees, incurred in enforcing the obligation secured. 
(Ord. 1228 N.S. § 18, 1995; Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.32.200 - Security—Cash deposits. 
The developer shall deposit with the city not less than one thousand dollars cash for subdivisions of four or less parcels, and three thousand dollars for other subdivisions, or such additional amount as required by the city engineer, not to exceed one percent of the construction cost. The deposit may be used at the discretion of the city to correct deficiencies and conditions caused by the subdivider or his contractor that may arise during or after the construction of the subdivision. Any unexpended amount will be returned to the developer at the time all bonds are released. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.32.210 - Security—For warranty period. 
Upon acceptance of the subdivision improvements by the city council, the subdivider shall provide security in the amount as required by the city engineer to guarantee the improvements throughout the warranty period. The amount of the warranty security shall be not less than fifty percent of the cost of the construction of the improvements, including the cash bond which shall be retained for the one-year warranty period. In hillside areas, the warranty security shall be not less than one hundred percent of the construction cost of improvements. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.32.220 - Security—Reduction conditions. 
The city engineer may authorize in writing the release of a portion of the security in conjunction with the acceptance of the satisfactory completion of a part of the improvements as the work progresses upon application by the subdivider, but in no case shall the security be reduced to less than fifty percent of the total improvement security given for faithful performance. The amount of reduction of the security shall be as determined by the city engineer; however, in no event shall the city engineer authorize a release of the improvement security which would reduce such security to an amount below that required to guarantee the completion of the improvements and any other obligation imposed by this title, the Subdivision Map Act, or the improvement agreement. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.32.230 - Security—Release conditions. 
A.  The performance security shall be released only upon acceptance of the improvements by the city and when an approved warranty security has been filed with the city engineer. 
B.  Security given to secure payment to the contractor, subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor, materials and equipment shall, after passage of the time within which claims of lien are required to be recorded pursuant to Article III (commencing with Section 3114) of Chapter 2 of Title 15 of Part IV, Division 3 of the Civil Code, be reduced to an amount equal to the total claimed by all claimants for whom claims of lien have been recorded and notice thereof given in writing to the city council, and if no such claims have been recorded, the securities shall be released in full. 
C.  The warranty security shall be released upon satisfactory completion of the warranty period provided: 
1.  All deficiencies appearing on the warranty deficiency list for the subdivision have been corrected; 
2.  Not less than twelve months have elapsed since the acceptance of the improvements by the city council. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 41, 1993; Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.32.235 - Reimbursement to companies for underground utilities. 
When the city imposes a condition of approval of a tentative map or a parcel map, a requirement that necessitates replacing, undergrounding or permanently or temporarily relocating existing facilities of a telephone corporation or cable television system, the developer or subdivider shall reimburse the telephone corporation or cable television system for all costs for the replacement, undergrounding or relocation. All these costs shall be billed after they are incurred and shall include a credit for any required advance payments and for the salvage value of any facilities replaced. In no event shall the telephone corporation or cable television system be reimbursed for costs incurred in excess of the cost to replace the facilities with substantially similar facilities. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 42, 1993)  
17.32.240 - Construction standards. 
A.  The construction methods and materials for all improvements shall conform to the standard specifications of the city as adopted by council resolution. The general provisions of the city's standard specifications shall apply to the developer where applicable. 
B.  Construction shall not commence until required improvement plans have been approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.32.250 - Inspection requirements—Deficiencies. 
A.  General Regulations. All improvements are subject to inspection by the city engineer or authorized personnel in accordance with the city's standard specifications. 
B.  Preconstruction Conference. Prior to commencing any construction, the developer shall arrange for a preconstruction conference with the city engineer. 
C.  Final Inspection and Deficiency List. 
1.  Upon completion of the subdivision improvements, the developer shall apply in writing to the city engineer for a preliminary final inspection. The city engineer or authorized representative shall schedule a preliminary final inspection. 
2.  A deficiency list shall be compiled during the inspection, noting all corrections or any additional work required. If the number of items are excessive or the subdivision appears incomplete, the preliminary final inspection may be halted and rescheduled on a date as determined by the city engineer or authorized representative. 
3.  When the preliminary final inspection has been completed, a copy of the deficiency list shall be transmitted to the developer for correction. 
4.  Upon having completed all corrections or additional work as outlined by the deficiency list, the developer shall certify in writing that all corrections have been completed satisfactorily and request a final inspection. The city engineer or authorized representative shall then make a final inspection. 
5.  Upon finding that all items on the deficiency list have been corrected and receipt of as-built improvement plans, the subdivision shall be placed on the council agenda for acceptance. 
6.  The completion of corrections indicated by the deficiency list shall not relieve the developer from the responsibility of correcting any deficiency not shown on the list that may be subsequently discovered. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.32.260 - Completion deadlines for improvements. 
A.  The subdivision improvements shall be completed by the developer within eighteen months, or such time as approved by the city engineer, not to exceed a period of twenty-four months, from the recording of the final map, unless an extension is granted by the city council. 
B.  Should the subdivider fail to complete the improvements within the specified time, the city may by resolution of the council and at its option, cause any or all uncompleted improvements to be completed and the parties executing the surety or sureties shall be firmly bound for the payment of all necessary costs therefor. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.32.270 - Extensions. 
A.  The completion date may be extended by the city council upon written request by the developer and the submittal of adequate evidence to justify the extension. The request shall be made not less than thirty days prior to expiration of the subdivision improvement agreement. 
B.  The subdivider shall enter into a subdivision improvement extension agreement with the city. If approved by the city council, the mayor shall execute the agreement on behalf of the city. 
C.  In consideration of a subdivision improvement extension agreement, the following may be required: 
1.  Revision of improvement plans to provide for current design and construction standards when required by the city engineer; 
2.  Revised improvement construction estimates to reflect current improvement costs as approved by the city engineer; 
3.  Increase of improvement securities in accordance with revised construction estimates; 
4.  Inspection fees may be increased to reflect current construction costs, but shall not be subject to any decrease or refund. 
B.  The city council may impose additional requirements as recommended by the city engineer or as it may deem necessary as a condition to approving any time extension for the completion of improvements. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.32.280 - Acceptance of improvements. 
A.  General Requirements. 
1.  When all improvement deficiencies have been corrected and as-built improvement plans filed, the subdivision improvements shall be considered by the city council for acceptance. 
2.  Acceptance of the improvements shall imply only that the improvements have been completed satisfactorily and that public improvements have been accepted for public use. 
B.  Notice of Completion. If the subdivision has been accepted by the city, the city clerk shall cause to be filed with the county recorder a notice of completion. 
C.  Acceptance of a Portion of the Improvements. 
1.  When requested by the subdivider in writing, the city may consider acceptance of a portion of the improvements as recommended by the city engineer. The improvements will be accepted by the city only if it finds that it is in the public interest and such improvements are for the use of the general public. 
2.  Acceptance of a portion of the improvements shall not relieve the developer from any other requirements imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.32.290 - Reconveyance of dedications. 
A.  The city, when property is dedicated in fee for public purposes, or for making public improvements or constructing public facilities, other than for open space, parks or schools, shall record a certificate with the county recorder, attached to the map and which shall contain the information: 
1.  The name and address of the subdivider dedicating the property; 
2.  A legal description of the real property dedicated; 
3.  A statement by the city that the city shall reconvey the property to the subdivider if the city makes the determination that the same public purpose for which the property was dedicated does not exist, or the property or any portion thereof is not needed for public utilities. 
B.  The subdivider may request that the city make the determination that the same public purpose for which the dedication was required still exists, after payment of a fee which shall not exceed the amount reasonably required to make the determination. The determination may be made in reference to the city capital improvement program, the General Plan, a specific plan, the subdivision map or other public documents. 
C.  If the city determines that the same public purpose for which the dedication was required does not exist, the city shall reconvey the property to the subdivider or a successor in interest except for any or all portions of the property which is required for that same purpose or for public utilities. 
D.  If the city decides to vacate, lease, sell or otherwise dispose of the dedicated property, the city shall give at least sixty days notice to the subdivider whose name appears on the certificate before vacating, leasing, selling or otherwise disposing of the dedicated property. This notice is not required if the dedicated property will be used for the same public property for which it was dedicated. 
E.  This section shall apply only to property required to be dedicated on or after January 1, 1990. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 43, 1993)  
17.32.293 - City review of subdivision improvement plans. 
A.  An improvement plan being processed in conjunction with either an approved tentative parcel map or final map shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer and acted on with sixty working days of its submittal, except that at least fifteen working days shall be provided for processing any resubmitted improvement plan. The sixty working-day period shall not include any days during which the improvement plan has been returned to the applicant for correction, has been subject to review by other than the local agency or, following that review, has been returned to the applicant for correction. 
B.  The time limits specified in this section for acting on improvement plans may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the city council. The city council will not require routine waiver of time limits as a condition of accepting the improvement plan, except for the purpose of permitting concurrent processing of other requirements related to the improvement plan or map. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 44, 1993)  
17.32.295 - Compensation for excessive dedication. 
Compensation for excessive dedications shall be governed by the provisions of Section 66475.4 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 45, 1993)  
Chapter 17.34 - STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL AND PRIVATE STREETS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2135, § 3(Exh. A), adopted May 20, 2015, amended Ch. 17.34 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 17.34, §§ 17.34.010—17.34.060, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. 1277 N.S., adopted in 1996; Ord. 1285 N.S. (part), adopted in 1996; and Ord. No. 1992 N.S., Exh. A, adopted Oct. 6, 2010. 
 
17.34.010 - Local street standards—General requirements. 
All local streets providing access to residential developments shall be constructed to conform to the street design standards as maintained by the director of public works. An exception to the street width and right-of-way requirement may be approved provided such streets are constructed in accordance with the requirements contained in this chapter. The street design standards establish minimum dimensions and design requirements for primary residential streets, secondary residential streets, culs-de-sac, and rural residential streets as defined below. 
(Ord. No. 2135, § 3(Exh. A), 5-20-2015)  
17.34.020 - Primary residential streets. 
All Primary residential streets are defined as those streets where anticipated traffic volume would exceed one thousand vehicles per day. All such streets shall be designed and improved by the developer to provide two travel lanes and two parking lanes as follows: 
A.  The total street section shall be sixty feet in width. Sidewalk and park strip may be provided either within the public right-of-way or within a public access/service easement on an adjoining property. Surface roadbed must be forty feet in width from curb to curb; 
B.  Detached sidewalks and park strips required; 
C.  Parking shall be allowed on both sides of the street. 
(Ord. No. 2135, § 3(Exh. A), 5-20-2015)  
17.34.030 - Secondary residential streets. 
Secondary residential streets are defined as those streets where traffic volumes would not exceed one thousand vehicles per day. All such streets shall be designed and improved by the developer to the Primary residential street standard or as follows: 
A.  The total street section shall be shall be fifty-six feet in width. Sidewalk and park strip may be provided either within the public right-of-way or within a public access/service easement on an adjoining property. Surface roadbed shall be thirty-six feet from curb to curb; 
B.  Detached sidewalks and park strips required; 
C.  Parking shall be allowed on both sides of the street. 
(Ord. No. 2135, § 3(Exh. A), 5-20-2015)  
17.34.040 - Cul-de-sacs. 
Residential Cul-De-Sac Streets Serving No More Than Twenty Single or Multi-Family Units. All such streets shall be designed and improved by the developer to the secondary street standard or as follows: 
A.  Publicly accessible right-of-way shall be fifty-six feet minimum in width. Sidewalk and park strip may be provided either within the public right-of-way or within a public access easement on an adjoining property. Surface roadbed shall be thirty-six feet minimum in curb to curb width; 
B.  Detached sidewalks and park strips required on both sides of street; 
C.  Parking shall be provided along both sides of the street. 
(Ord. No. 2135, § 3(Exh. A), 5-20-2015)  
17.34.050 - Rural residential streets. 
Rural residential streets are those defined as serving a rural residential neighborhood having an anticipated traffic volume of less than one thousand vehicles per day, and are lots that are forty thousand square feet minimum in area. All such streets shall be designed and improved by the developer to provide two travel lanes as follows: 
A.  Right-of-way shall be fifty-two feet in width. Surface roadbed shall be twenty-eight feet in width with no curbs; 
B.  Five foot shoulders and graded v-ditches will be provided on both sides of roadbed; 
C.  Maximum slope of v-ditch flow line shall be two percent unless otherwise approved by city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2135, § 3(Exh. A), 5-20-2015)  
17.34.060 - Private streets. 
Residential units may take primary access from a private street or paseo in the R-4, R-3, R-2, CL-R, CC-R or R-1 4,500 zoning districts. Minimum standards for private streets and paseos shall be as determined by the community development director in consultation with the fire marshall. 
A.  Private streets shall incorporate pedestrian-friendly design features that integrate public and private spaces and promote connectivity to nearby neighborhoods, schools, parks, shopping, transit routes, and other destinations. The design of private streets shall conform to all applicable city standards, as established elsewhere in the development code, subdivision regulations, or Morgan Hill Municipal Code. 
B.  Private streets shall provide multiple ingress and egress points within and into subdivisions wherever feasible; cul-de-sac and dead-end streets shall be avoided unless other options are not available. 
C.  Private streets shall be designed to connect to adjacent uses wherever feasible. 
D.  Design measures which slow traffic and encourage walking and bicycling shall be incorporated. Typical features include curb bulbs, street trees, raised crosswalks, and roundabouts. A minimum of one street tree per unit is required. 
E.  Decorative or accent paving shall be used at neighborhood entries, crosswalks, and major pedestrian areas within the development. 
F.  Rolled curbs are prohibited. 
G.  Street lights shall be designed and scaled at a pedestrian scale with a maximum height of sixteen feet. "Cobra head" type street lights are prohibited. 
H.  Bike lanes and pedestrian walkways shall be incorporated wherever feasible, connecting to existing bicycle and pedestrian facilities on the perimeter of the development. The design and dimensions of bike lanes and pedestrian walkways shall conform to all applicable provisions of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code. 
I.  Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of any street, driveway, or courtyard which serves six or more units. Sidewalks which are located on one side of the street only are acceptable on streets within developments of fewer than six homes, provided they are at least four feet in width. 
J.  Street trees may be provided in either a park strip or within bulb outs. The minimum dimension for a tree planting area shall be five feet in width and five feet in length. 
K.  Private streets must be designed and constructed to a structural section that meets the current city engineering design standards or as approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2164, § 6, 10-7-2015; Ord. No. 2237 N.S., § 1, 6-7-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2164, § 6, adopted Oct. 7, 2015, amended § 17.36.060 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 17.36.060, pertained to private streets and paseos, and derived from Ord. No. 2135, § 3(Exh. A), adopted May 20, 2015.  
17.34.070 - Alleys. 
Alleys may be used to provide vehicle access to lots within small lot and medium density development within the R-2 and R-3 zoning districts. 
A.  Rear lot alleys are permitted for service vehicles and access to garages. Where they are used, alleys shall be designed as follows: 
1.  Alleys shall be configured to provide good visibility, enabling activities in the alley to be easily observed from adjoining properties. 
2.  Alleys shall incorporate special paving treatment, accenting entries, and walkways. 
3.  Alleys shall incorporate landscaping, including planters for trees. A minimum of one tree shall be provided for one unit. 
4.  Building or pedestal lighting shall be provided on each lot as feasible, in order to illuminate the alley. 
5.  If dead-end alleys are necessary, they shall be no more than one hundred feet in length and shall be at least twenty-four feet wide, or meet other design standards as determined by the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 2164, § 7, 10-7-2015)  
Chapter 17.36 - CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION 
Sections: 
 
17.36.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is: 
A.  To establish criteria for the conversion of the existing multiple-family rental housing to condominiums, community apartments, stock cooperatives and any other subdivision which is a conversion of existing rental housing. 
B.  To reduce the impact of such conversions on residents in rental housing who may be required to relocate due to the conversion of apartments to condominiums by providing for procedures for notification and adequate time and assistance for such relocation. 
C.  To assure that purchasers of converted housing have been properly informed as to the physical conditions of the structure which is offered for purchase. 
D.  To insure that converted housing achieves a high degree of appearance, quality and safety and is consistent with the goals of the city. 
E.  Attempt to provide a reasonable balance of ownership and rental housing in Morgan Hill and a variety of choices of tenure, type, price and location of housing. 
F.  Attempt to maintain a supply of rental housing for low and moderate income persons. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.36.020 - Conversions permitted when. 
A.  In order to reduce the effect of conversions on the city's housing supply and to minimize the displacement of tenants, conversions shall only be allowed when there exists an average apartment vacancy rate of five percent or greater. The average vacancy rate shall be determined from the two previous apartment vacancy surveys conducted by the housing programs coordinator. 
B.  Vacancy rates shall be determined by the housing programs coordinator in April and October of each year on the basis of a representative sampling of apartment buildings. New apartment units which have not been available to the public for rent for six months shall not be included in the vacancy rate determination. 
(Ord. 996 N.S. § 1, 1990: Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.36.030 - Prerequisites. 
The planning commission shall not approve an application for conversion unless the planning commission finds that: 
A.  All provisions of this chapter are met; 
B.  The proposed conversion is consistent with the general plan; 
C.  The proposed conversion will conform to the Morgan Hill Municipal Code in effect at the time of tentative map approval except as otherwise provided in this section; 
D.  The overall design and physical condition of the condominium conversion achieves a high degree of appearance, quality and safety; 
E.  The proposed project will not convert during the current calendar year more than five percent of the potentially convertible rental units in the city for the current calendar year except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.36.040 - General requirements. 
In addition to the requirements and procedures as set forth in Chapters 17.16, 17.20, 17.24 and 17.28 of this title, conversions of existing multiple-family rental housing to condominiums, community apartments, stock cooperatives and any other subdivision which is a conversion of existing rental housing, shall be subject to the additional requirements provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.36.050 - Submission of physical elements report. 
A report on the physical elements of all structures and facilities shall be submitted with the tentative subdivision or parcel map. The report shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  A report detailing the structural condition of all elements of the property including foundations, electrical, plumbing, utilities, walls, ceilings, windows, recreational facilities, sound transmission of each building, mechanical equipment, parking facilities and appliances. Regarding each such element, the report shall state, to the best knowledge or estimate of the applicant, when such element was built; the condition of each element; when such element was replaced; the approximate date upon which the element will require replacement; the cost of replacing the element; and any variation of the physical condition of the element from the current zoning and from the city's Uniform Housing Code and the city's Uniform Building Code in effect on the date that the last building permit was issued for the subject structure. The report shall identify any defective or unsafe elements and set forth the proposed corrective measures to be employed; 
B.  A report from a licensed structural pest control operator, approved by the city, on each structure and each unit within the structure; 
C.  A report on any known soil and geological conditions regarding soil deposits, rock formations, faults, groundwater and landslides in the vicinity of the project and a statement regarding any known evidence of soils problems relating to the structures. Reference shall be made to any previous soils reports for the site and a copy submitted with such report; 
D.  A statement of repairs and improvements to be made by the subdivider necessary to refurbish and restore the project to achieve a high degree of appearance and safety. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.36.060 - Submission of additional documents. 
A.  A declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions which would be applied on behalf of any and all owners of condominium units within the project. The declaration shall include, but not be limited to, the conveyance of units; the assignment of parking; an agreement for common area maintenance, including facilities and landscaping, together with an estimate of any initial assessment fees anticipated for such maintenance, description of a provision for maintenance of all vehicular access areas within the project; an indication of appropriate responsibilities for maintenance of all utility lines and services for each unit. 
B.  1. Specific information concerning the demographic characteristics of the project, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  Square footage and number of rooms in each unit; 
b.  Rental rate history for each type of unit for the previous five years; 
c.  Monthly vacancy rate for each month during the preceding two years; 
d.  Makeup of existing tenant households, including family size, length of residence, age of tenants and whether receiving federal or state rent subsidies; 
e.  Proposed sale price of units; 
f.  Proposed homeowners' association fee; 
g.  Financing available; and 
h.  Names and addresses of all tenants. 
2.  When the subdivider can demonstrate that such information is not available, this requirement may be modified by the community development department. 
C.  Signed copies from each tenant of notice of intent to convert, as specified in Section 17.36.130 of this chapter. The subdivider shall submit evidence that a certified letter of notification was sent to each tenant for whom a signed copy of the notice is not submitted. 
D.  Any other information which, in the opinion of the community development department, will assist in determining whether the proposed project will be consistent with the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.36.070 - Reports—Form—Availability to public. 
A.  The final form of the physical elements report and other documents shall be as approved by the city. 
B.  The reports in their acceptable form shall remain on file with the community development department for review by any interested persons. The report shall be referenced in the subdivision report to the planning commission. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.36.080 - Reports—Furnishing copies to purchasers. 
The subdivider shall provide each purchaser with a copy of all reports (in their final, acceptable form), except the information required by subsections B and C of Section 17.36.060 of this chapter, prior to the purchaser executing any purchase agreement or other contract to purchase a unit in the project, and the developer shall give the purchaser sufficient time to review the reports. Copies of the reports shall be made available at all times at the sales office and shall be posted at various locations, as approved by the city, at the project site. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.36.090 - Public hearing—Notice. 
Prior to tentative map approval, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given to tenants of the proposed conversion and posted on the property. For subdivisions of four or fewer parcels, the city engineer shall hold the public hearing pursuant to Section 17.20.080 of this title. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.36.100 - Submission of final information. 
Prior to the close of escrow, the subdivider shall submit the following information to the community development department: 
A.  Name, address and phone number of homeowner's association; 
B.  Actual sale price of units; 
C.  Actual homeowner's association fee; 
D.  Number of prior tenants who purchased units; 
E.  Number of units purchased with intent to be used as rentals. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.36.110 - Conformance with statutes—Correction of violations. 
A.  To achieve the purpose of this chapter, the planning commission shall require that all condominium conversions conform to the Morgan Hill Municipal Code in effect at the time of tentative map approval except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
B.  All provisions of this code must be met and violations corrected prior to the approval of the final map or, upon approval of the community development department, funds shall be adequately escrowed or bonded to assure completion of such corrective work, prior to the closing of escrow of any unit in the project. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.36.120 - Physical standards—Specifications—Prerequisite to map approval. 
The planning commission shall require conformance with the standards of this section in approving the map. 
A.  Building Regulations. The project shall conform to the applicable standards of the city's Uniform Housing Code and shall be found to be in compliance with the city's Uniform Building Code in effect on the date that the last building permit was issued for the subject structure or structures except as provided herein. 
B.  Fire Prevention. 
1.  Smoke Detectors. Each living unit shall be provided with approved detectors of products of combustion other than heat conforming to the latest U.S. standards, mounted on the ceiling or wall at a point centrally located in the corridor or area giving access to rooms used for sleeping purposes. 
2.  Maintenance of Fire Protection Systems. All fire hydrants, fire alarm systems, portable fire extinguishers and other fire protective appliances shall be retained in an operable condition at all times. 
C.  Sound Transmission. 
1.  Shock Mounting of Mechanical Equipment. All permanent mechanical equipment such as motors, compressors, pumps and compactors which is determined by the chief building inspector to be a source of structural vibration or structure-borne noise shall be shock mounted with inertia blocks or bases and/or vibration isolators in a manner approved by the chief building inspectors. 
2.  Noise Standards. The structure shall conform to all exterior and interior sound transmission standards of Chapter 35 (Appendix) of the Uniform Building Code. In such cases where present standards cannot reasonably be met, the planning commission may require the applicant to notify potential buyers of the noise deficiency currently existing within these units. 
D.  Utility Metering. Each dwelling unit shall be separately metered for gas and electricity. A plan for equitable sharing of communal water metering shall be developed prior to final map approval and included in the covenants, conditions and restrictions. In such cases where the subdivider can demonstrate that this standard cannot or should not reasonably be met, this standard may be modified by the planning commission. 
E.  Private Storage Space. Each unit shall have at least two hundred cubic feet of enclosed weatherproofed and lockable private storage space in addition to guest, linen, pantry and clothes closets customarily provided. Such space may be provided in any location approved by the community development department. In such cases where the subdivider can demonstrate that this standard cannot or should not reasonably be met, this standard may be modified by the planning commission. 
F.  Laundry Facilities. A laundry area shall be provided on each unit; or if common laundry areas are provided, such facilities shall consist of not less than one automatic washer and dryer for each five units or fraction thereof. In such cases where the subdivider can demonstrate that this standard cannot or should not reasonably be met, this standard may be modified by the planning commission. 
G.  Landscape Maintenance. All landscaping shall be restored as necessary and maintained to achieve a high degree of appearance and quality. 
H.  Condition of Equipment and Appliances. The developer shall provide written certification to the buyer of each unit at the close of escrow that any dishwashers, garbage disposals, stoves, refrigerators, hot-water tanks and air conditioners that are provided are in operable working condition as of the close of escrow. At such time as the homeowners' association takes over management of development, the developer shall provide written certification to the association that any pool and pool equipment (filter, pumps, chlorinator) and any appliances and mechanical equipment to be owned in common by the association is in operable working condition. 
I.  Refurbishing and Restoration. All main buildings, structures, fences, patio enclosures, carports, accessory buildings, sidewalks, driveways, landscaped areas, and additional elements as required by the community development department shall be refurbished and restored as necessary to achieve a high degree of appearance, quality and safety. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.36.125 - Conversion of mobile home park. 
No fee shall be charged by the city as a condition to the approval of a tentative, final or parcel map for a subdivision or a division of land which is not a subdivision, which consists of the conversion of a mobile home park to a condominium or stock cooperative ownership interest, except regulatory fees charged for the issuance of a permit and those fees authorized by Section 66451.2 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 46, 1993)  
17.36.130 - Tenants—Notification of intent to convert. 
A notice of intent to convert shall be delivered to each tenant at least sixty days prior to filing the tentative map. Evidence of receipt by each tenant shall be submitted with the tentative map. The form of the notice shall be as developed and approved by the community development department and will inform the tenants of all rights provided under this section and the provisions of Section 66427.1 of the Government Code of the state or successor sections. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.36.140 - Tenants—Right to purchase—Time restrictions. 
As provided in Government Code Section 66427.1(b) of the state, any present tenant or tenants of any unit shall be given a nontransferable right of first refusal to purchase the unit occupied at a price no greater than the price offered to the general public. The right of first refusal shall extend for at least ninety days from the date of issuance of the subdivision public report or commencement of sales, whichever date is later. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.36.150 - Tenants—Rent increase restrictions. 
A tenant's rent shall not be increased for two years from the time of filing of the application by the community development department of the tentative map until the unit is sold or until the subdivision is denied or withdrawn. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.36.160 - Tenant relocation—Time limitations. 
Each nonpurchasing tenant not in default under the obligation of the rental agreement or lease under which he occupies his unit, shall have not less than one hundred twenty days from the approval date of the final subdivision map to find substitute housing and relocate. The subdivider shall notify each tenant immediately prior to the time of final map approval of the anticipated date required to vacate the unit and when the one hundred twenty day period will begin. Evidence of receipt by each tenant shall be submitted prior to approval of the final map. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.36.170 - Tenant relocation—Special case exceptions. 
Any nonpurchasing tenant aged sixty-two or older or handicapped or with minor children in school shall be given at least an additional six months in which to find suitable replacement housing. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.36.180 - Senior citizens—Lifetime lease agreements 
At the time of final map approval, all tenant households in which the head of household or spouse is age sixty-two or older shall be offered a lifetime lease with reasonable annual rent increases. Starting rents shall be the rent at the time of tentative map application. Lease forms shall be submitted to the community development department for review prior to final map approval. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.36.190 - Low and moderate income lease agreements. 
At the time of final map approval, all tenant households which meet the income limits of the HUD Section 8 Program will be considered low and moderate income households and shall be offered, at minimum, a three-year lease with reasonable annual rent increases. Starting rents shall be the rent at the time of tentative map application. Lease forms shall be submitted to the community development department for review prior to final map approval. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.36.200 - Moving expenses—Notice of rental availability. 
The subdivider shall provide moving expenses of two times the monthly rent to any tenant household living in any unit at any time prior to tentative map approval as provided in this section. A tenant moving in after tentative map approval will not be required to be provided with moving expenses. Eligible tenants will receive moving expenses when they relocate, except when the tenant has given notice of his intent to move prior to receipt of notification from the subdivider of his intent to convert, and except when the tenant has not resided in the unit for at least three months. The subdivider shall also provide each tenant with a monthly list of other rentals available in the South Santa Clara County area beginning from the time of tentative map approval until each tenant relocates or decides to purchase a unit. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.36.210 - Notice to new tenants of intent to convert. 
After submittal of the tentative map, any prospective tenants shall be notified in writing of the intent to convert prior to leasing or renting any unit. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
Chapter 17.38 - MOBILE HOME PARK CONVERSIONS TO RESIDENT OWNERSHIP OR TO ANY OTHER USE 
Sections:  
Article I. - General 
 
17.38.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
A.  This chapter is enacted to establish requirements and procedures for the control and approval of the conversion of mobile home parks to community mobile home park, mobile home park condominium, and non-mobile home park uses. By their nature, mobile home park conversion projects differ specifically from other types of projects. The unique status of such projects tends to magnify the effects associated with higher urban densities to the point where they may lead to conditions of mismanagement, neglect, and blight that impact upon the public health, safety, welfare, and economic prosperity of the city of Morgan Hill. Such projects may conflict with the policies of the city of Morgan Hill to provide a variety of individual choices of tenure, type, price, and location of housing and to maintain the supply of mobile home housing for low and moderate income persons and families. To ensure that such problems are avoided in both short- and long-term, it is the express intent of the council of the city of Morgan Hill to treat mobile home park conversion projects differently from other projects, and to establish rules and standards regulating such projects in the city of Morgan Hill. 
B.  This chapter is enacted to ensure that approval of proposed conversions is consistent with policies and objectives of the city of Morgan Hill, particularly the following: 
1.  To make adequate provision for the housing needs of all economic segments of the community; 
2.  To facilitate resident ownership of mobile home parks, while recognizing the need for maintaining an adequate inventory of rental space within mobile home parks; 
3.  To provide a reasonable balance between mobile homes and other types of housing; 
4.  To inform prospective conversion purchasers about the physical conditions of the structures and land offered for purchase; 
5.  To reduce and avoid the displacement of long-term residents, particularly senior citizens, the disabled, those who are of low income, and families with school-age children, who may be required to move from the community due to a shortage of replacement mobile home housing. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined in this part and shall be construed as herein set forth unless it shall be apparent from their context that a different meaning is intended. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.030 - Association. 
"Association" means the organization of persons who own a condominium space or have right of exclusive occupancy in a mobile home park condominium or community mobile home park. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.040 - Common area. 
"Common area" means the entire area within a condominium mobile home park or community mobile home park, except the separate interests therein. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.050 - Common interest development. 
"Common interest development" means a real property development as defined in Civil Code Section 1351(c). 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.060 - Community mobile home park. 
"Community mobile home park" means a common interest development in which an undivided interest in the mobile home park is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of a mobile home lot located therein. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.070 - Condominium. 
"Condominium" means an estate in real property as defined in Civil Code Section 1351(f). 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.080 - Condominium mobile home park. 
"Condominium mobile home park" means a mobile home park common interest development consisting of condominiums. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.090 - Conversion project. 
"Conversion project" means the term used to include mobile home park conversion to ownership and mobile home park conversion of use, as defined in this part. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.100 - Developer. 
"Developer" means the owner or subdivider with a controlling proprietary interest in the proposed mobile home park conversion project. If no one owner or subdivider has a controlling propriety interest, this term shall mean each and every owner or subdivider. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.110 - Designated resident organization. 
"Designated resident organization" means any association of mobile home owners within a mobile home park which has, not later than sixty days after issuance of a notice of intent to convert under Section 17.38.340, provided the owner or manager of the mobile home park written notice of the following: 
1.  The name and address of the organization; 
2.  The name and address of the representative of the organization to whom all notices under this chapter shall be given; 
3.  A statement that the organization is interested in purchasing the mobile home park. 
The organization must demonstrate that, as of the date of giving notice to the owner or manager, it represents at least sixty-seven percent of all such owners for purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.120 - Disabled mobile home owner. 
"Disabled mobile home owner" means a mobile home owner who is the primary wage earner of a household, or a single person, with any medically determinable physical or mental impairment limiting his or her mobility, substantially affecting his or her ability to obtain employment, or requiring special care facilities in the mobile home. "Physical or mental impairment" is an impairment that results from anatomical, physiological or psychological abnormalities which are demonstrable by medically acceptable clinical or laboratory diagnostic techniques. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.130 - Low income. 
"Low income" means eighty percent or less of the current median income as established annually by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for the Morgan Hill standard metropolitan statistical area (SMSA) as adjusted for household size. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.140 - Mobile home. 
"Mobile home" means a structure transportable in one or more sections, designed and equipped to contain not more than one or two dwelling unit(s), to be used with or without a foundation system. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.150 - Mobile home lot. 
"Mobile home lot" means a portion of a mobile home park designated or used for the occupancy of one mobile home, including but not limited to storage, parking and landscaped areas intended for the private use and/or care of the mobile home resident. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.160 - Mobile home owner. 
"Mobile home owner" means a person who has the right to the use of a mobile home lot within a mobile home park on which to locate, maintain, and occupy a mobile home, lot improvements and accessory structures for human habitation, including the use of the services and facilities of the park. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.170 - Mobile home park. 
"Mobile home park" means an area of land where two or more mobile home lots are rented or leased, or held out for rent or lease, to accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.180 - Mobile home park conversion to ownership. 
"Mobile home park conversion to ownership" means the conversion of an existing mobile home park containing four or more mobile home lots to a condominium mobile home park or to a community mobile home park. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.190 - Mobile home park conversion of use. 
"Mobile home park conversion of use" means the conversion of an existing mobile home park containing four or more mobile home lots to any other use, excluding mobile home park conversion to ownership. The elimination of individual mobile home leasehold or rental agreement interests in a mobile home park shall not constitute conversion. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.200 - Mobile home resident. 
"Mobile home resident" means a person, including a mobile home owner or mobile home tenant, who occupies a mobile home. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.210 - Mobile home tenant. 
"Mobile home tenant" means a person who rents or leases a mobile home from a mobile home owner. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.220 - Organizational documents. 
"Organizational documents" means and includes the declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions, articles of incorporation, bylaws, and any contracts for the maintenance, management or operation of all or any part of a mobile home park conversion to ownership project. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.230 - Recreational open space. 
"Recreational open space" means open space (exclusive of the required front setback area) which shall be used exclusively for leisure and recreational purposes, for the use and enjoyment of occupants (and their guests) within the condominium mobile home park or community mobile home park, and to which such occupants (and their guests) shall have the right of use and enjoyment. Accessory structures such as swimming pools, recreational building, and landscaped areas may be included as open space. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.240 - Right of first refusal. 
"Right of first refusal" means an irrevocable, nontransferable, and preemptive right to purchase an interest in a common interest development at a price no greater then the price offered to the general public for such interest. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.250 - Unjust eviction. 
"Unjust eviction" means the termination of tenancy by a mobile home park landlord for reasons other than those stated in California Civil Code Section 798.56, or its successor. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
Article II. - General Requirements 
 
17.38.300 - Applicability of chapter. 
To achieve the purpose of this chapter, all conversion projects shall conform to the requirements of this chapter and all other parts of this title applicable thereto provided that, if there is any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and such other parts of this title, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.310 - Permit required. 
Conversion projects shall not be permitted in the city unless the use is permitted in such zoning district and then only with a planned unit development approval pursuant to Title 18 of the code. PUD approval must be obtained prior to any filing of an application for a condominium conversion. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.320 - Special noticing and report requirements. 
A.  In addition to any other requirements, notice of time, place, and purpose of any public hearing on an application for a planned unit development for a conversion project shall be given to each mobile home owner and mobile home tenant of the proposed project hereinafter identified pursuant to the provisions of this part. In addition, a notice shall be posted at all entrances of the proposed project. Each such notice shall be printed in English and Spanish. 
B.  The director of community development shall mail, with postage prepaid, a copy of the staff report on an application for a planned unit development for a conversion project to each mobile home owner and mobile home tenant at least fifteen days before the date set for hearing thereon. 
C.  Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this section, the failure of the director of community development or city clerk to mail any notice or report, or the failure of any resident to receive the same, shall not affect in any way whatsoever the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter, nor of any such proceedings, nor prevent the director, planning commission or city council from proceeding with any hearing at the time and place set therefor. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.330 - Notice of intention to convert. 
A.  At least one hundred twenty days prior to the date of filing an application for a planned unit development for a conversion project, the developer shall notify, in writing, each mobile home owner, mobile home tenant and designated resident organization of the proposed project of his/her intention to convert, and thereafter, the developer shall notify each person applying for rental of a mobile home lot in the proposed project, prior to payment of any rent or deposit, of his intention to convert. 
B.  Said notice of intention to convert shall contain a statement that the developer proposes a conversion project, and for that purpose that (1) the developer shall file an application for a planned unit development with the city of Morgan Hill, and, if applicable, that (2) the developer shall file an application for a final public report with the California Department of Real Estate. Said notice shall also contain a statement of the rights of mobile home owners, mobile home tenants and residents as set forth in Sections 17.38.350, and 17.38.360, and 17.38.370 and the rights of designated resident organizations, and shall attach a copy of this Chapter 17.38. 
C.  Developer shall also submit evidence of notification to the California Department of Housing and Community Development of intention to convert. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.340 - Notice of public report. 
In addition to any noticing requirements imposed by the Department of Real Estate and/or the Department of Housing and Community Development, within five days of receipt of the final public report on the proposed project from the California Department of Real Estate (hereinafter "final public report"), and/or an HCD approval to terminate, if applicable, the developer shall notify each of the mobile home owners and tenants in the proposed conversion project of the issuance of said report. The notice shall indicate that copies of said report are available on request. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.350 - Rights of mobile home owners and tenants. 
Each mobile home owner and mobile home tenant of a proposed conversion project shall have the following rights from the date of issuance of a notice of intention to convert, pursuant to Section 17.38.330, until the date indicated, if applicable, with respect to his or her tenancy: 
A.  The right to terminate a lease or rental agreement, without penalty, upon sixty days notice to the landlord; 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 5.36 of Title 5 of this code, no increase in rent until termination of a lease or rental agreement pursuant to subsection (A) of this section or until twelve months after the date of issuance of the final public report, if applicable, or expiration of the mobile home owner's or mobile home tenant's lease or rental agreement, whichever is longer; 
C.  No unjust eviction during tenancy; 
D.  No coercion or retaliatory action against any such mobile home owner or mobile home tenant, including pressure to support, or refrain from opposing, a conversion project. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.360 - Rights of mobile home residents. 
In the case of a mobile home park conversion to ownership, a mobile home resident shall have a right of first refusal to purchase a condominium interest or an undivided interest in a community mobile home park, whichever is applicable. The purchase price shall be no greater than the price offered to the general public for such interest. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.370 - Right of first negotiated purchase. 
A designated resident organization shall have the right to negotiate for purchase of a mobile home park for which a conversion project is proposed, prior to the commencement of any other negotiations conducted by the developer, if written notice of the exercise of this right is provided to the developer within one hundred and twenty days of the date of issuance of the notice of intention to convert. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.380 - Negotiation for purchase. 
If a written notice has been provided to the developer pursuant to Section 17.38.370 and within the time limit specified therein, the following procedure shall be followed: 
A.  Action on any planned unit development for the conversion project shall be suspended for one hundred eighty days in order that good faith negotiations can be encouraged and such steps may be taken as are reasonably likely to result in preservation of the mobile home park and the housing opportunities therein. 
B.  Within fifteen days of receipt of notice, the developer shall meet with each designated resident organization which has provided such notice in order to explore the possibility of acquisition of the park by such organization. 
C.  Upon the request to the director by either the developer or the designated resident organization, a mediation session shall be conducted by a mediator assigned by the city. The mediation shall be conducted within forty-five days of such request. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
Article III. - Mobile Home Park Conversions to Ownership 
 
17.38.400 - Supplemental applications. 
A.  In addition to submittal requirements specified for planned unit development applications, a supplemental application must be submitted for every mobile home park conversion to ownership, which shall include the following: 
1.  Satisfactory evidence that, at least one hundred and twenty days prior to the date of filing such application, each of the mobile home owners and mobile home tenants within the proposed project received, pursuant to Section 17.38.340 of this chapter, written notice of intention to convert; and that thereafter, each person applying for rental of a mobile home in the proposed project, prior to payment of any rent or deposit, received notice of intention to convert. In addition, satisfactory evidence of the posting of said notice at all entrances of the mobile home park shall be submitted. 
2.  A declaration that, after the date of filing such application, each person applying for rental of a mobile home or mobile home lot in the proposed project prior to payment of any rent or deposit, shall receive, pursuant to Section 17.38.330 of this chapter, written notification of intention to convert. 
3.  A boundary map showing the location of all existing easements, structures, mature and/or scenic trees, and other improvements upon the property. 
4.  The proposed organizational documents and true copies of any and all documents submitted to the California Department of Real Estate and/or the Department of Housing and Community Development for the proposed conversion project. 
5.  The material indicated in subsection (4) shall be submitted subject to the following provisions: 
a.  The developer shall file with the director of community development a true copy of any amended, revised or additional documents submitted to the Department of Real Estate at least sixty days prior to the public hearing before the planning commission on a planned unit development for a conversion project. 
b.  The developer shall file with the city a true copy of the final public report within ten days of issuance by the Department of Real Estate and at least ten days prior to any hearing. 
6.  A property report describing the condition and estimating the remaining useful life of each of the following elements of each applicable structure and system situated within the project proposed for conversion, excluding mobile homes: roofs, foundations, exterior paint, paved surfaces, mechanical systems, electrical systems, plumbing systems, sewage systems, swimming pools, sprinkler systems for landscaping, utility delivery systems, central or community heating and air conditioning systems, fire protection systems including any automatic sprinkler systems, alarm systems or standpipe systems, and structural elements. For any element whose useful life is less than five years, a replacement cost estimate shall be provided. Such report shall be prepared by an appropriately licensed contractor or registered civil or structural engineer. 
7.  A statement detailing the current ownership of all improvements and underlying land; the name and address of each present mobile home park resident within the project and identification of all residents under sixteen years, all residents fifty-five years and over, all residents with minor children, and all disabled residents; square footage of each mobile home lot; the current or last rental rate for each mobile home lot or rented mobile home and the monthly rental rate for the preceding two years; and the monthly space vacancy over the preceding two years of each mobile home lot proposed to be converted. 
8.  A timetable for conversion to a condominium mobile home park or community mobile home park. 
9.  Such other documents or information as the director may require to further the purposes of this chapter. True copies of any and all documents submitted to the California Department of Real Estate and/or the Department of Housing and Community Development for the proposed conversion project. 
10.  A description of how the financial aspects of transfers of mobile homes and mobile home lots have been handled for the preceding two years. 
11.  The appraised market value of each mobile home lot and the in-place value of each mobile home in the park. The appraisal is to be made no more than ninety days prior to submittal of the supplemental application. The appraiser shall be a tested, certified, and designated member of a nationally recognized appraisal association; shall be selected by the developer and/or association; and shall be paid by the developer and/or association to make the appraisal. The appraiser shall attach to any appraisal a signed statement confirming that he or she has no direct or indirect economic interest in the park other than the receipt of the appraisal fee, the amount of which shall be stated in the disclosure statement. 
12.  Proof that each resident and/or owner received a copy of the appraisal. 
B.  Copies of the supplemental application shall be made available by the applicant upon demand at the on-site office in the proposed project, during regular business hours, to mobile home owners and mobile home tenants. For projects that do not have on-site offices, all mobile home owner and tenants shall receive written notice, with a contemporaneous copy to the city, that copies of the supplemental application materials are available at the city offices. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.410 - Supplemental findings for planned development permit. 
A planned development permit may be issued for a mobile home park conversion to ownership only if the planning commission finds that the applicant has provided a program of relocation, rental assistance, purchase assistance or other assistance pursuant to Section 17.38.430 of this chapter to mitigate the impact of the conversion on displaced mobile home owners and mobile home tenants, and that mobile home residents shall have the right of first refusal specified in Section 17.38.370. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.420 - Relocation and purchase assistance. 
The city council shall make any planned unit development which may be granted for a mobile home park conversion to ownership subject to a condition requiring a plan of relocation and purchase assistance for displaced mobile home owners and mobile home tenants within the proposed project. Such a plan may include the following: 
A.  Information to be provided to each mobile home owner within the proposed project: 
1.  A list of known available mobile home lots and spaces and their mobile homes, if applicable, in Santa Clara, San Benito, Monterey, and Santa Cruz counties, including any written commitments from mobile home park owners willing to accept displaced mobile home owners, and whether and under what criteria such owners will accept used mobile homes moving into their park; 
2.  Estimates from two moving companies as to the per mile costs of moving mobile homes of various sizes including, but not limited to, tear down and set up of coaches. 
B.  Measures to mitigate the adverse impacts of conversion upon mobile home owners and mobile home tenants. Such mitigation measures shall benefit mobile home owners and mobile home tenants of the mobile home park from the date the application for the planned unit development for the proposed conversion project is filed with the city, or from the date on which notices to vacate are mailed to mobile home owners and tenants, whichever is earlier. Mitigation measures may include but are not limited to: 
1.  Moving expenses for furniture and personal belongings to a new residence in Santa Clara, San Benito, Monterey, or Santa Cruz County. 
2.  Provision for payment of any or all portions of the cost of physically moving a mobile home to a new site in Santa Clara, San Benito, Monterey, or Santa Cruz County, including, but not limited to, tear down and set up. 
3.  For those who move to a multiple or two-family dwelling, provision of a rent subsidy for up to twenty-four months. Rent shall not exceed the fair market rent for new construction and substantial rehabilitation for the Santa Clara County area as established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. "Rent subsidy" is the difference between the rent of a comparable multiple or two-family dwelling and the rent of the mobile home space or mobile home on the date of the notice of intention to convert. 
4.  Payment of the difference of rent between the old and new mobile home park spaces for up to twenty-four months. 
5.  Purchase of the mobile home at its in-place value, as determined by a tested, certified, and designated member of a nationally recognized appraisal association. "In-place value" includes a presumption of continued and uninterrupted use of the space and coach in the current park setting, and includes the value of any accessory structures whose installation has been approved by mobile home park management, such as a porch or a carport. The appraisal is to be made no more than sixty days prior to its submittal, and the value shall be established as of the date of approval by the planning commission of the plan. 
6.  Extended leases and rental agreements (commencing at the conclusion of the right of continued tenancy period under Section 17.38.360(C)) for mobile home owners and mobile home tenants who are disabled, or aged fifty-five or over, and/or of low income, and/or for mobile home owners and mobile home tenants with minor children. No mobile home owner or mobile home tenant covered by any such extended lease or rental agreement shall be unjustly evicted. "Extended lease or rental agreement" is a lease or rental agreement whose expiration date is extended at least ninety days. 
7.  A provision for setting aside a certain number of rental spaces for mobile home owners and mobile home tenants who are disabled, and/or aged fifty-five or over, and/or low income, and/or for mobile home owners and mobile home tenants with minor children. The set-aside figure shall be based on an analysis of the inventory of tenants and tenant groups, and shall be subject to review and approval by the city. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.430 - Development standards. 
To achieve the purposes of this chapter, mobile home park conversion to ownership projects shall conform to the following development standards: 
A.  The off-street parking requirements shall be one and one-half parking spaces for each mobile home lot. One such space per mobile home lot shall be assigned. However, a variance may be granted to maintain pre-existing or current parking ratios within the park. 
B.  The consumption of gas and electricity within each mobile home lot shall be separately metered so that the owner can be billed separately for each utility. A water shut-off valve shall be provided for each mobile home lot or for each plumbing fixture. 
C.  Each mobile home lot shall have its own panel board for all electrical circuits which serve the mobile home. 
D.  All standards contained in Section 18.30.100 of this code shall be adhered to unless an exception to those standards is approved by the city council pursuant to Section 18.30.110. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.440 - Findings for noncompliance with development standards. 
An application for a planned unit development for a mobile home conversion project under this article which does not comply with all of the applicable development standards stated in Section 17.38.430 may, but shall not under any circumstances be, required to be approved, and a planned unit development may be issued therefore if the planning commission finds that: 
A.  Strict application of the development standards set forth in said Section 17.38.430 would create an unreasonable economic hardship due to (but not limited to) the size, shape, location or surroundings of the subject property or the buildings situated thereon, but expressly excluding consideration of personal circumstances of the developer; and 
B.  A planned unit development for the conversion project which is not in conformance with such development standards, subject to such conditions as may be imposed thereon: 
1.  Will provide for substantial compliance with such development standards, and 
2.  Will incorporate mitigating features which further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.450 - Code compliance. 
The proposed conversion project shall comply with all applicable city, county, and state codes and regulations regarding health and safety. If said project does not comply with said codes and said regulations at the time of approval of a planned unit development for the project, a code compliance bond shall be submitted as required in Section 17.38.460. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.460 - Code compliance bond. 
If a proposed mobile home conversion project does not comply with provisions of Section 17.38.450 and/or the building official identifies items to be corrected pursuant to said section, any planned unit development created pursuant to this chapter shall require the developer to furnish a bond in an amount equal to the reasonable estimated cost of code compliance. Said bond shall run in favor of individual purchasers and the association. Said bond shall provide for reasonable attorney's fees in the event of default by the principal. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.470 - Effectiveness of permit. 
A planned unit development created under this chapter for a mobile home conversion project may be created prior to the time compliance has been made with the said codes and said regulations as herein above provided in Section 17.38.450, but such PUD shall not become effective unless and until compliance has been made as required. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.480 - Recreational open space. 
Without limiting the generality of the provisions relating to conditions which may be imposed upon a development permit, the planning commission may make any planned unit development for conversion to a mobile home conversion project subject to a condition requiring recreational open space in a manner and to the extent it deems reasonably necessary. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.490 - Documents furnished to prospective purchasers. 
The developer shall furnish each prospective purchaser of an interest in a condominium mobile home park or community mobile home park pursuant to a conversion project a true copy of the planned unit development issued under this chapter and of each document required by state law and the regulations of the California Department of Real Estate to be provided to such prospective purchaser. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.500 - Capital contributions and warranties. 
Without limiting the generality of the provisions relating to conditions which may be imposed upon a planned unit development, the planning commission may make any planned unit development plan which may be granted under this part subject to conditions requiring the following: 
1.  A capital contribution provided by the developer to the association for the deferred maintenance of the common area, and the deferred maintenance or replacement of any of the elements described in the property report which are owned or maintained by the association, pursuant to Section 17.38.400. Information available pursuant to subsection (A)(6) of said section regarding the estimated replacement cost of those elements whose useful life is less than five years may be used in determining the amount of such contribution. 
2.  A one-year warranty provided free of charge by the developer to the association for those systems described in the property report, as herein above specified, which are owned or maintained by the association. Such warranty need not cover those systems which may be covered by a substantial capital contribution by the developer for deferred maintenance. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
Article IV. - Mobile Home Park Conversions of Use 
 
17.38.600 - Supplemental application. 
A.  A supplemental application must be submitted for a mobile home park conversion of use which shall include the following: 
1.  Satisfactory evidence that, at least one hundred and twenty days prior to the date of filing such application, each mobile home owner and mobile home tenant within the proposed project received, pursuant to Section 17.38.330 of this chapter, written notice of intention to convert; and that thereafter, each person applying for rental of a mobile home or mobile home lot in the proposed project, prior to payment of any rent or deposit, received notice of intention to convert. In addition, satisfactory evidence of the posting of said notice at all entrances to the mobile home park shall be submitted. 
2.  A declaration that, after the date of filing such application, each person applying for rental of a mobile home or mobile home lot in the proposed project prior to payment of any rent or deposit, shall receive, pursuant to Section 17.38.330 of this chapter, written notification of intention to convert. 
3.  A statement detailing the current ownership of all improvements and underlying land; the name and address of each present mobile home park resident and/or owner within the project and identification of all residents under sixteen years, all residents fifty-five years and over, all residents with minor children, and all disabled residents; square footage of each mobile home lot; the current or last rental rate for each mobile home lot and rental rate for the preceding two years; and the monthly space vacancy over the preceding two years of each mobile home lot proposed to be converted. 
4.  A timetable for conversion of the mobile home park use. 
5.  The appraised market value of each mobile home lot and the in-place value of each mobile home in the park. The appraisal is to be made no more than ninety days prior to submittal of the supplemental application. The appraiser shall be a tested, certified, and designated member of a nationally recognized appraisal association; shall be selected by the developer and/or association; and shall be paid by the developer and/or association to make the appraisal. The appraiser shall attach to any appraisal a signed statement confirming that he or she has no direct or indirect economic interest in the park other than the receipt of the appraisal fee, the amount of which shall be stated in the disclosure statement. 
6.  A description of how the financial aspects of transfers of mobile homes and mobile home lots have been handled for the preceding two years. 
7.  True copies of any and all documents submitted to the California Department of Real Estate and/or the Department of Housing and Community Development for the proposed conversion project. 
8.  Proof that each resident and/or owner received a copy of the appraisal. 
B.  Copies of the supplemental application shall be made available upon demand at the on-site office in the proposed project, during regular business hours, to mobile home owners and mobile home tenants. For projects that do not have on-site offices, all mobile home owner and tenants shall receive written notice, with a contemporaneous copy to the city, that copies of the supplemental application materials are available at the city offices. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.610 - Supplemental findings for planned unit development. 
A planned unit development may be issued for a mobile home park conversion of use only if the director or planning commission finds that the applicant has provided a satisfactory program of relocation, rental assistance, purchase assistance or other assistance pursuant to Section 17.38.620 of this chapter to mitigate the conversion on displaced mobile home owners and mobile home tenants. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
17.38.620 - Relocation and purchase assistance. 
The director, planning commission or the city council shall make planned unit development which may be granted under this chapter for mobile home park conversion of use subject to a condition requiring a plan of relocation and purchase assistance for mobile home owners and mobile home tenants within the proposed project. Such a plan may include the following: 
1.  Information to be provided to each mobile home owner within the proposed project: 
a.  A list of known available mobile home lots in Santa Clara, San Benito, Monterey, and Santa Cruz counties, including any written commitments from mobile home park owners willing to accept displaced mobile home owners, and whether and under what criteria such owners will accept used mobile homes moving into their parks. 
b.  Estimates from two moving companies as to the per mile costs of moving mobile homes of various sizes including, but not limited to, tear down and set up of coaches. 
2.  Measures to mitigate the adverse impacts of conversion upon mobile home owners and mobile home tenants. Such mitigation measures shall benefit mobile home owners and mobile home tenants of the mobile home park from the date the application for the planned unit development for the proposed conversion project is filed with the city, or from the date on which notices to vacate are mailed to mobile home owners and mobile home tenants, whichever is earlier. Mitigation measures may include but are not limited to: 
a.  Moving expenses for furniture and personal belongings to a new residence in Santa Clara, San Benito, Monterey, or Santa Cruz County. 
b.  Provision for payment of any or all portions of the cost of physically moving a mobile home to a new site in Santa Clara, San Benito, Monterey, or Santa Cruz County, including, but not limited to, tear down and set up. 
c.  For those who move to a multiple or a two-family dwelling, provision of a rent subsidy for up to twenty-four months. Rent shall not exceed the fair market rent for new construction and substantial rehabilitation for the Santa Clara County area as established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. "Rent subsidy" is the difference between the rent of the multiple or two-family dwelling and the rent of the mobile home space or mobile home on the date of the notice to convert. 
d.  Payment of the difference of rent between the old and new mobile home park spaces for up to twenty-four months. 
e.  Purchase of the mobile home at its in-place value, as determined by a tested, certified, and designated member of a nationally recognized appraisal association. "In-place value" includes a presumption of continued and uninterrupted use of the space and coach in the current park setting, and includes the value of any accessory structures whose installation has been approved by mobile home park management, such as a porch or a carport. The appraisal is to be made no more than ninety days prior to its submittal, and the value shall be established as of the date of approval by the planning commission of the plan. In-place value includes the value of any accessory structures whose installation has been approved by mobile home park management, such as a porch or a carport. The appraisal is to be made no more than sixty days prior to its submittal. 
f.  Extended leases or rental agreements (commencing at the conclusion of the right of continued tenancy period under subsection B of Section 17.38.350) for mobile home owners and mobile home tenants who are disabled, and/or aged fifty-five or over, and/or of low income, and/or for mobile home owners and mobile home tenants with minor children. No mobile home owner or mobile home tenant covered by any such extended lease or rental agreement shall be unjustly evicted. "Extended lease or rental agreement" is a lease or rental agreement whose expiration date is extended at least ninety days. 
(Ord. 1631 § 1 (part), 2003)  
Chapter 17.40 - PARCEL MERGERS 
Sections: 
 
17.40.010 - Mergers—Required when. 
If any one of two or more contiguous parcels or units held by the same owner does not conform to existing zoning regulations so as not to permit its development, and at least one parcel or unit has not been developed with a building for which a building permit is required, then such parcels shall be considered as merged for the purpose of this title. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.40.020 - Mergers—Not required when. 
Two or more contiguous parcels or units of land which have been subdivided under the provisions of this title or the State Subdivision Map Act shall not merge by virtue of the fact that such contiguous parcels are held by the same ownership. No further proceedings under this chapter shall be required for the purpose of sale, lease of financing, except as provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.40.030 - Mergers—Notice. 
A.  Merger of parcels becomes effective when the city engineer files for record with the county recorder a notice of merger specifying the names of the record orders and particularly describing the real property. Prior to recording a notice of merger, the city engineer shall cause to be mailed by certified mail to the then current owner of the property, a notice of intention to determine status, notifying the owner that the affected parcels may be merged pursuant to standards of the city's codes and advising the owner of the opportunity to request a hearing on determination of status and to present evidence at the hearing that the property does not meet the criteria for merger. The notice of intention shall be filed for record with the recorder of the county of Santa Clara on the date that notice is mailed to the property owner. 
B.  At any time within thirty days after recording the notice of intention to determine status, the owner of the affected property may file with the city a request for a hearing on determination of status. Upon receiving such a request, the city shall fix a time, date and place for a hearing to be conducted by the city council and shall notify the property owner of that time, date and place for the hearing by certified mail. The hearing shall be conducted not more than sixty days following the city's receipt of the property owner's request for the hearing, but may be postponed or continued with the mutual consent of the city and the property owner. 
C.  At the hearing, the property owner shall be given the opportunity to present any evidence that the affected property does not meet the standards for merger specified in this code. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged and shall so notify the owner of its determination. A determination of merger or a determination of nonmerger shall be recorded within thirty days after the conclusion of the hearing. If the city council makes the determination of nonmerger, the city engineer shall mail a clearance letter to the then current owner of record. A recorded determination of nonmerger shall constitute a release of the notice of intention to determine status recorded pursuant to this section. 
D.  If, within the thirty-day period specified, the owner does not file a request for a hearing, the city council may at any time thereafter, make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged. A determination of merger shall be recorded as provided herein no later than ninety days following the mailing of the notice required by Section 17.40.030(B). 
E.  Except as provided in Sections 66451.195, 66451.301 and 66451.302 of the Subdivision Map Act, a merger shall not be effective if merged prior to January 1, 1984, unless the city recorded a notice of merger prior to January 1, 1986. In approving a merger, the city engineer may impose reasonable conditions. The conditions may be appealed within ten days of written notice of the conditions imposition to the city council in accordance with Section 17.20.130. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 47, 1993)  
17.40.040 - Requests—Filing—Conditions—Appeal procedures. 
A.  Upon request of the legal owner of contiguous parcels, the city engineer or authorized representative may approve the merger of the property. Such request shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by such data and documents as required by the city engineer's office. 
B.  Upon approval, a notice of merger shall be filed with the county recorder. The form and content of the notice shall be as required by the city engineer. 
C.  In approving the merger, the city may impose reasonable conditions. The reasonableness of such conditions may be appealed within fifteen days of written notice of the conditions to the city council in accordance with Section 17.20.130 of this title. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
Chapter 17.44 - REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE 
Sections: 
 
17.44.010 - General requirements. 
Subdivided property may be reverted to acreage pursuant to provisions of this chapter and the State Subdivision Map Act. This chapter shall apply to final maps and parcel maps. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.44.020 - Initiation of proceedings. 
A.  By Owners. Proceedings to revert subdivided property to acreage may be initiated by petition of all of the owners of record of the property. The petition shall be in a form prescribed by the community development director. The petition shall contain the information required by Section 17.44.030 of this chapter and such other information as required by the community development director. 
B.  By City Council. The city council, at the request of any person or on its own motion may, by resolution, initiate proceedings to revert property to acreage. The city council shall direct the community development director to obtain the necessary information to initiate and conduct the proceedings. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 48, 1993: Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.44.030 - Form of petition. 
The petition shall be in the form prescribed by the community development director and shall contain the following: 
A.  Adequate evidence of title to the real property within the subdivision; 
B.  Sufficient data to enable the city to make all of the determinations and findings required by this chapter; 
C.  A final map which delineates dedications which will not be vacated and dedications which are a condition to reversion; 
D.  Such other pertinent information as may be required by the community development director. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 49, 1993)  
17.44.040 - Petition—Submission. 
A.  The final map or parcel map for the reversion, together with all other data as required by this chapter, shall be submitted to the community development director for his review. 
B.  Upon finding that the petition meets with all the requirements of this title and the State Subdivision Map Act, the community development director shall submit the final map or parcel map, together with his report and recommendations of approval or conditional approval of the reversion to acreage, to the city council for their consideration. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 50, 1993: Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.44.050 - Petitions—Public hearing—Council approval. 
A.  A public hearing shall be held by the city council on all petitions for initiations for reversions to acreage. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided by Section 66451.3 of the Government Code. The community development director may give such other notice that he deems necessary or advisable. 
B.  The city council may approve a reversion to acreage only if it finds and records by resolution that: 
1.  Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes; and 
2.  Either: 
a.  All owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to reversion, or 
b.  None of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later, or 
c.  No lots shown on the final or parcel map were filed for record. 
C.  The city council may require as conditions of the reversion: 
1.  The owners dedicate or offer to dedicate streets, public rights-of-way or easements; 
2.  The retention of all or a portion of previously paid subdivision fees, deposits or improvements securities if the same are necessary to accomplish any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 51, 1993; Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.44.060 - Filing with county recorder. 
A.  Upon approving the reversion to acreage, the community development director shall transmit the final map or parcel map, together with the city council resolution approving the reversion, to the county recorder for recordation. 
B.  Reversion shall be effective upon the final map being filed for record by the county recorder. Upon filing, all dedications and offers of dedication not shown on the final map for reversion shall be of no further force and effect. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 52, 1993; Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.44.070 - Merger and resubdivision. 
Subdivided lands may be merged and resubdivided without reverting to acreage by complying with all the applicable requirements for the subdivision of land as provided by the State Subdivision Map Act and this chapter. The filing of the final map or parcel map shall constitute legal merging of the separate parcels into one parcel and the resubdivision of such parcel, and the real property shall thereafter be shown on the new lot or parcel boundaries on the assessment roll. Any unused fees or deposits previously made pursuant to this division pertaining to the property shall be credited pro rata towards any requirements for the same purposes which are applicable at the time of resubdivision. Any streets or easements to be left in effect after the resubdivision shall be adequately delineated on the map. After approval of the merger and resubdivision by the city council or the planning commission, or by the community development director in the case of four or fewer lots, the map shall be delivered to the county recorder. The filing of the map shall constitute legal merger and resubdivision of the land affected thereby, and shall also constitute abandonment of all streets and easements not shown on the map. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 53, 1993)  
Chapter 17.48 - MAP CORRECTIONS AND AMENDMENTS 
Sections: 
 
17.48.010 - Methods of amendments or correction. 
After a final or parcel map is filed in the office of the county recorder, it may be amended by a certificate of correction or an amending map: 
A.  To correct an error in any course or distance shown thereof; 
B.  To show any course or distance that was omitted therefrom; 
C.  To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the map; 
D.  To indicate monuments set after the death, disability or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor charged with the responsibilities for setting monuments; or 
E.  To show the proper location of any monument which has been changed in location, or character or originally was shown at the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character; 
F.  To correct any other type of map error or omission as approved by the city engineer, which does not affect any property right. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.48.020 - Preparation of documents. 
The amending map or certificate of correction shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The form and contents of the amending map shall conform to the requirements of Article III of Chapter 17.20 of this title if a final map, or Article II of Chapter 17.24 of this title if a parcel map. The certificate of correction shall set forth in detail the corrections made and show the names of the present fee owners of the property affected by the correction. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.48.030 - Submittal—Review and approval. 
A.  The amending map or certificate of correction, complete as to final form, shall be submitted to the city engineer for his review and approval. 
B.  The city engineer shall examine the amending map or certificate of correction and if the only changes made are those set forth in Section 17.48.010 of this chapter, he shall certify to this fact on the amending map or certificate of correction. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.48.040 - Fees. 
The fee for checking, processing and recording the amended map or certificate of correction, shall be in accordance with the city's resolution establishing fees and charges. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.48.050 - Filing with county recorder. 
The amending map or certificate of correction certified by the city engineer shall be filed in the office of the county recorder in which the original map was filed. Upon such filing, the county recorder shall index the names of the fee owners and the appropriate tract designation shown on the amending map or certificate of correction in the general index and map index respectively. Thereupon, the original map shall be deemed to have been conclusively so corrected and thereafter shall impart constructive notice of all such corrections in the same manner as though set forth upon the original map. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
Chapter 17.50 - VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS 
Sections: 
 
17.50.010 - Citation and authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1) of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the state of California (hereinafter referred to as the Vesting Tentative Map Statute), and may be cited as the vesting tentative map ordinance. 
(Ord. 751 N.S. (VIII-2-13.01), 1985)  
17.50.020 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  It is the purpose of this chapter to establish procedures necessary for the implementation of the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act (Map Act) and the subdivision ordinance of the city (Title 17 of this code). Except as otherwise set forth in the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of the subdivision ordinance shall apply to the vesting tentative map ordinance. 
B.  To accomplish this purpose, the regulations outlined in this chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, and for the promotion of orderly growth and development. 
(Ord. 751 N.S. (VIII-2-13.02), 1985)  
17.50.030 - Consistency with general plan. 
No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan or not permitted by the zoning ordinance (Title 18 of this code) or other applicable provisions of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 751 N.S. (VIII-2-13.03), 1985)  
17.50.040 - Definitions. 
A.  "Vesting tentative map" means a tentative map that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map" at the time it is filed in accordance with Section 17.50.060 and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Furthermore, vesting tentative map refers to a map which meets the requirements of subdivision (a) of Section 66424.5 and Section 66452 of the Subdivision Map Act. When the city approves or conditionally approves a vesting tentative map, that approval shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect on the date the city has determined that the application for approval of the vesting tentative map is complete pursuant to Section 65943 of the Government Code. 
B.  All other definitions set forth in the subdivision ordinance are applicable. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 54, 1993; Ord. 751 N.S. (VIII-2-13.04), 1985)  
17.50.050 - Applicability. 
A.  Whenever a provision of the Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by the subdivision ordinance, requires the filing of a tentative map or a tentative parcel map, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed, in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
B.  If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction. 
(Ord. 1477 N.S. § 1, 2000; Ord. 751 N.S. (VIII-2-13.05), 1985)  
17.50.060 - Filing and processing. 
A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in the subdivision ordinance for a tentative map except as provided in this section: 
A.  At the time a vesting tentative map is filed it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map." 
B.  At the time a vesting tentative map is filed a subdivider shall also supply the following information: 
1.  A statement that site, architecture and landscape plan approval has been granted, or that application for site, architecture and landscape plan approval and plans have been filed which will be concurrently processed with the vesting tentative map for all buildings to be constructed on lots within the boundary of the vesting tentative map; 
2.  A statement that the vesting tentative map is consistent with the current zoning of the land, or an application has been filed for a zone amendment which will be processed concurrently with the vesting tentative map. If a conditional use permit is required, such permit shall be processed prior or concurrently with the vesting tentative map; 
3.  A tentative utility plan indicating the location of all public utilities and facilities including, but not limited to, facilities for water, sewer, electric, gas, cable TV and street lighting to be installed to serve the subdivision and any facilities which currently exist within the boundary of the subdivision; 
4.  The height, size, location, preliminary or conceptual architectural plans and use of all buildings to be constructed within the subdivision; 
5.  Plans for all site development, including, but not limited to, grading, drainage facilities and miscellaneous structures, prepared by a registered civil engineer in accordance with city standards and approved by the director of public works; 
6.  Required approval letters from other agencies where applicable and feasible; 
7.  When required by the community development department, an economic analysis including analysis of the market for the subdivision; 
8.  Landscape plans, including planting and irrigation details and drawings and specifications as prepared by a licensed landscape architect or contractor satisfactory for review by the director of community development; 
9.  Geological studies in such form as acceptable to the director of public works and the chief building official, which shall include detailed soils reports, seismic analysis, bank stabilization, and other factors pertinent to the particular site location; 
10.  Specific information on the uses to which the proposed buildings will be put; 
11.  Flood control information and statements showing compliance with flood hazard regulations; 
12.  A tree preservation plan. If there are no trees on the site, a statement to that effect should appear on the vesting tentative map. The tree preservation plan shall accurately identify all existing trees as species, trunk size and dripline. Trees that are proposed for removal shall be marked "TO BE REMOVED." Any provisions for tree preservation, transplanting, or new planting shall be identified; 
13.  As determined by the director of community development, a uniform sign program identifying locations of signs; 
14.  The director of community development may request, and the applicant shall promptly furnish, information as may reasonably be necessary to enable the director to evaluate the vesting effect which would follow from approval of the map. 
C.  All vesting tentative map submittals must be accurate and complete, and must satisfy all requirements of the community development department. 
(Ord. 1477 N.S. §§ 2, 3, 2000: Ord. 751 N.S. (VIII-2-13.06), 1985)  
17.50.070 - Fees. 
Upon filing a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall pay the fees required by the subdivision ordinance for the filing and processing of a tentative map. 
(Ord. 751 N.S. (VIII-2-13.07), 1985)  
17.50.080 - Expiration. 
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same extensions, established by this chapter for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map. 
(Ord. 1477 N.S. § 4, 2000: Ord. 751 N.S. (VIII-2-13.08), 1985)  
17.50.090 - Vesting on approval of vesting tentative map. 
A.  The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards described in Government Code Section 66474.2. However, if Section 66474.2 of the Government Code is repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a permit approval, extension or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following are determined: 
1.  A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both; 
2.  The condition or denial is required in order to comply with state or federal law. 
C.  The rights referred to herein shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in Section 17.50.080. If the final map is approved, these rights shall last for the following periods of time: 
1.  An initial time period of one year. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded. All of such final maps must be recorded within the time period set forth in Section 17.50.080 or the vesting tentative map approval shall expire for those parcels for which final maps are not timely recorded; 
2.  The initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds thirty days from the date a complete application is filed; 
3.  A subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section expires. The request for extension shall be submitted, in writing, to the secretary of the planning commission. The planning commission shall review any request for extension and submit a recommendation to the city council. An extension may be granted for a maximum of one year. The city council shall deny a request for extension unless it finds that changes to any city ordinances, policies, or standards that were adopted subsequent to the time of filing the vesting tentative map are not necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare; 
4.  If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subsections (C)(1)—(3) of this section, the rights referred to herein shall continue until the expiration of the permit, or any extension of that permit. 
D.  Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of the project covered by a single vesting tentative map, the one-year initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded. The initial time period shall be automatically extended by any time used by the city for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if the time used by the city to process exceeds thirty days from the date that a complete application is filed. At any time prior to the expiration of the initial time period provided by this section, the subdivider may apply for a one-year extension. If the extension is denied by the planning commission, the subdivider may appeal the denial to the city council within ten days of receiving written notice. If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during periods of time specified herein, the rights of vesting conferred by Section 66498.1 of the Subdivision Map Act shall continue until expiration of that permit or any extension of that permit granted by the local agency. The provisions of this subsection apply only to the extent permitted in a signed development agreement, if applicable in a residential subdivision. 
(Ord. 1477 N.S. § 5, 2000; Ord. 1143 N.S. § 55, 1993; Ord. 751 N.S. (VIII-2-13.09), 1985)  
17.50.094 - Imposition of development fees. 
Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, the development fees for the project described in the vesting map shall be those fees which are in effect charged as of the date the vesting tentative map is deemed completed. 
(Ord. 1584 N.S. § 1, 2002: Ord. 883 N.S. § 1, 1989)  
17.50.100 - Development inconsistent with zoning—Conditional approval. 
A.  Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with the zoning ordinance in existence at that time, that inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The city shall deny such a vesting tentative map if the city finds the vesting tentative map to be inconsistent with zoning of the property or proposed zoning ordinance which is being processed concurrently with the vesting tentative map. If the change in the zoning ordinance is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall, notwithstanding subsection A of Section 17.50.090, confer the vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change in the zoning ordinance and the map, as approved. 
B.  The rights conferred by this section shall be for the time periods set forth in subsection C of Section 17.50.090. 
(Ord. 1477 N.S. § 6, 2000; Ord. 751 N.S. (VIII-2-13.10), 1985)  
17.50.110 - Applications inconsistent with current policies. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, a property owner or his or her designee may seek approvals or permits for development which depart from the ordinances, policies and standards described in subsection A of Section 17.50.090 and Section 17.50.100, and the city may grant these approvals or issue these permits to the extent that the departures are authorized under applicable law. 
(Ord. 751 N.S. (VIII-2-13.11), 1985)  
17.50.115 - Failure to obtain site and architectural approval. 
The city shall deny a vesting tentative map application if site, architecture and landscape plan (site review) approval has not been granted for the subdivision. If the subdivider filed a complete application for site review approval concurrently with filing the vesting tentative map application and final action has not been taken on the site review application, the subdivider may request that the city defer action on the vesting tentative map application until after final action has been taken on the site review application, provided that the subdivider agrees to an extension of any periods within which the city is legally required to act on the vesting tentative subdivision map application. 
(Ord. 1477 N.S. § 7, 2000)  
17.50.120 - Tentative map approvals based on standards in effect. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided, in determining whether to approve or disapprove an application for a vesting tentative map, for which a development agreement has been signed, the city shall only apply those ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the date that the city has determined the application to be complete pursuant to Section 65943 of the Government Code. 
B.  Subsection A shall not apply to applications for vesting tentative maps for which the city has, before determining the applications to be complete pursuant to Section 65943, done both of the following: 
1.  Initiated proceedings by way of ordinance, resolution or motion; 
2.  Published notice in the manner prescribed in Section 65090(a) of the Subdivision Map Act containing a description sufficient to notify the public of the nature of the proposed change in the applicable general or specific plans, or zoning or subdivision ordinances. 
When the city has complied with both subsections (B)(1) and (2) of this section, the city may apply any ordinances, policies or standards enacted or instituted as a result of those proceedings which are in effect on the date that the city approves or disapproves the vesting tentative map. 
C.  If the subdivision applicant requests changes in applicable ordinances, policies or standards in connection with the same development project, any ordinances, policies or standards adopted pursuant to the applicant's request shall apply. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 56, 1993)  
Chapter 17.52 - ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 
 
17.52.010 - Unlawful acts designated. 
A.  No person shall offer to sell or lease, to contract to sell or lease, to sell or lease or to finance any parcel or parcels of real property or to commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon, except for model homes, or to allow occupancy thereof, for which a final map or parcel map is required by this title, or the State Subdivision Map Act, until such map thereof, in full compliance with the provisions of this title, or the State Subdivision Map Act, has been filed with the county recorder for record. 
B.  No person shall sell, lease or finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a parcel map is required by this chapter or the State Subdivision Map Act, until such map thereof, in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the State Subdivision Map Act, has been filed for record by the recorder. 
C.  Conveyances of any part of a division of real property for which a final or parcel map is required by this title shall not be made by parcel or block number, initial or other designation, unless and until such map has been filed for record with the county recorder. 
D.  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit an offer or contract to sell, lease or finance real property or to construct improvements thereon where the sale, lease or financing or the commencement of construction, is expressly conditioned upon the approval and filing of a final subdivision map or parcel map as required by law, nor shall this section modify or affect the provisions of Section 11018.2 of the California Business and Professions Code. 
E.  For purposes of this section, the limitation period for commencing an action, either civil or criminal, against the subdivider or an owner of record at the time of a violation of this title or of the Subdivision Map Act, shall be tolled for any time period during which there is no constructive notice of the transaction constituting the violation, because the owner of record, at the time of the violation or at any time thereafter, failed to record a deed, lease or financing document with the county recorder. Penalties for violation of the Subdivision Map Act are described in Section 66499.31 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 57, 1993; Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.52.020 - Remedies—Conditions—Liability. 
A.  Any deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of this title or the State Subdivision Map Act, is voidable at the sole option of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, his heirs, personal representative or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy within one year after the date of discovery of the violation, but the deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell is binding upon any successor in interest of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchases, other than those above enumerated, and upon the grantor, vendor or person contracting to sell, or his assignee, heir or devisee. 
B.  Any grantee, or his successor in interest, of real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of this title or the State Subdivision Map Act may, within one year of the date of discovery of such violation, bring an action in the superior court to recover any damages he has suffered by reason of such division of property. The action may be brought against the person who divided the property in violation and against any successors in interest who have actual or constructive knowledge of such division of property. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the conveyance of any parcel of real property identified in a certificate of compliance filed pursuant to Section 66499.35 of the Government Code of the state, or identified in a recorded final map or parcel map, from and after the date of recording. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter shall not limit or affect in any way the rights of a grantee or his successor in interest under any other provision of law. 
D.  This chapter does not bar any legal, equitable or summary remedy to which the city or other public agency, or any person, firm or corporation may otherwise be entitled, and the city or other public agency, or such person, firm or corporation may file a suit in the superior court to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision for sale, lease or financing in violation of this title. 
E.  The city shall not issue a permit or grant any approval necessary to develop any real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of this title or the State Subdivision Map Act if it finds that development of such real property is contrary to the public health or the public safety. The authority to deny such a permit or such approval shall apply whether the applicant therefor was the owner of the real property at the time of such violation or whether the applicant therefor is the current owner of the real property with, or without, actual or constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of the acquisition of his interest in such real property. 
F.  The city, in issuing a permit or granting approval for the development of any such real property, may impose those additional conditions as would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the current owner of record acquired the property, and which had been established at such time by this title or location ordinance enacted pursuant thereto, except that if a conditional certificate of compliance has been filed for record under the provisions of this chapter, only such conditions stipulated shall be applicable. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.52.030 - Certificate of compliance—Issuance. 
A.  Any person owning real property within the city, or a vestee of that person pursuant to a contract of sale of the real property, may request the city engineer to determine whether such real property complies with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  Upon making such determination, the city engineer shall cause a certificate of compliance to be filed for record with the recorder of Santa Clara County. Each certificate of compliance shall identify the real property and shall state that the division thereon complies with applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. 
C.  1.  If the city engineer determines that such real property does not comply with the provisions of this code or the Subdivision Map Act, he shall issue a certificate of compliance or a conditional certificate of compliance. The city engineer may, as a condition to granting a certificate of compliance, impose such conditions as would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the applicant acquired his or her interest therein, and which had been established at such time by ordinance. Except that where the applicant was the owner of record at the time of the initial violation of the provisions of this title or the Subdivision Map Act, who by a grant of the real property created a parcel or parcels in violation thereof, and the person is the current owner of record of one or more of the parcels which were created as a result of the grant in violation of this title or the Subdivision Map Act, the city engineer may impose any conditions which may have been applicable to a current division of the property. Upon making the determination and establishing the conditions, the city engineer, or authorized representative, shall cause a conditional certificate of compliance to be filed for record with the county recorder. Such certificate shall serve as notice to the property owner or vestee who has applied for the certificate pursuant to this section, a grantee of the property owner, or any subsequent transferee or assignee of the property. The fulfillment and implementation of such conditions shall be required prior to subsequent issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for development of the property. 
2.  Compliance with such conditions shall not be required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval for development of such property is issued. 
D.  A recorded final map, parcel map or official map, shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein. 
E.  For the purposes of administration of this title, any parcel that is shown on the county assessor's map prior to 1960 shall be considered as a conforming parcel. 
(Ord. 1143 N.S. § 58, 1993: Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
17.52.040 - Certificate of noncompliance—Issuance. 
Whenever the city engineer or an authorized representative has knowledge that real property has been divided in violation of the provisions of this title or the State Subdivision Map Act, they shall cause to be filed for record with the recorder of the county a tentative notice of violation (certificate of noncompliance) describing the real property in detail, naming the owners thereof, and describing the violation and stating that an opportunity will be given to the owner to present evidence. At least thirty days prior to the recording of a final notice, the owner of the real property shall be advised in writing of the intention to record a final notice and specifying a time, date and place at which the owner may present evidence as to why such notice should not be recorded. If, after the owner has presented evidence, it is determined that there has been no violation, a release of the tentative notice shall be filed with the county recorder. Such tentative or final notice, when recorded, shall be deemed to be constructive notice of the violation to all successors in interest in such property. 
(Ord. 635 N.S. § A (part), 1983)  
Title 18 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), adopted June 6, 2018, repealed the former Title 18, Zoning, in its entirety and enacted a new title as set out herein. See Code Comparative Table for a detailed history of derivation. 
 
Division I. - Zoning Code  
Part 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
Chapter 18.04 - INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS 
 
18.04.010 - Title. 
Division I of Title 18 of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code shall be known and cited as the "Morgan Hill Zoning Code" and referred to in this title as the "zoning code." 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.04.020 - Effective date. 
The zoning code takes effect and is in force from and after July 7, 2018. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.04.030 - Authority. 
The zoning code is adopted pursuant to the authority in Section 65850 of the California Government Code and all other relevant laws of the state of California. Whenever the zoning code refers to a section of state law that is later amended or superseded, the zoning code shall be deemed amended to refer to the amended section or the section that most nearly corresponds to the superseded section. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.04.040 - Purpose of the zoning code. 
A.  General. The purpose of the zoning code is to implement the general plan and to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
B.  Specific. The zoning code is intended to: 
1.  Preserve and enhance Morgan Hill's small-town feel and family friendly character. 
2.  Ensure that all development exhibits high-quality design that supports a unique sense of place. 
3.  Protect and enhance the quality of life in residential neighborhoods. 
4.  Encourage active and inviting commercial and mixed-use areas. 
5.  Support a vibrant, diverse, and dynamic local economy. 
6.  Allow for a broad range of housing choices that meets the needs of all segments of the community. 
7.  Protect environmental resources and promote a sustainable development pattern. 
8.  Preserve viable agricultural land, important habitat areas, and recreational open space. 
9.  Support a balanced transportation system that accommodates the needs of automobiles, pedestrians, and bicycles. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.04.050 - Relationship to the general plan. 
The zoning code implements the city of Morgan Hill general plan by establishing detailed regulations for land uses, structures and activities in Morgan Hill. All land uses, structures, and activities in Morgan Hill shall be consistent with the general plan. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.04.060 - Applicability and jurisdiction. 
A.  General. The zoning code applies to all land uses, structures, and activities in the city of Morgan Hill unless an exemption is specifically provided by the zoning code. 
B.  Compliance Required. No land use shall be established nor shall any structure be constructed, altered, or moved until: 
1.  All applicable development review and approval processes have been followed; 
2.  All applicable approvals have been obtained; and 
3.  All required permits or authorizations to proceed have been issued. 
C.  Governmental Activities. The zoning code applies to special districts and state or federal governmental agencies to the extent legally permissible. The zoning code does not apply to public projects of the city of Morgan Hill. Private projects on leased lands owned by the city are not public projects of the city. 
D.  Public Utilities. Public utility facilities are subject to the requirements of the zoning code except to the extent provided by Government Code Section 53091 and the California Public Utilities Code. 
E.  Emergency Powers. The city council may authorize deviations from the zoning code during a local emergency declared and ratified under the Morgan Hill Municipal Code. The city council may authorize a deviation by resolution without notice or public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.04.070 - Conflicting provisions. 
A.  Conflict with State or Federal Regulations. Where conflict occurs with state or federal laws, higher law shall control over lower law unless local variation is permitted. 
B.  Conflict with Other City Regulations. Where the zoning code conflicts with other ordinances, resolutions, or regulations of the city of Morgan Hill, the more restrictive shall control. 
C.  Conflict with Private Agreements. It is not the intent of the zoning code to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any easement, covenant, deed restriction, or other agreement between private parties. If the zoning code imposes a greater restriction than imposed by a private agreement, the zoning code shall control. Private agreements may impose greater restrictions than the zoning code, but the city is not responsible for monitoring or enforcing private agreements. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.04.080 - Transitional provisions. 
A.  Relation to Prior Ordinances. This zoning code supersedes the prior zoning code codified in Title 18 of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code. 
B.  Violations Continue. Any violation of the prior zoning code will continue to be a violation under this zoning code subject to penalties and enforcement under Chapter 18.120 (Enforcement) unless the use, structure, or activity complies with this zoning code. 
C.  Nonconforming Parcels, Uses, and Structures. A legal nonconforming parcel, land use, or structure may be maintained and continue as allowed by Chapter 18.68 (Nonconforming Uses and Structures). 
D.  Previously Approved Projects and Projects in Progress. Permits and approvals valid on or before the effective date of this zoning code remain valid until their expiration date. Projects with valid approvals or permits may be carried out in accordance with the development standards in effect at the time of approval, provided that the permit or approval is valid and has not lapsed. A re-application for a permit or approval that expires after the effective date of this zoning code shall fully comply with the standards in effect at the time of re-application. 
E.  Transition to New Zoning Districts. 
1.  Upon the effective date of this zoning code, land that is zoned with a zoning district classification from the previous zoning code shall be re-classified or translated to one of the zoning districts as established in Chapter 18.14 (Zoning Districts and Map) and shown on the zoning map. 
2.  A property shall comply with the regulations of its zoning district classification as shown on the zoning map. 
F.  Planned Development Zoning Districts. Requirements that applied within a planned development zoning district existing before the effective date of the zoning code shall remain in full force and effect. 
G.  References to Prior Zoning Districts. 
1.  In cases where city ordinances, policies, conditions of approval, and other requirements reference a zoning district classification from the previous zoning code, such references shall be interpreted to mean the equivalent zoning district in this zoning code as shown in Table 18.04-1. 
2.  For requirements based on previous zoning districts with no equivalent zoning district in this zoning code, the requirements of the previous zoning district in effect at the time the reference was established shall continue to apply. 
Table 18.04-1: Equivalent Zoning Districts 
Zoning District from Previous Zoning Code 	Equivalent Zoning District in this Zoning Code 
Residential Zoning Districts 	
Residential Estates (RE) - 10 	Residential Estate (RE) - 10 
Residential Estates (RE) - 10,000 	Residential Estate (RE) - 2.5 
Residential Estates (RE) - 40,000 	Residential Estate (RE) - 1 
Single-Family Low Density Residential (R-1) 	Residential Detached Low Density (RDL) 
Single-Family Medium Density Residential (R-1) 	Residential Detached Medium Density (RDM) 
High Density Single-Family Residential (R-1) 	Residential Detached High Density (RDH) 
Medium-Density Residential (R-2) 	Residential Attached Low Density (RAL) 
Medium-Density Residential (R-3) 	Residential Attached Medium Density (RAM) 
High-Density Residential (R-4) 	Residential Attached High Density (RAH) 
Mixed Use Zoning Districts 	
Central Business District (CBD) 	Downtown Mixed Use (MU-D) 
Central Commercial/Residential (CC-R) 	Neighborhood Mixed Use (MU-N) 
Light Commercial/Residential (CL-R) 	Mixed Use Flex (MU-F) 
Commercial Zoning Districts 	
Administrative Office (CO) 	Administrative Office (CO) 
Neighborhood Commercial (CN) 	Neighborhood Commercial (CN) 
General Commercial (CG) 	General Commercial (CG) 
Highway Commercial (HC) 	Highway Commercial (CH) 
Service Commercial (CS) 	Service Commercial (CS) 
Theme Unit Development (TUD) 	No equivalent zoning district 
Administrative Office (CO) 	No equivalent zoning district 
Industrial Zoning District s 	
No equivalent zoning district 	Commercial Industrial (CI) 
Office Industrial (MO) 	Office Industrial (IO) 
Campus Industrial (MC) 	Campus Industrial (IC) 
Light Industrial (ML) 	Light Industrial (IL) 
General Industrial (MG) 	General Industrial (IG) 
Public, Open Space, and Recreational Zoning Districts 	
Open Space (OS) 	Open Space (OS) 
Public Facilities (PF) 	Public Facilities (PF) 
Sports Recreation Leisure (SRL) 	Sports Recreation Leisure (SRL) 
Overlay Zones and Combining Districts 	
Active Fault Surface Rupture Combining District (AFSR) 	Active Fault Surface Rupture Combining District (AFSR) 
Downtown Ground Floor Overlay (GF) 	Downtown Ground Floor Overlay Zone (DGF) 
Hillside Combining (H) 	Hillside Combining District (H) 
Planned Development Overlay (PD) 	Planned Development Combining District (PD) 
Seismic Combining (S) 	No equivalent zoning district 
Geologic Combining (G) 	No equivalent zoning district 
Legacy Zones 	
Residential Planned Development (RPD) 	No equivalent zoning district 
Planned Unit Development (PUD) 	No equivalent zoning district 
Conditional (C) 	No equivalent zoning district 
 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.04.090 - Severability. 
If any portion of the zoning code is found invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the zoning code. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed the zoning code, and each portion thereof, regardless of the fact that a portion has been declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.08 - INTERPRETATION OF THE ZONING CODE 
 
18.08.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes rules and procedures for interpreting the zoning code to ensure that it is applied and enforced in a consistent manner. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.08.020 - Authority. 
The city council delegates to the community development director and the director's designees the authority to interpret the meaning and applicability of all provisions in the zoning code. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.08.030 - Rules of interpretation. 
A.  Meaning and Intent. All language shall be construed according to the purpose and intent set out in Section 18.04.040 (Purpose of the Zoning Code). 
B.  Minimum Requirements. The zoning code establishes minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. When the zoning code provides for discretion on the part of a city official or body, that discretion may be exercised to impose more stringent requirements as necessary to achieve the purpose and intent of the zoning code set out Section 18.04.040 (Purpose of the Zoning Code). 
C.  Headings, Illustrations, and Text. In cases where text conflicts with any heading, table, or figure, the text controls. 
D.  Lists and Examples. Unless otherwise specifically indicated, lists of items or examples that use terms such as "including," "such as," or similar language are intended to provide examples, not to be exhaustive lists of all possibilities. 
E.  Computation of Time. References to days are calendar days unless otherwise stated. When business days are referenced, they shall include only days when City Hall is open. The end of a time period shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If the last day is a holiday observed by the city or a City Hall non-business day, that day shall be excluded. 
F.  References to Other Regulations, Publications, and Documents. Whenever reference is made to a resolution, ordinance, regulation, or document, it shall be construed as a reference to the most recent edition of such resolution, ordinance, regulation, or document, unless specifically stated. 
G.  Technical and Non-Technical Terms. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases that may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
H.  Public Officials and Agencies. All public officials, bodies, and agencies to which references are made are those of the city of Morgan Hill, unless otherwise indicated. 
I.  Mandatory and Discretionary Terms. The words "shall," "will," "must," and "is" are always mandatory. The words "may" and "should" are advisory and discretionary terms. 
J.  Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly suggests the contrary, conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows: 
1.  "And" means that all connected items, conditions, provisions, or events apply. 
2.  "And/or" means that the connected words or provisions may apply singularly or in any combination. 
3.  "Or" means that one or more of the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply. 
4.  "Either…or" means that the connected words or provisions shall apply singularly but not in combination. 
K.  Tenses and Plurals. Words used in one tense (past, present, or future) include all other tenses, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular. 
L.  Terms Not Defined. In the event there is a term used in the zoning code that is not defined in this title, the community development director shall have the authority to provide a definition based upon intended meaning of the undefined term. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.08.040 - Land use regulations. 
A.  Land Use Regulation Tables. Land use regulation tables in Part 2 (Zoning Districts and Overlay Zones) establish permitted land uses within each zoning district. Notations within these tables have the following meanings: 
1.  Permitted Uses. A "P" means that a use is permitted by right in the zoning district and is not subject to discretionary review and approval. 
2.  Conditionally Permitted Uses. A "C" means that a use requires approval of a conditional use permit. An "A" means that a use requires approval of an administrative use permit. 
3.  Uses Not Allowed. A "-" means that a use is not allowed in the zoning district. 
B.  Unlisted Land Uses. 
1.  A land use not listed in a land use regulation table is not permitted if the use is listed as a permitted use in one or more other zoning districts. In such a case, the absence of the use in the land use regulation table means that the use is prohibited in the zoning district. 
2.  For a proposed use unlisted in all land use regulation tables, the community development director may determine that the proposed use is equivalent to a permitted or conditionally permitted use if all of the following findings can be made: 
a.  The use is similar to other uses allowed in the zoning district. 
b.  The density or intensity of the use is similar to other uses in the zoning district. 
c.  The use is compatible with permitted or conditionally permitted uses in the zoning district. 
d.  The use will meet the purpose of the zoning district. 
e.  The use is consistent with the goals and policies of the general plan. 
f.  The use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
3.  When the community development director determines that a proposed use is equivalent to a listed use, the proposed use shall be treated in the same manner as the listed use with respect to development standards, permits required, and all applicable requirements of the zoning code. 
C.  Unlawful Uses. Uses that are unlawful under federal or state law are prohibited uses within Morgan Hill. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.08.050 - Zoning map. 
A.  Zoning Map Boundaries. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zoning districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules apply: 
1.  Boundaries shown as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys are construed to follow the centerlines. 
2.  Boundaries shown as approximately following platted lot lines are construed as following the lot lines. 
3.  Boundaries shown as approximately following city limits are construed as following city limits. 
4.  Boundaries shown following railroad lines are construed to be midway between the main tracks. 
5.  In unsubdivided property or where a zoning district boundary divides a parcel, the location of the boundary is determined by the use of the scale appearing on the zoning map. 
6.  In case further uncertainty exists, the community development director shall determine the exact location of the boundaries. The director's decision may be appealed to the planning commission to determine the exact location of the boundaries. 
B.  Parcels Containing Two or More Zoning Districts. 
1.  For parcels containing two or more zoning districts ("split zoning"), the location of the zoning district boundary shall be determined by the community development director. 
2.  For parcels containing two or more zoning districts, the regulations for each zoning district shall apply within the zoning district boundaries as identified on the zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.08.060 - Procedures for interpretation/determinations. 
A.  Requests for Interpretation. The community development director shall respond in writing to written requests for interpretation of the zoning code if the requested interpretation would substantially clarify an ambiguity which interferes with the effective administration of the zoning code. When the director makes such a determination, the following procedures apply: 
1.  The request shall be in writing, shall identify the provision to be interpreted, and shall be accompanied by the fee identified in the latest planning fee schedule. 
2.  The request shall provide any information that the director requires to assist in its review. 
3.  The director shall respond to an interpretation request within thirty days of receiving a complete request. 
B.  Form and Content of Interpretation. Official interpretations prepared by the director shall be in writing, and shall quote the zoning code provisions being interpreted. The interpretation shall describe the circumstance that caused the need for the interpretation. 
C.  Official Record of Interpretations. An official record of interpretations shall be kept and updated regularly by the development services department. The record of interpretations shall be indexed by the number of the section that is the subject of the interpretation and made available for public inspection during normal business hours. 
D.  Referral to Planning Commission. The director may refer any request for interpretation of the zoning code to the planning commission for review and interpretation. 
E.  Appeals. Any official interpretation prepared by the Director may be appealed to the planning commission. The planning commission's interpretation may be appealed to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.12 - Rules of Measurement 
 
18.12.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes rules for the measurement of standards contained in the zoning code. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.12.020 - Building coverage. 
A.  Building Coverage. Building coverage means the total horizontal area of all buildings on a lot divided by the net lot area. Total horizontal building area is measured from the exterior surface of the exterior ground floor walls of all principal and accessory buildings on the lot. 
B.  Building Coverage (Exclusions). Building coverage does not include the following: 
1.  Unenclosed and unroofed decks, uncovered patio slab, porches, landings, balconies and stairways less than eighteen inches in height at surface of deck (and less than six feet including railings). See Figure 18.12-1. 
2.  Eaves and roof overhangs projecting less than two feet from a wall. 
3.  Areas covered by a trellis or similar structure where at least fifty percent of the area is open to the sky with uniformly distributed openings. 
4.  Swimming pools and hot tubs that are not enclosed in roofed structures or deck. 
  
Figure 18.12-1: Deck Excluded from Building Coverage
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.12.030 - Density. 
Density means the number of dwelling units divided by the net lot area. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.12.040 - Distances. 
A.  Measurements Are Shortest Distance. When measuring a required distance, such as the minimum distance between a structure and a lot line, the measurement is made at the closest or shortest distance between the two objects. 
B.  Distances Are Measured Horizontally. When measuring distances for setbacks and structure dimensions, all distances are measured along a horizontal plane from the appropriate line, edge of building, structure, storage area, parking area, or other object. Distances are not measured following the topography or slope of the land. 
C.  Measurements Involving a Structure. Measurements involving a structure are made to the closest support element of the structure. Structures or portions of structures that are entirely underground are not included in measuring required distances. 
D.  Measuring Radius. When a specified land use is required to be located a minimum distance from another land use, the minimum distance is measured in a straight line from all points along the lot line of the subject project, in all directions. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.12.050 - Floor area and floor area ratio. 
A.  Floor Area. 
1.  Floor area means the total enclosed area of all floors of a building measured from the outside face of the structural members in outside walls. 
2.  The floor area calculation includes the following: 
a.  Covered parking areas for residential uses, including detached garages. 
b.  Staircases and elevator shafts at each floor level. 
Service and mechanical equipment rooms. 
c.  Areas with a solid roof even if open on the sides (e.g., covered porches, patios, and California rooms). 
d.  For nonresidential uses, interior walkways or corridors, interior courtyards, walkways, paseos, or corridors covered by a roof or skylight. 
3.  The floor area calculation does not include the following: 
a.  Attic areas as defined in Section 18.128.020.A ("A" Terms). 
b.  Covered parking areas for non-residential uses. 
c.  Basement area as defined in Section 18.128.020.B ("B" Terms). 
d.  Front-facing covered porches where at least fifty percent of the sides are open and exposed (without walls) to adjacent outdoor space. 
e.  Areas covered by a trellis or similar structure where at least fifty percent of the area is open to the sky with uniformly distributed openings. 
f.  Windows or other architectural projections where the vertical distance between the lowest surface of the projection and the finished floor is thirty inches or more. 
g.  For nonresidential uses, arcades, porticoes, and similar open areas that are located at or near street level and are accessible to the general public but are not designed or used as sales, display, storage, service, or production areas. 
B.  Floor Area Ratio. Floor area ratio means the ratio of the total floor area of all buildings on a lot to the net lot area. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.12.060 - Height. 
A.  Building Height. Building height means the vertical distance from the average contact ground level at the front wall of the building to the highest point of the building. See Figure 18.12-2. 
  
Figure 18.12-2: Building Height
B.  Number of Stories. 
1.  Basements and Cellars. A basement or cellar shall not be included in the calculation of number of stories of a building if the finished surface of the floor above is six feet or less below the average level of the adjoining grade. See Figure 18.12-3. 
  
Figure 18.12-3 Number of Stories - Basement or Cellar Height
2.  Mezzanines. A mezzanine shall not be included in the calculation of number of stories if: 
a.  The mezzanine floor area is one-third or less of the total area of the full floor directly below it; and 
b.  The mezzanine is open on at least two sides to the full floor below. 
C.  Fence or Wall Height. 
1.  Fence or wall height means the vertical distance from the bottom to the top of the fence or wall. 
2.  Fences placed on top of a retaining wall do not include the height of retaining wall. 
3.  If the adjacent finished grade is different on opposite sides of a fence or wall, the height is measured from the side with the lowest finished grade to the highest point on the fence or wall. 
D.  Freestanding Structure Height. For freestanding structures such as poles and towers, structure height means the vertical distance from the finished grade at the base of the structure to the highest point of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.12.070 - Lot area and dimensions. 
A.  Lot Area. Lot area means the net site area of a lot, expressed in terms of acres or square feet. Lot area does not include: 
1.  Land within the limits of a street (public or private) upon which the lot abuts, even if fee title to such street is held by the owner. 
2.  All public easements (e.g., public streets, utility lines). 
3.  All private easements (e.g., private streets, accessways) other than streets which are in excess of fifteen percent of the net site area of the lot. 
B.  Lot Depth. 
1.  For lots other than flag lots, lot depth means the horizontal distance from the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line, or to the most distant point on any other lot line where there is no rear lot line. See Figure 18.12-4. 
2.  For flag lots, lot depth is measured as the distance of the shortest side property line. 
  
Figure 18.12-4: Lot Depth and Width
C.  Lot Width. 
1.  For lots other than cul-de-sac lots, lot width means the distance measured along a straight line between the midpoints of the side property lines. 
2.  For flag lots, the measurement of the midpoint of the side property lines excludes the narrow corridor providing access to the street. 
3.  For cul-de-sac lots, lot width is measured at the rear property line. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.12.080 - Setbacks. 
A.  Measure at Right Angles. The distance/depth of a setback area (i.e., front, side, or rear) shall be measured at right angles from the nearest property line establishing a setback area line parallel to that lot line. See Figure 18.12-4. 
  
Figure 18.12-4: Setbacks
B.  Planned Street Widening. Where a lot abuts a street designated for a future widening, required minimum setbacks shall be measured from the edge of the planned future right-of-way. 
C.  Future Street Right-of-Way. Where a future street right-of-way is planned or established, required minimum setbacks shall be measured from property lines that define the edge of the future right-of-way. 
D.  Alleys. 
1.  If side lot line abuts an alley, the lot line shall be treated as interior side lot line for the purpose of establishing minimum required setbacks. 
2.  The width of an adjoining alley is not included in the measurement of a required setback. 
E.  Rear Lot Lines. 
1.  Irregularly Shaped Lots. Where the side lot lines converge to a point at the rear of the lot and make an angle ninety degrees or less, a line ten feet long within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line, shall be deemed to be the rear lot line for the purpose of determining the depth of the required rear setback area. Where the angle created by the convergence of two side lot lines at the rear of the lot is greater than ninety degrees, a line ten feet long measured from the point of convergence and perpendicular to the front lot line shall establish the location of the required rear setback line. See Figure 18.12-4. 
  
Figure 18.12-4: Rear Lot Lines for Irregularly Shaped Lots
2.  Double-Frontage Lots. The location of the front and rear yard setbacks on double-frontage lots shall be determined by the community development director based on the placement of existing buildings on adjacent lots. 
F.  Measuring Structure Distance from Lot Lines. The distance of a structure from a lot line shall be measured as the distance between the lot line and the closest point on the exterior of a building or structure along a line at right angles to the lot line. See Figure 18.12-5. 
  
Figure 18.12-5: Measuring Structure Distance from Lot Lines
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.12.090 - Slope. 
A.  Formula. Average ground slope shall be made using the formula S = .00229(I)(L)/A, where: 
1.  S = Average slope (in percent) 
2.  I = Contour interval (in feet) 
3.  L = Total length of all contour lines on the parcel (in feet) 
4.  A = Lot area (in acres) 
B.  Contour Intervals. Measurements along contours shall be made at contour intervals not to exceed ten feet, and a horizontal map scale of one inch equals two hundred feet or larger. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.14 - ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP 
 
18.14.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter identifies the zoning districts that apply to land within the Morgan Hill city limits and establishes the official Morgan Hill zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.14.020 - Zoning districts. 
A.  Base Zoning Districts. Morgan Hill is divided into zoning districts that implement the general plan land use map as shown in Table 18.14-1. 
Table 18.14-1: Base Zoning Districts 
Zoning District Symbol 	Name of Zoning District 	General Plan Designation 
Residential Zoning Districts 
RE 10 	Residential Estate (10 acre lots) 	Residential Estate 
RE 2.5 	Residential Estate (2.5 acre lots) 	
RE 1 	Residential Estate (1 acre lots) 	
RDL 20,000 	Residential Detached Low Density (20,000 sq. ft. lots) 	Residential Detached Low 
RDL 12,000 	Residential Detached Low Density (12,000 sq. ft. lots) 	
RDM 9,000 	Residential Detached Medium Density (9,000 sq. ft. lots) 	Residential Detached Medium 
RDM 7,000 	Residential Detached Medium Density (7,000 sq. ft. lots) 	
RDH 4,500 	Residential Detached High Density (4,500 sq. ft. lots) 	Residential Detached High 
RAL 3,500 	Residential Attached Low Density (3,500 sq. ft. per unit) 	Residential Attached Low 
RAL 3,000 	Residential Attached Low Density (3,000 sq. ft. per unit) 	
RAM 	Residential Attached Medium Density (2,000 sq. ft. per unit) 	Residential Attached Medium 
RAH 	Residential Attached High Density (1,100 sq. ft. per unit) 	Residential Downtown 
Mixed Use Zoning Districts 
MU-D 	Downtown Mixed Use 	Downtown Mixed Use 
MU-N 	Neighborhood Mixed Use 	
MU-F 	Mixed Use Flex 	Mixed Use Flex 
Commercial Zoning Districts 
CN 	Neighborhood Commercial 	Commercial General Commercial 
CG 	General Commercial 	
CO 	Administrative Office 	
CH 	Highway Commercial 	
CS 	Service Commercial 	
Industrial Zoning Districts 
CI 	Commercial Industrial 	Industrial and Commercial/Industrial 
IO 	Office Industrial 	
IC 	Campus Industrial 	
IL 	Light Industrial 	
IG 	General Industrial 	
Public, Open Space, and Recreational Zoning Districts 
OS 	Open Space 	Open Space 
PF 	Public Facilities 	Public Facilities 
SRL 	Sports Recreation Leisure (A and B) 	Sports Recreation Leisure 
 
B.  Overlay Zones and Combining Districts. The zoning code and zoning map include the overlay zones and combining districts shown in Table 18.14-2. Overlay zones and combining districts impose additional regulations on properties beyond what is required by the underlying base zoning district. 
Table 18.14-2: Overlay Zones 
Overlay Zone Symbol 	Name of Overlay Zone or Combining District 
AFSR 	Active Fault Surface Rupture Combining District 
DGF 	Downtown Ground Floor Overlay Zone 
DTSP 	Downtown Specific Plan Overlay Zone 
H 	Hillside Combining District 
PD 	Planned Development Combining District 
 
C.  Legacy Zones. 
1.  A legacy zone is base zoning district, overlay zone, or combining district which was applied to a property prior to July 7, 2018, remains the zoning in effect for the property, but which may not be applied to any additional properties as of July 7, 2018. All rules and regulations of the legacy zone, and any subsequent amendments thereto, continue to apply to the subject property. 
2.  The Zoning Map shows the following three legacy zones: 
a.  Residential planned development (RPD) overlay district. 
b.  Planned unit development (PUD) base zoning district. 
c.  Conditional (C) base zoning district. 
3.  Where a legacy zone is shown on the zoning map, the requirements of that legacy zone as originally applied to a property remain in full force and effect. 
4.  Permitted land uses, development standards, and other provisions that apply within a legacy zone may be amended in accordance with Chapter 18.114 (Zoning Code Amendments). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.14.030 - Zoning map. 
A.  Adoption. The city council hereby adopts the Morgan Hill zoning map ("zoning map"), which establishes the boundaries of all base zoning districts and overlay zones provided for in the zoning map. 
B.  Incorporation by Reference. The zoning map, including all legends, symbols, notations, references, and other information shown on the map, is incorporated by reference and made a part of the zoning code. 
C.  Location. The zoning map is kept, maintained, and updated electronically by the development services department, and is available for viewing by the public at the department and on the official Morgan Hill city website. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Part 2 - ZONING DISTRICTS  
Chapter 18.16 - RESIDENTIAL DETACHED ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
18.16.010 - Purpose of the residential detached zoning districts. 
A.  General. The purpose of the residential detached zoning districts is to support attractive, safe, and friendly single-family residential neighborhoods consistent with Morgan Hill's unique small-town feel. Development within the residential detached zoning districts features high quality design that enhances the visual character of the community. The mass, scale, and design of new homes support pleasant and walkable neighborhoods that complement Morgan Hill's existing community character. 
B.  Specific. 
1.  Residential Estate (RE). The purpose of the RE zoning district is to provide locations for detached single-family homes on large lots in a semi-rural setting. The RE zoning district is divided into three subzones allowing for a range of permitted residential densities. 
2.  Residential Detached Low Density (RDL). The purpose of the RDL zoning district is to provide locations for detached single-family homes in low-density single-family neighborhoods. The RDL zoning district is divided into two subzones allowing for a range of permitted residential densities. 
3.  Residential Detached Medium Density (RDM). The purpose of the RDM zoning district is to provide locations for detached single-family homes and a limited number of duet units in medium-density single-family neighborhoods. The RDM zoning district is divided into two subzones allowing for a range of permitted residential densities. 
4.  Residential Detached High Density (RDH). The purpose of the RDH zoning district is to provide locations for detached single-family homes on small lots and a limited number of duet units in high-density single-family neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.16.020 - Land use regulations. 
A.  Permitted Land Uses. Table 18.16-1 identifies land uses permitted in the residential districts. 
Table 18.16-1: Permitted Land Uses — Residential Detached Zoning Districts 
Key 
P Permitted Use 
A Administrative Use Permit required 
C Conditional Use Permit required 
— Use not allowed 	Zoning District 	Additional 
Regulations 
	RE 	RDL 	RDM 	RDH 	
Residential Uses 					
Accessory Dwelling Units 	P 	P 	P 	P 	Chapter 18.84 
Duets 	— 	— 	P [1,2] 	P [2] 	
Residential Care Facilities, Small 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Single-Family Detached Dwellings 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Public and Quasi-Public Uses 					
Community Assembly 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Cultural Institutions 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Day Care Centers 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Home Day Care, Large and Small 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Parks and Recreational Facilities [5] 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Public Safety Facilities 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Schools, Public and Private 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Transportation, Communication, and Utility Uses 					
Wireless Communications Facilities 	See Chapter 18.96 	
Agriculture and Natural Resource Uses 					
Crop Cultivation 	P [3,4] 	— 	— 	— 	
Other Uses 					
Accessory Uses 	See Chapter 18.44 	
Home Occupations 	See Section 18.92.060 	
Temporary Uses 	See Section 18.92.150 	
Urban Agriculture 					
 Home Gardens 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
 Community Gardens 	A 	A 	A 	A 	
 Urban Farms 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
 
Notes: 
[1] Permitted on corner lots only. 
[2] Limited to no more than twenty-five percent of total dwelling units within a single project or subdivision, excluding two-lot subdivisions. 
[3] Mushroom farms are prohibited. 
[4] On-site sale of products is prohibited. 
[5] Park and recreational facilities accessory to a residential use (e.g., a clubhouse serving a residential subdivision) are permitted by right. 
B.  Additional Permits. In addition to permits identified in Table 18.16-1, proposed projects in the detached residential zoning districts may also require a design permit pursuant to Section 18.108.040 (Design Permits). Modifications to a historic resource may require a Historic Alteration pursuant to Chapter 18.60 (Historic Resources). 
C.  Residential Building Allotments. All residential development must comply with the voter-approved residential development control system (RDCS) as established in Chapter 18.78 (Residential Development Control System). The RDCS requires proposed residential projects to first receive residential building allotments before applying for land use entitlements. Section 18.78.050.C (Exemptions from Allotments) identifies types of residential projects exempt from the requirement to obtain residential building allotments. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.16.030 - Development standards. 
A.  General. Tables 18.16-2, 18.16-3, and 18.16-4 identify development standards in the residential detached zoning districts. 
B.  Garage and Carport Setbacks. The entrance of a garage or carport shall be setback a minimum of twenty feet from the edge of a sidewalk or public right-of-way, whichever is closer. See Figure 18.16-1. 
  
Figure 18.16-1: Garage Setbacks
C.  Reverse Corner Lots — RDM and RDH Zoning Districts. In the RDM and RDH zoning districts, a fifteen-foot minimum side yard setback is required when the side yard of a two-story residence is adjacent to a rear yard on an adjoining lot. See Figure 18.16-2. 
  
Figure 18.16-2: Reverse Corner Lots — RDM Zoning District
D.  Reduced Front Setbacks — RDM Zoning District. The minimum front setback in the RDM zoning district is 15 feet for up to a 26-foot wide portion of the front elevation of a home. See Figure 18.16-3. 
  
Figure 18.16-3: Reduced Front Setback — RDM Zoning District
E.  Cul-De-Sac Lot Width. In all detached residential zoning districts, the minimum width of a cul-de-sac lot is forty feet as measured along the radius of the front property line. 
F.  Arterial Roadway Setbacks. The following setback requirements apply to residential development adjacent an arterial roadway, as identified in the general plan. 
1.  The minimum front yard setback for residential development fronting an arterial roadway is thirty feet. 
2.  All residential development with rear or side yard setback areas adjacent to an arterial street shall provide a minimum fence/wall setback of fifteen feet with an average of twenty feet from the face of the curb. 
G.  Freeway Setbacks. The minimum setback for residential development adjacent to the freeway is sixty feet. Accessory structures and ancillary uses, excluding guest houses or other habitable living space, may be located within the sixty-foot setback area. 
Table 18.16-2: Residential Estate (RE) District Development Standards 
	Residential Estate Subzones 	Additional 
Standards 
	RE-10 	RE-2.5 	RE-1 	
Site Requirements 				
Lot Area, Minimum 	10 acres 	2.5 acres 	1 acre 	
Lot Width, Minimum 	200 ft. 	150 ft. 	100 ft. 	18.16.030.F 
Lot Depth, Minimum 	200 ft. 	150 ft. 	100 ft. 	
Building Coverage, Maximum 	15% 	25% 	30% 	
Structure Requirements 				
Setbacks, Minimum 				18.56.030 
 Front 	50 ft. 	50 ft. 	25 ft. 	18.16.030.C and G 
 Rear 	50 ft. 	25 ft. 	25 ft. 	
 Interior Side 	50 ft. 	25 ft. 	20 ft. 	
 Street Side 	25 ft. 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 	
Height, Maximum 	30 ft. 	18.56.020 
 
Table 18.16-3: Residential Detached Low and Medium Density District Development Standards 
	RDL-20,000 	RDL-12,000 	RDM-9,000 	RDM-7,000 	Additional Standards 
Site Requirements 					
Lot Area, Minimum 					
 Single-Family Lot or Corner Duplex 	20,000 sq. ft. 	12,000 sq. ft. 	9,000 sq. ft. 	7,000 sq. ft.; 7,500 sq. ft. for corner lots 	
 Corner Duet Lot [1] 			4,200 sq. ft. 	3,500 sq. ft. 	
Lot Width, Minimum 					18.16.030.F 
 Single-Family Lot 	100 ft. 	75 ft. 	70 ft. 	60 ft. 	
 Corner Duet Lot 			40 ft. 	40 ft. 	
Lot Depth, Minimum 	100 ft. 	100 ft. 	85 ft. 	85 ft. 	
Building Coverage, Maximum 	40% 	40% 	50% 	50% 	
Structure Requirements 					
Setbacks, Minimum 					18.56.030 
 Front 	25 ft. 	25 ft. 	First Story: 20 ft. 
Upper Stories: 25 ft. 	First Story: 20 ft. 
Upper Stories: 25 ft. 	18.16.030.C, E and G 
 Rear 	25 ft. 	25 ft. 	First Story: 20 ft. 
Upper Stories: 25 ft. 	First Story: 20 ft. 
Upper Stories: 25 ft. 	
 Interior Side 	15 ft. 	First Story: 10 ft. 
Upper Stories: 15 ft. 	First Story: 5 ft. 
Upper Stories: 12.5 ft. 	First Story: 5 ft. 
Upper Stories: 12.5 ft. 	18.16.030.D 
 Street Side 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 	
Height, Maximum 	30 ft. 	30 ft. 	30 ft. 	30 ft. 	18.56.020 
 
Notes: 
[1] The combined lot area of two adjacent duet lots may be no less than the minimum lot area required for single-family detached dwellings. 
Table 18.16-4: Residential Detached High Density District Development Standards 
	RDH-4,500 	Additional Standards 
Site Requirements 		
Lot Area, Minimum 		
 Single-family detached lots 	4,500 sq. ft. 	
 Corner single-family detached lots 	5,000 sq. ft. 	
 Duet lots 	3,500 sq. ft. 	
Lot Width, Minimum 		18.16.030.F 
 Lots less than 5,000 sq. ft. 	40 ft. 	
 Lots 5,000 sq. ft. or greater 	50 ft. 	
Lot Depth, Minimum 	85 ft. 	
Floor Area Ratio, Maximum 	52% 	
Structure Requirements 		
Setbacks, Minimum 		18.56.030 
 Front 	First story: 15 ft. 
Upper stories: 20 ft. 	18.16.030.C and G 
 Rear 	15 ft. 	
 Interior Side 	First story: 10% of lot width 
Upper stories: 15% of lot width 	
 Street Side 	9 ft. 	
Height, Maximum 	35 ft. 	18.56.020 
 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.18 - RESIDENTIAL ATTACHED ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
18.18.010 - Purpose of the residential attached districts. 
A.  General. The purpose of the residential attached zoning districts is to provide locations for attached housing types to meet the full range of housing needs in Morgan Hill. The residential attached zoning districts accommodate small lot single-family homes, townhomes, and multi-family dwellings at a range of densities. The residential attached zoning district increases housing options for seniors, young people, renters, and smaller households. Housing in the residential attached zoning district is carefully integrated with surrounding development, supports the economic vitality of nearby commercial areas, and increases opportunities for residents to walk or bike to destinations. 
B.  Specific. 
1.  Residential Attached Low Density (RAL). The purpose of the RAL zoning district is to provide locations for low density attached housing types. The RAL zoning district is divided into two subzones allowing for a range of permitted residential densities. 
2.  Residential Attached Medium Density (RAM). The purpose of the RAM zoning district is to provide locations for medium density attached housing types. 
3.  Residential Attached High Density (RAH). The purpose of the RAH zoning district is to provide locations for high density attached housing types typically within and adjacent to Downtown Morgan Hill. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.18.020 - Land use regulations. 
A.  Permitted Land Uses. Table 18.18-1 identifies land uses permitted in the residential attached zoning districts. 
Table 18.18-1: Permitted Land Uses — Residential Attached Zoning Districts 
Key 
P Permitted Use 
A Administrative Use Permit required 
C Conditional Use Permit required 
— Use not allowed 	Zoning District 	Additional Regulations 
	RAL 	RAM 	RAH 	
Residential Uses 				
Accessory Dwelling Units 	P [2] 	P [2] 	P [2] 	Chapter 18.84 
Duets and Duplexes 	P 	P 	P 	
Group Housing 	C [1] 	C 	C 	
Multi-Family Dwellings 	P 	P 	P 	
Nursing Homes and Long-Term Care 	C 	C 	C 	
Residential Care Facilities 	C 	C 	C 	
Residential Care Facilities, Small 	P 	P 	P 	
Single-Family Attached Dwellings 	P 	P 	P 	
Single-Family Detached Dwellings 	P [3, 4] 	P [4] 	P [4] 	
Public and Quasi-Public Uses 				
Community Assembly 	C 	C 	C 	
Cultural Institutions 	C 	C 	C 	
Day Care Centers 	C 	C 	C 	
Home Day Care, Large and Small 	P 	P 	P 	
Parks and Recreational Facilities [5] 	C 	C 	C 	
Public Safety Facilities 	C 	C 	C 	
Schools, Public and Private 	C 	C 	C 	
Transportation, Communication, and Utility Uses 				
Wireless Communication Facilities 	See Chapter 18.96 	
Other Uses 				
Accessory Uses and Structures 	See Chapter 18.44 	
Home Occupations 	See Section 18.92.060 	
Temporary Uses and Structures 	See Section 18.92.150 	
Urban Agriculture 				
 Home Gardens 	P 	P 	P 	
 Community Gardens 	A 	A 	A 	
 Urban Farms 	C 	C 	C 	
 
Notes: 
[1] Limited to no more than eight residents. 
[2] Permitted only on lots occupied by one existing or proposed detached single-family home. 
[3] Up to twenty-five percent of homes within a development project may be small-lot single family homes with a maximum lot area of three thousand five hundred square feet. 
[4] Permitted only on a lot of record existing prior to July 7, 2018. 
[5] Park and recreational facilities accessory to a residential use (e.g., a clubhouse serving a residential subdivision) are permitted by right. 
B.  Additional Permits. In addition to permits identified in Table 18.18-1, development projects in the attached residential zoning districts may also require a design permit pursuant to Section 18.108.040 (Design Permits). Modifications to a historic resource may require a historic alteration pursuant to Chapter 18.60 (Historic Preservation). 
C.  Residential Building Allotments. All residential development must comply with the voter-approved residential development control system (RDCS) as established in Chapter 18.78 (Residential Development Control System). The RDCS requires proposed residential projects to first receive residential building allotments before applying for land use entitlements. Section 18.78.050.C (Exemptions from Allotments) identifies types of residential projects exempt from the requirement to obtain residential building allotments. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.18.030 - Development standards. 
A.  General. Tables 18.18-2 and 18.18-3 identifies development standards in the residential attached zoning districts. 
B.  Alternative Standards for RAL and RAM Zoning Districts. Proposed development in the RAL and RAM zoning districts may utilize alternative development standards in Chapter 18.40 (Alternative Standards for Medium Density Residential Development). These standards apply to small lot single-family homes, townhomes, courtyard homes, and other housing types appropriate for a low- and medium-density residential setting. 
C.  Cul-De-Sac Lot Width. The minimum width of a cul-de-sac lot is forty feet as measured along the radius of the front property line. 
D.  Arterial Roadway Setbacks. The following setback requirements apply to residential development adjacent an arterial roadway, as identified in the general plan. 
1.  The minimum front yard setback for residential development fronting an arterial roadway is thirty feet. 
2.  All residential development with rear or side yard setback areas adjacent to an arterial street shall provide a minimum fence/wall setback of fifteen feet with an average of twenty feet from the face of the curb. 
Table 18.18-2: Residential Attached Low Density Development Standards 
	Residential Attached Low Density Subzones 	
	RAL-3,500 	RAL-3,000 	Additional Standards 
Site Requirements 			
Lot Area, Minimum 			
 Duplex lots 	7,000 sq. ft. 	6,000 sq. ft. 	
 Duplex corner lots 	7,500 sq. ft. 	6,500 sq. ft. 	
 Duet lots 	3,500 sq. ft. 	3,000 sq. ft. 	
 Duet corner lots 	3,750 sq. ft. 	3,250 sq. ft. 	
 Multi-family and other uses 	3,500 sq. ft. 	3,000 sq. ft. 	
Lot Width, Minimum 			18.18.030.D 
 Duplex lots 	70 ft. 	70 ft. 	
 Duplex corner lots 	80 ft. 	80 ft. 	
 Duet and single-family attached lots 	30 ft. 	30 ft. 	
 Duet and single-family attached corner lots 	40 ft. 	40 ft. 	
Other uses allowed in Table 18.18-1 	50 ft. or as determined through the Conditional Use Permit 	
Lot Depth, Minimum 	85 ft. 	85 ft. 	
Building Coverage, Maximum 	50% 	50% 	
Site Area per Dwelling Unit, minimum 	3,500 sq. ft. 	3,000 sq. ft. 	
Structure Requirements 			
Setbacks, Minimum 			18.56.030 
 Front 	20 ft. 	20 ft. 	18.18.030.E 
 Rear 	15 ft.; or 20 ft. for two-story, located adjacent to a single-family district 	15 ft.; or 20 ft. for two-story, located adjacent to a single-family district 	
 Interior Side 	5 ft. 	5 ft. 	
 Street Side 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 	
Height, Maximum 	30 ft. 	30 ft. 	18.56.020 
 
Table 18.18-3: Residential Attached Medium Density and High Density Development Standards 
	RAM 	RAH 	Additional Standards 
Site Requirements 			
Lot Area, Minimum 	6,000 sq. ft.; 
4,500 sq. ft. for corner lots 	6,000 sq. ft.; 
6,500 sq. ft. for corner lots 	
Lot Width, Minimum 	60 ft. 	40 ft. 	18.18.030.D 
Lot Depth, Minimum 	85 ft. 	75 ft. 	
Building Coverage, Maximum 	60% 	60% 	
Site Area per Dwelling Unit, Minimum 	2,000 sq. ft. 	1,100 sq. ft. 	
Structure Requirements 			
Setbacks, Minimum 			18.56.030 
 Front 	15 	15 	18.18.030.E 
 Rear 	20 	15 	
 Interior Side 	5 	5 	
 Street Side 	15 	15 	
Height, Maximum 	3 stories or 40 ft., whichever is less; min. 10 ft. for roof element on 3 story structure 	3 stories or 40 ft., whichever is less; min. 10 ft. for roof element on 3 story structure 	18.56.020 
 
E.  Freeway Setbacks. The minimum setback for residential development adjacent to the freeway is sixty feet. Accessory uses and buildings may be located within the sixty-foot setback area. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.22 - MIXED USE ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
18.22.010 - Purpose of the mixed use zoning districts. 
A.  General. The purpose of the mixed use zoning districts is to provide for active and inviting destinations in Morgan Hill with a diversity of residential and commercial land uses. In the mixed use zoning districts the design of development supports a welcoming, pedestrian-friendly public realm. A diversity of local and independent businesses, recreational amenities, and public spaces meet the needs of residents, workers, and visitors. New development respects Morgan Hill's history and reflects its unique small-town feel. The diversity of land uses, pedestrian-friendly development, and general level of activity in the mixed use zoning districts supports a range of transportation choices, including walking, biking, and transit. 
B.  Specific. 
1.  Downtown Mixed Use (MU-D). The purpose of the Downtown Mixed Use (MU-D) zoning district is to preserve and enhance Downtown as the heart of Morgan Hill and the center of the community. New development supports a walkable Downtown district with active storefronts and a diversity of commercial, residential, and public uses. The intensity of residential uses enhances economic vitality, increases housing options for residents of all ages, and support a vibrant and diverse destination for residents and visitors. The MU-D zoning district implements the community's vision for Downtown Morgan Hill as described in the Downtown Specific Plan. 
2.  Neighborhood Mixed Use (MU-N). The purpose of the Neighborhood Mixed Use (MU-N) zoning district accommodates a range of residential and commercial land uses in close proximity to Downtown. A range of housing types provide residents with affordable housing options and increase opportunities to live close to stores, services, jobs, and transit. The MU-N zoning district provides a transition from the higher intensity uses in the Downtown Core to lower density residential neighborhoods. 
3.  Mixed Use Flex (MU-F). The purpose of the MU-F zoning district is to accommodate a mixture of residential and commercial uses typically along the Monterey Road corridor north and south of Downtown. New mixed use development may be vertical (residences above ground floor commercial) or horizontal (separate buildings with different uses on a single site). Development in the MU-F zoning district creates attractive gateways into Morgan Hill, provides a range of housing options, and creates new centers of activity to serve surrounding neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.22.020 - Land use regulations. 
A.  Permitted Land Uses. Table 18.22-1 identifies land uses permitted in the MU-N and MU-F zoning districts. For permitted land uses in the MU-D zoning district, see Figure 8 in the Downtown Specific Plan. 
Table 18.22-1: Permitted Land Uses — MU-N and MU-F Zoning Districts 
Key 
P Permitted Use 
A Administrative Use Permit required 
C Conditional Use Permit required 
— Use not allowed 	Zoning District 	Additional Regulations 
	MU-N 	MU-F 	
Residential Uses 			Section 18.22.030 
Accessory Dwelling Units 	P [1] 	P [1] 	Chapter 18.84 
Duets and Duplexes 	P 	C 	
Group Housing 	C 	C 	
Live/Work Unit 	A 	A 	
Mixed Use Residential 	P 	P 	
Multi-Family Dwellings 	P 	C 	
Nursing Homes and Long-Term Care 	C 	C 	
Residential Care Facilities 	C 	C 	
Residential Care Facilities, Small 	P 	P 	
Senior Housing, Independent Living 	P 	C 	
Single-Family Attached Dwellings 	P 	C 	
Single-Family Detached Dwellings 	P 	C 	
Public and Quasi-Public Uses 			
College and Trade Schools 	P 	P 	
Community Assembly 	C 	C 	
Cultural Institutions 	A 	A 	
Day Care Centers 	C 	C 	
Emergency Shelters 	— 	C 	Section 18.92.050 
Government Offices 	A 	A 	
Home Day Care, Large 	C 	C 	
Home Day Care, Small 	P 	P 	
Hospitals 	C 	C 	
Instructional Services 	P 	P 	
Medical Offices and Clinics 	P 	P 	
Parks and Recreational Facilities 	P 	P 	
Public Safety Facilities 	C 	C 	
Schools, Public and Private 	C 	C 	
Social Services 	— 	C 	
Commercial Uses 			
Animal-Related Users 			
 Veterinarian Clinics and Hospitals 	C 	C 	
Banks and Financial Institutions 	P 	P 	
Business Support Services 	P 	P 	
Cinemas and Theaters 	A 	A 	
Commercial Recreation, Indoor 			
 = 15,000 sq. ft. 	P 	P 	
 > 15,000 sq. ft. 	C 	C 	
Drive-Through Facilities 	C 	C 	18.92.040 
Eating and Drinking Uses 			
 Bars and Nightclubs 	C 	C 	
 Restaurant, Fast Food 	P 	P 	
 Restaurants, Sit Down 	P 	P 	
 Tasting Rooms 	P 	P 	
Farmers Markets 	A 	A 	
Lodging Facilities 			
 Bed and Breakfast 	A 	A 	
 Hotels and Motels 	C 	C 	
Personal Services 	P 	P 	
Professional Offices 	P 	P 	
Retail 			
 Convenience Market 	A 	A 	18.92.030 
 General Retail 	P 	P 	
Vehicle-Related Uses 			
 Fuel and Service Stations 	— 	C 	
 Vehicle Rentals 	— 	C 	
 Vehicle Washing 	— 	C 	
Industrial Uses 			
Food and Beverage Production 			
 < 5,000 sq. ft. [3] 	P 	P 	
 5,000 sq. ft. to 10,000 sq. ft. [3] 	C 	C 	
Transportation, Communication, and Utility Uses 			
Parking Lots or Structures [2] 	C 	C 	
Recycling Facilities 			
 Reverse Vending Machines 	— 	C 	
Transportation Terminals 	— 	— 	
Wireless Communications Facilities 	See Chapter 18.96 	
Other Uses 			
Accessory Uses 	See Chapter 18.44 	
Home Occupations 	See Section 18.92.060 	
Temporary Uses 	See Section 18.92.150 	
 
Notes: 
[1] Permitted only on lots with one existing or proposed new detached single-family dwelling. 
[2] When proposed as a primary use. 
[3] On-site wholesale or retail sales required. 
B.  Replacement Housing. Any proposed project that would replace existing rental housing occupied by a low or moderate-income household with commercial development or higher density residential uses shall comply with Municipal Code Chapter 15.30 (Replacement Housing). 
C.  Additional Permits. In addition to permits identified in Table 18.22-1, development projects in the mixed use zoning districts may also require a design permit pursuant to Section 18.108.040 (Design Permits). Modifications to a historic resource may require a Historic Alteration pursuant to Chapter 18.60 (Historic Resources). 
D.  Residential Building Allotments. All residential development must comply with the voter-approved residential development control system (RDCS) as established in Chapter 18.78 (Residential Development Control System). The RDCS requires proposed residential projects to first receive residential building allotments before applying for land use entitlements. Section 18.78.050.C (Exemptions from Allotments) identifies types of residential projects exempt from the requirement to obtain residential building allotments. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.22.030 - Residential and mixed use in the MU-F zoning district. 
Residential and residential mixed use is not allowed in the MU-F zoning district until the completion of a master plan for the Monterey Corridor. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.22.040 - Development standards. 
A.  General. Table 18.22-2 identifies development standards that apply in the mixed zoning districts. 
Table 18.22-2: Development Standards in Mixed Use Zoning Districts 
	MU-D 	MU-N 	MU-F 	Additional 
Standards 
Site Requirements 				
Lot Area, Minimum 	3,500 sq. ft. 	6,000 sq. ft. 	6,000 sq. ft. 	
Lot Width, Minimum 	40 ft. 	60 ft. 	60 ft. 	
Lot Depth, Minimum 	80 ft. 	100 ft. 	100 ft. 	
Floor Area Ratio, Maximum 	2.0 [1] 	1.0 	0.5 	
Residential Density 				
 Minimum 	None 	8 du/acre 	7 du/acre 	
 Maximum 	None 	20 du/acre 	24 du/acre 	
Building Coverage, Maximum 	None 	75% 	50% 	
Structure Requirements 				
Setbacks 	See Table 18.22-3 	18.56.030 
Height, Maximum 	3 stories and 45 ft. [2] 	35 ft. [3,4] 	35 ft. [3] 	18.56.020 
 
Notes: 
[1] 2.25 FAR permitted on sites 22,000 sq. ft. or more. 
[2] Four stories and 55 ft. permitted on sites 22,000 sq. ft. or more. 
[3] 45 ft. permitted with a minimum of 10 ft. devoted to a roof element. 
[4] 40 ft. allowed for vertical mixed use, regardless of roof form. 
B.  Setbacks. Table 18.22-3 identifies setback standards that apply in the mixed zoning districts. Within each zoning district, setback standards for residential uses are different from setback standards for non-residential and mixed use development. See Figure 18.24. 
Table 18.22-3: Setback Standards in Mixed Use Zoning Districts 
	MU-D 	MU-N 	MU-F 
Setback 	Res. 	Non-Res. [1] 	Res. 	Non-Res. [1] 	Res. 	Non-Res. [1] 
Front 	Min: 6 ft. [2] 
Max: 15 ft. 	Min: 0 ft. 
Max: 10 ft. 	Min: 6 ft. [2] 
Max: 15 ft. 	Min: 0 ft. [3] 
Max: 10 ft. 	Min: 15 ft. [2] 
Max: None 	Min: 10 ft. [4] 
Max: None 
Rear, Min. 	0 ft. 	10 ft. 	0 ft. 	10 ft. 	20 ft. 	10 ft. 
Interior Side, Min. 	5 ft. 	0 ft. 	5 ft. 	0 ft. 	5 ft. 	0 ft. 
Street Side, Min. 	6 ft. 	0 ft. 	6 ft. 	0 ft. 	10 ft. 	10 ft. [4] 
 
Notes: 
[1] Includes mixed use buildings with residential uses above ground floor commercial. 
[2] Residential porches and similar entry features may project five feet into the front setback. See Figure 18.22-1. 
[3] Building wall must be setback a minimum of ten feet from the edge of curb. See Figure 18.22-2. 
[4] Outdoor seating, courtyards, and other publicly-accessible spaces may project five feet into the front setback. 
C.  Residential Transition Standards — MU-N and MU-F. Where a property zoned MU-N or MU-F abuts a residential zoning district, projects shall comply with increased setbacks, upper story stepbacks, and landscaping standards as specified in Section 18.92.130 (Residential Transition Standards). 
  
Figure 18.22-1: Permitted Projection Into Front Setback — Residential Uses
  
Figure 18.22-2: Minimum Setback From Curb — MU-N Zoning District
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.24 - Commercial Zoning Districts 
 
18.24.010 - Purpose of the commercial zoning districts. 
A.  General. The purpose of the commercial zoning districts is to provide locations for a variety of commercial uses to meet the need of residents, visitors, and workers in Morgan Hill. Development within the commercial zoning districts is attractively designed to enhance Morgan Hill's unique character and economic prosperity. Commercial uses are clustered and concentrated to utilize land resources efficiently and support a balanced transportation system. Employment uses accommodate a diversity of jobs that contribute to a dynamic local economy. 
B.  Specific. 
1.  Administrative Office (CO). The purpose of the CO zoning district is to provide an area where professional, general commercial offices and limited personal services may develop in close relationship with each other outside of other commercial districts. 
2.  Neighborhood Commercial (CN). The purpose of the CN zoning district is to provide a location for retail, office, and service uses to serve residents living in surrounding neighborhoods. 
3.  General Commercial (CG). The purpose of the CG zoning district is to provide a location for a broad range of commercial and employment uses to serve Morgan Hill residents, workers, and visitors. 
4.  Highway Commercial (CH). The purpose of the CH zoning district is to provide areas adjacent to the freeway that can accommodate highway and tourist-oriented uses and uses which require the high visibility of thoroughfare locations. 
5.  Service Commercial (CS). The purpose of the CS zoning district is to provide an area for commercial services that may be inappropriate in neighborhood or pedestrian-oriented shopping areas, and which generally require automotive access for customer convenience, servicing of vehicles or equipment, loading or unloading, or parking of commercial service vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.24.020 - Land use regulations. 
A.  Permitted Land Uses. Table 18.24-1 identifies land uses permitted in the commercial zoning districts. 
Table 18.24-1 Permitted Land Uses in the Commercial Zoning Districts 
Key 
P Permitted Use 
A Administrative Use Permit required 
C Conditional Use Permit required 
— Use not allowed 	Zoning District 	Additional 
Regulations 
	CO 	CN 	CG 	CH 	CS 	
Residential Uses 						
Caretaker Quarters 	— 	— 	C 	— 	C 	
Nursing Homes and Long-Term Care 	C 	C 	C 	— 	— 	
Residential Care Facilities 	— 	C 	— 	— 	— 	
Public and Quasi-Public Uses 						
Colleges and Trade Schools 	— 	C 	C 	— 	— 	
Community Assembly 	C 	C 	C 	— 	— 	
Cultural Institutions 	C 	C 	C 	— 	C 	
Day Care Centers 	— 	C 	A 	— 	C 	
Government Offices 	— 	P 	P 	— 	C 	
Instructional Services 	P 	A 	A 	A 	A 	
Medical Offices and Clinics 	P 	P 	P 	A 	C 	
Schools, Public and Private 	C 	C 	C 	— 	— 	
Social Services 	C 	C 	C 	— 	C 	
Commercial Uses 						
Animal-Related Uses 	— 					
 Animal Boarding 	— 	C 	C 	— 	C 	
 Veterinarian Clinics and Hospitals 	P 	A 	A 	A 	P 	
Banks and Financial Institutions 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Business Support Services 	— 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Cinemas and Theatres 	— 	A 	A 	A 	A 	
Commercial Recreation, Indoor 						
 = 15,000 sq. ft. 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
 > 15,000 sq. ft. 	— 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Drive-Through and Drive-In Facilities 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	18.92.040 
Eating and Drinking Uses 						
 Bars and Nightclubs 	— 	C 	C 	— 	— 	
 Restaurants, Fast Food 	— 	C 	P 	P 	C 	
 Restaurants, Sit-Down 	— 	C 	P 	P 	C 	
 Tasting Rooms 	— 	C 	A 	P 	C 	
Funeral Parlors and Mortuaries 	— 	— 	C 	— 	C 	
Lodging Facilities 						
 Hotels and Motels 	— 	C 	A 	P 	A 	
Mini-Storage 	— 	— 	C 	— 	C 	
Personal Services 	P 	P 	P 	— 	C 	
Plant Nurseries 	— 	— 	C 	— 	P 	
Professional Offices 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Retail Uses 						
 Convenience Markets 	— 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
 General Retail 	— 	P 	P 	P 	C 	
 Home Improvement Centers 	— 	— 	P 	— 	P 	
 Large Commodity Retail 	— 	— 	C 	— 	C 	
Vehicle-Related Uses 						
 Fuel and Service Stations 	— 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
 Towing and Impound 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	
 Vehicle Rentals 	— 	C [2] 	C [2] 	P 	P 	
 Vehicle Repair and Maintenance, Minor 	— 	— 	C 	— 	P 	
 Vehicle Sales and Leasing 	— 	C [1] 	C [1] 	P 	P 	
 Vehicle Washing 	— 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Wholesaling 	— 	— 	C 	— 	P 	
Industrial Uses 						
Construction and Material Yards 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	
Food and Beverage Production 						
 < 5,000 sq. ft. [3] 	— 	A 	A 	A 	A 	
 5,000 sq. ft. to 10,000 sq. ft. [3] 	— 	A 	A 	C 	A 	
 > 10,000 sq. ft. 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	
Research and Development 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	
Warehousing and Distribution, Large and Small 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	
Transportation, Communication, and Utility Uses 						
Freight Terminals and Transfer 	— 	— 	— 	C 	— 	
Light Fleet-Based Services 	— 	C 	C 	— 	C 	
Parking Lots and Structures 	— 	— 	C 	— 	C 	
Recycling Facilities 						
 Reverse Vending Machine 	— 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
 Recycling Collection Facility 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	
Transportation Terminals 		— 	— 	— 	C 	
Utilities, Major 	— 	— 	C 	— 	C 	
Wireless Communications Facilities 	See Chapter 18.96 	
Other Uses 						
Accessory Uses 	See Chapter 18.44 	
Temporary Uses 	See Section 18.92.150 	
 
Notes: 
[1] Allowed only when conducted entirely within an enclosed building without outdoor storage and display of vehicles. 
[2] Vehicles stored outdoors must be fully screened from public view. 
[3] On-site wholesale or retail sales required. 
B.  Additional Permits. In addition to permits identified in Table 18.24-1, development projects in the commercial zoning districts may also require a design permit pursuant to Section 18.108.040 (Design Permits). Modifications to a historic resource may require a Historic Alteration pursuant to Chapter 18.60 (Historic Resources). 
C.  Outdoor Uses and Storage. In the commercial zoning districts, all uses shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building except as follows: 
1.  In the CS zoning district, outdoor storage associated with any permitted use is allowed with a conditional use permit. 
2.  In the CG zoning district, outdoor storage and display associated with a home improvement center is allowed with a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.24.030 - Development standards. 
A.  General. Table 18.24-2 identifies development standards that apply in the commercial zoning districts. 
B.  Residential Transition Standards. Where a property zoned in a commercial zoning district abuts a residential zoning district, projects shall comply with increased setbacks, upper story stepbacks, and landscaping standards as specified in Section 18.92.130 (Residential Transition Standards). 
Table 18.24-2: Development Standards in the Commercial Zoning Districts 
	CO 	CN 	CG 	CH 	CS 	Additional Standards 
Site Requirements 						
Lot Area, Minimum 	6,000 sq. ft. 	10,000 sq. ft. 	10,000 sq. ft. 	20,000 sq. ft. 	10,000 sq. ft. 	
Lot Width, Minimum 	60 ft. 	100 ft. 	100 ft. 	70 ft. 	100 ft. 	
Lot Depth, Minimum 	100 ft. 	100 ft. 	100 ft. 	125 ft. 	100 ft. 	
Building Coverage, Maximum 	50% 	50% 	50% 	40% 	50% 	
Structure Requirements 						
Setbacks, Minimum 						18.56.030 
 Front 	20 ft. 	25 ft. 	25 ft. 	40 ft. 	25 ft. 	
 Rear 	20 ft. 	20 ft. 	20 ft. 	20 ft. 	20 ft. 	
 Interior Side 	10 ft. 	0 ft. 	0 ft. 	0 ft. 	0 ft. 	
 Street Side 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 	
Height, Maximum 	3 stories or 30 ft., whichever is less 	2 ½ stories or 30 ft., whichever is less 	3 stories or 35 ft., whichever is less 	4 stories or 55 ft., whichever is less 	3 stories or 35 ft., whichever is less 	18.24.030.B; 18.56.020 
 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.26 - INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
18.26.010 - Purpose of the industrial zoning districts. 
A.  General. The purpose of the industrial zoning districts is to provide locations to maintain and focus industrial development in economically and geographically strategic locations in Morgan Hill. Permitted land uses in the industrial zoning districts are limited to avoid potential conflicts that would adversely impact industrial activities. Development is designed to enhance the economic vitality of industrial areas and limit impacts on adjacent development. 
B.  Specific. 
1.  Commercial Industrial (CI). The purpose of the CI zoning district is to promote job-generating development of lands by allowing flexibility in the mix of industrial, office, and commercial uses that are compatible with existing development. Lodging uses (e.g., hotels) that support primary job generating uses within business districts are allowed. 
2.  Light Office Industrial (IO). The purpose of the IO zoning district is to provide areas for mixed administrative and executive office uses in appropriate areas within the community. 
3.  Campus Industrial (IC). The purpose of the IC zoning district is to provide an environment exclusively for and conducive to the development and protection of modern administrative facilities, research institutions and specialized manufacturing operations. 
4.  Light Industrial (IL). The purpose of the IL zoning district is to provide areas for research, administrative, lighter manufacturing, wholesale and heavy service commercial uses not suitable in commercial districts. 
5.  General Industrial (IG). The purpose of the IG zoning district is to provide areas for general industrial, manufacturing, wholesale and service uses needed by the city and region subject to regulations necessary to protect other nearby uses from hazards and noise and other disturbances. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.26.020 - Land use regulations. 
A.  Permitted Land Uses. Table 18.26-1 identifies land uses permitted in the industrial zoning districts. 
Table 18.26-1 Permitted Land Uses in the Industrial Zoning Districts 
Key 
P Permitted Use 
A Administrative Use Permit required 
C Conditional Use Permit required 
— Use not allowed 	Zoning District 	Additional 
Regulations 
	CI 	IO 	IC 	IL 	IG 	
Residential Uses 						
Caretaker Quarters 	— 	— 	— 	C 	C 	
Public and Quasi-Public Uses 						
Colleges and Trade Schools 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Community Assembly 	C 	— 	— 	C 	C 	
Instructional Services 	A 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Medical Offices and Clinics 	A 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Parks and Recreational Facilities 	C 	— 	— 	C 	C 	
Public Safety Facilities 	C 	— 	— 	C 	C 	
Commercial Uses 						
Adult Businesses 	— 	— 	P 	P 	P 	18.92.020 
Animal-Related Commercial Uses 						
 Animal Boarding 	C 	— 	— 	C 	C 	
 Veterinarian Clinics and Hospitals 	A 	A 	A 	C 	C 	
Banks and Financial Institutions 	C [4] 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Business Support Services 	P 	C 	P 	P 	P 	
Cinemas and Theaters 	A 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Commercial Recreation, Indoor 						
 = 15,000 sq. ft. 	P 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
 > 15,000 sq. ft. 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	
Eating and Drinking Uses 						
 Restaurants, Fast Food 	C [4] 	— [5] 	— [5] 	— [5] 	— [5] 	
 Restaurants, Sit-Down 	C [4] 	— [5] 	— [5] 	— [5] 	— [5] 	
 Tasting Rooms 	P [6] 	— 	— 	A [6] 	A [6] 	
Lodging Facilities 						
 Hotels and Motels 	P 	— 	— 	— 	— 	
Mini-Storage 	— 	— 	— 	C 	C 	18.92.100 
Personal Service 	C [4] 	— [5] 	— [5] 	— [5] 	— [5] 	
Plant Nurseries 	C 	— 	— 	P 	P 	
Professional Offices 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Retail 						
 Building Materials 	C 	— 	— 	P 	P 	
 Convenience Markets 	C [4] 	— [5] 	— [5] 	— [5] 	— [5] 	
 General Retail 	C [4] 	— [5] 	— [5] 	— [5] 	— [5] 	
Home Improvement Centers 	C 	— 	— 	C 	C 	
Large Commodity Retail 	C 	— 	— 	C 	C 	
Vehicle-Related Uses 						
 Towing and Impound 	— 	— 	— 	C 	P 	
 Vehicle Repair and Maintenance, Major 	— 	— 	— 	C 	P 	
 Vehicle Repair and Maintenance, Minor 	— 	— 	— 	P 	P [1] 	
Wholesaling 	P 	— 	— 	P 	P 	
Industrial Uses 						
Construction and Material Yards 	C 	C 	C 	P 	P 	18.36.030.C 
Food and Beverage Production 						
 < 5,000 sq. ft. [7] 	A [2] 	A [2] 	A [2] 	P [2] 	P [2] 	
 5,000 sq. ft. to 10,000 sq. ft. [7] 	C [2] 	C [2] 	C [2] 	P [2] 	P [2] 	
 > 10,000 sq. ft. 	C 	C 	C 	P [2,8] 	P [2,8] 	
Manufacturing, Light 	P 	C [3] 	C 	P 	P 	
Manufacturing, General 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	
Research and Development 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Salvage and Wrecking 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	
Warehousing and Distribution 						
 Warehousing and Distribution, Large 	C 	C [3] 	C [3] 	C 	P 	
 Warehousing and Distribution, Small 	C 	C [3] 	C [3] 	P 	P 	
 Warehousing and Distribution with Outdoor Storage 	C 	— 	— 	C 	C 	
Transportation, Communication, and Utility Uses 						
Freight Terminals and Transfer 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	
Light Fleet-Based Services 	C 	— 	C 	P 	P 	
Recycling Facilities 						
 Reverse Vending Machine 	P 	C 	C 	P 	P 	
 Recycling Collection Facility 	C 	— 	— 	C 	C 	
 Recycling Processing Facility 	— 	— 	— 	— 	C 	
Utilities, Major 	— 	— 	— 	C 	C 	
Wireless Communications Facilities 	See Chapter 18.96 	
Agriculture and Natural Resource Uses 						
Crop Cultivation 	— 		— 			
Other Uses 						
Accessory Uses 	See Chapter 18.44 	
Temporary Uses 	See Section 18.92.150 	
 
Notes: 
[1] Retail sale of automotive products allowed only when ancillary to a vehicle repair and maintenance use. Retail display areas for automotive products may not exceed twenty-five percent of the building floor area. 
[2] Must be one hundred fifty feet or more from a residential zoning district, otherwise requires a CUP. 
[3] Permitted only when ancillary to another permitted use. 
[4] Allowed as a primary use only when the planning commission finds that the use supports the primary job-generating uses within a business park setting. 
[5] Allowed when accessory to a permitted primary use subject to the limitations in Section 18.26.020.D (Accessory Uses). 
[6] Allowed only when accessory to a brewery, winery, or other alcoholic beverage production facility. Tasting rooms must be located within the building occupied by the primary use and may not exceed five thousand square feet or ten percent of the gross floor area of the building, whichever is less. 
[7] On-site wholesale or retail sales required. 
[8] Conditional use permit required when the type of food being produced will emit a generally offensive odor. Examples include primary processing of seafood, coffee roasting, pickled foods, or processes involving primarily fat and oils. 
B.  Additional Permits. In addition to permits identified in Table 18.26-1, development projects in the industrial districts may also require a design permit pursuant to Section 18.108.040 (Design Permits). Modifications to a historic resource may require a Historic Alteration pursuant to Chapter 18.60 (Historic Resources). 
C.  Outdoor Uses. 
1.  In the IO zoning district, all uses shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building. Outdoor uses are prohibited. 
2.  In all other industrial zoning districts, outdoor uses shall be screened from public view and the area containing the outdoor use shall meet the minimum design standards applicable to off-street parking facilities as specified in Section 18.72.060 (Parking Design and Development Standards). 
D.  Accessory Uses. 
1.  In all industrial zoning districts, retail, personal service, recreation, restaurants, and other similar uses are permitted as an accessory use provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  The use is conducted within the building occupied by the primary use; and 
b.  The use is to serve only employees and guests of the primary use; and 
c.  The use is limited to no more than three thousand square feet or ten percent of the floor area of the primary use, whichever is less. 
2.  Tasting rooms associated with a brewery, winery, or other alcoholic beverage production facility are allowed in industrial zoning districts as specified in Table 18.26-1. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.26.030 - Development standards. 
A.  General. Table 18.26-2 identifies development standards that apply in the industrial zoning districts. 
Table 18.26-2: Industrial Zoning District Development Standards 
	CI 	IO 	IC 	IL 	IG 	Additional Standards 
Site Requirements 						
Lot Area, Minimum 	20,000 sq. ft. 	40,000 sq. ft. 	5 acres 	20,000 sq. ft. 	20,000 sq. ft. 	
Lot Width, Minimum 	100 ft. 	100 ft. 	300 ft. 	100 ft. 	150 ft. 	
Lot Depth, Minimum 	100 ft. 	100 ft. 	300 ft. 	100 ft. 	100 ft. 	
Floor Area Ratio, Maximum 	0.5/0.6 [1] 	0.6 	0.5 	0.6 	0.6 	
Building Coverage, Maximum 	60% 	40% 	40% 	50% 	60% 	
Structure Requirements 						
Setbacks, Minimum 						Chapter 18.56 
 Front 	30 ft. 	40 ft. 	50 ft. 	30 ft. 	30 ft. 	
 Rear 	20 ft. 	20 ft. 	20 ft. 	20 ft. 	20 ft. 	
 Interior Side 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 	25 ft. 	10 ft. 	15 ft. 	
 Street Side 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 	15 ft. 	
Height, Maximum 	4 stories or 55 ft., whichever is less 	35 ft. 	50 ft. 	50 ft. 	50 ft. 	18.56 
18.26.030.B 
 
Notes: 
[1] An FAR of 0.6 is allowed for industrial uses. An FAR of 0.5 is allowed for non-industrial land uses. 
B.  Residential Transition Standards. Where a property in an industrial zoning district abuts a residential zoning district, projects shall comply with increased setbacks, upper story stepbacks, and landscaping standards as specified in Section 18.92.130 (Residential Transition Standards). 
C.  Cul-De-Sac Lot Width. In all industrial zoning districts except for the IC zoning district, the minimum width of a cul-de-sac lot is eighty feet as measured along the radius of the front property line. 
D.  Joint Access Agreement — IL, IG Zoning Districts. For parcels of less than forty thousand square feet in area, a joint mutual access agreement between adjoining parcels shall be required for reasonable vehicular and pedestrian passage. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.28 - OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC, AND RECREATION ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
18.28.010 - Purpose of the open space, public, and recreation zoning districts. 
A.  Open Space. The purpose of the Open Space (OS) zoning district is to preserve and enhance open space lands as a limited and valuable resource in Morgan Hill. The OS zoning district is intended to permit limited but reasonable use of open space lands while reducing exposure to geologic hazards, to preserve agricultural land, and to preserve the topographic features that contribute to Morgan Hill's unique identity. 
B.  Public Facilities. The purpose of the Public Facilities (PF) zoning district is to provide a location for schools, governmental offices, parks and recreational facilities, fire and police stations, utilities, and other public and quasi-public facilities to serve the community. 
C.  Sports Recreation and Leisure (SRL). The purpose of the SRL zoning district is to provide a location for a variety of private and public or quasi-public land sports, recreation, and leisure uses to serve the community. The SRL zoning district includes two sub-zones: 
1.  The SRL-A sub-zone which supports lower intensity sports, recreation, and leisure uses that are compatible with nearby agricultural and open space activities; and 
2.  The SRL-B sub-zone which supports lower and medium intensity sports, recreation, and leisure uses that are generally open in nature. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018; Ord. No. 2290 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 11-7-2018)  
18.28.020 - Land use regulations. 
A.  Open Space and Public Facility Zones. 
1.  Permitted Land Uses—General. Table 18.28-1 identifies land uses permitted in the Open Space (OS) and Public Facilities (PF) zoning districts. 
Table 18.28-1: Permitted Land Uses in the Open Space and Public Facilities Zoning Districts 
Key 
P Permitted Use 
A Administrative Use Permit required 
C Conditional Use Permit required 
— Use not allowed 	Zoning 
District 	Additional Regulations 
	OS 	PF 	
Residential Uses 			
Accessory Dwelling Units 	P 	— 	Chapter 18.84 
Agricultural Labor Accommodations 	C 	— 	
Single-Family Detached Dwellings 	P 	— 	
Public and Quasi-Public Uses 		— 	
Cemeteries 	C 	C 	
Colleges and Trade Schools 	— 	C 	
Community Assembly 	— 	C 	
Cultural Institutions 	— 	P [1] 	
Day Care Centers 	— 	C 	
Emergency Shelters 	— 	P 	
Government Offices 	— 	P 	
Home Day Care, Small 	P 	— 	
Hospitals 	— 	P 	
Instructional Services 	— 	P [1] 	
Parks and Recreational Facilities 	P 	P [1] 	
Public Safety Facilities 	C 	P 	
Schools, Public 	— 	P 	
Schools, Private 	— 	C 	
Commercial Uses 			
Animal-Related Commercial Uses 			
 Animal Boarding 	C 	— 	
 Equestrian Centers 	C 	— 	
Farmer's Markets 	C 	C 	
Plant Nurseries 	C [2] 	— 	
Transportation, Communication, and Utility Uses 		— 	
Parking Structures and Facilities 	— 	P [1] 	
Utilities, Major 	— 	C 	
Wireless Communications Facilities 	See Chapter 18.96 	
Agriculture and Natural Resource Uses 			
Crop Cultivation 	P 	— 	
Animal Raising and Production, Intensive 	C 	— 	
Animal Raising and Production, Limited 	P 	— 	
Wildlife Refuges 	P 	— 	
Other Uses 			
Accessory Uses 	See Chapter 18.44 	
Home Occupations 	See Section 18.92.060 	
Temporary Uses 	See Section 18.92.150 	
 
Notes: 
[1]  A Conditional Use Permit is required if not owned or operated by a governmental agency. 
[2]  Sales are limited to horticultural products grown on site. 
B.  Design Permit for Residential Uses in the OS Zone. In addition to projects requiring Design Permits pursuant to Section 18.108.040 (Design Permits), the construction of new residential uses requires a Design Permit to verify conformance with Section 18.28.030.B (Performance Standards in OS Zone) and all other applicable requirements. 
C.  Sports Recreation and Leisure Zones. Table 18.28-2 identifies land uses permitted in the SRL-A and SRL-B sub-zones. 
Table 18.28-2: Permitted Land Uses in the Sports Recreation Leisure Zoning District 
Key 
P Permitted use 
C Conditional Use Permit required 
— Use not allowed 	Zoning 
District 	Additional Regulations 
	SRL-A 	SRL-B 	
Residential Uses 			
Single-family detached dwellings 	P [1] 	P [1] 	
All other new residential land uses 	— 	— 	
Commercial Uses 			
Drive-through establishments 	— 	— 	
Gas and service stations 	— 	— 	
Hotel and motels 	— 	— 	
Restaurants 	— 	— 	
Retail that is sports-themed or sports/recreation-serving 	— 	— 	
Sports, Recreation, and Leisure Uses 			
Adventure sports facilities, indoor 	P 	— 	
Adventure sports facilities, outdoor 	P 	P 	
Arts and crafts studios 	P 	P 	
Batting cages, indoor 	P 	— 	
Batting cages, outdoor 	P 	P 	
Bowling alleys 	— 	— 	
Campgrounds 	— 	— 	
Casinos, card clubs, and gambling facilities 	— 	— 	
Cinemas and movie theaters 	— 	— 	
Day spas, barbershops, and hair salons 	C [2] 	— 	
Equestrian centers 	P 	P 	
Golf courses 	P [3] 	P [3] 	
Health and fitness clubs and indoor recreation centers oriented to local residents 	C [4] 	— 	
Indoor sports centers 	P 	— 	
Outdoor sports centers 	P 	P 	
Outdoor race tracks for cars, go-karts, or similar use; 	— 	— 	
Pool and billiards halls 	— 	— 	
Recreational vehicle parks 	— 	— 	
Sports Fields 	P 	P 	
Stadiums 	— 	— 	
Swimming pools, indoor 	P [5] 	— 	
Swimming pools, outdoor 	P [5] 	P 	
Agriculture and Natural Resource Uses 			
Crop cultivation 	P 	P 	
Farmer's market 	P 	P 	
Sales of agricultural products grown on site 	P 	P 	
Wineries 	P 	P 	
Transportation, Communication, and Utility Uses 			
Wireless communications facilities 	See Chapter 18.96 	
Other Uses 			
Accessory Uses and Structures 	See Chapter 18.44 	
Home Occupations 	See Section 18.92.060 	
Temporary Uses 	See Section 18.92.150 	
 
Notes: 
[1]  Permitted only on a legal lot of record established in the unincorporated area prior to August 1, 2014. 
[2]  May be permitted with a conditional use permit if ancillary to hotel or motel use. 
[3]  Golf courses in excess of three holes are prohibited. 
[4]  Fitness and exercise facilities ancillary to a primary destination-oriented sports/recreation/leisure use are allowed with a conditional use permit. 
[5]  Permitted if ancillary to hotel or motel use. 
D.  Additional Permits. In addition to permits identified in Tables 18.28-1 and 18.28-2, development projects in the open space, public, and recreation zoning districts may also require a design permit pursuant to Section 18.108.040 (Design Permits). Modifications to a historic resource may require a historic alteration pursuant to Chapter 18.60. (Historic Resources). 
E.  Hillside Combining District. Development on site with an average slope of ten percent or greater are subject to the requirements of Section 18.30.040 (Hillside Combining District). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018; Ord. No. 2290 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 11-7-2018)  
18.28.030 - Development standards. 
A.  General. Table 18.28-3 identifies development standards that apply in the public, open space, and recreation zoning districts. 
Table 18.28-3: Public, Open Space, and Recreation Development Standards 
	OS 	PF 	SRL-A 	SRL-B 	Additional Standards 
Site Requirements 					
Lot Area, Minimum 	5 acres 	None 	1 acre 	1 acre 	
Lot Width, Minimum 	100 feet 		100 ft. 	100 ft. 	
Lot Depth, Minimum 	None 		150 ft. 	150 ft. 	
Impervious Coverage, Maximum 	10% [1] 	As required by review authority 	None 	None 	
Building Coverage, Maximum 	5% [2] 		30% 	50% 	
Structure Requirements 					
Setbacks, Minimum 					18.56.030 
 Front 	50 ft. 	As required by review authority 	30 ft. 	20 ft. 	
 Rear 	50 ft. 		50 ft. 	15 ft. 	
 Interior Side 	50 ft. 		20 ft. 	15 ft. 	
 Street Side 	25 ft. 		30 ft. 	20 ft. 	
Height, Maximum 	2 stories or 25 ft. 		35 ft. 	35 ft. 	18.56.020 
 
Notes: 
[1]  Planning Commission may allow greater impervious surface with a Conditional Use Permit. 
[2]  30 percent for those existing lots less than 5 acres. 
B.  Performance Standards in OS Zoning District. The following standards apply to all development and land uses in the OS zoning district. 
1.  Stormwater Runoff. In addition to requirements in Chapter 18.140 (Post Construction Stormwater Pollution Prevention), development shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Permanent vegetation and improvements capable of carrying stormwater runoff in a safe manner shall be installed to the extent possible before the vegetative cover is removed from the area. 
b.  Sediment basins, including debris basins, desilting basins, and silt traps, shall be installed, and maintained to reserve sediment from runoff waters of land undergoing development. 
2.  Public Services and Infrastructure. Construction of dwellings for which conditional use permits are required are permitted only if the proposed dwelling units are served by public sewers, public water, and ingress/egress that comply with minimum fire department standards. The city may grant exceptions to the public sewer and public water requirements for: 
a.  Areas that were annexed into the city outside the urban service area with approved private water and septic systems; and 
b.  Secondary dwellings where a private septic tank disposal system has been approved for the primary dwelling on the same parcel of land. 
C.  Outdoor Storage in the PF Zone. Areas used for outdoor storage in the PF zoning district shall meet the minimum design standards applicable to off-street parking facilities as specified in Section 18.72.060 (Parking Design and Development Standards). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018; Ord. No. 2290 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 11-7-2018)  
Chapter 18.30 - OVERLAY ZONES AND COMBINING DISTRICTS 
 
18.30.010 - Purpose of overlay zones and combining districts. 
A.  Overlay Zones. An overlay zone is a defined geographic area shown on the zoning map where special requirements apply in addition to the underlying base zoning district requirements. 
B.  Combining Districts. A combining district is a designation applied to a property, or a portion of a property, indicating that special requirements apply in addition to the base zoning district requirements. If and when a combining district is applied to a property, it is shown on the zoning map with the combining district label attached to base zoning district label (e.g., "RE (H)"). 
C.  Conflicting Requirements. Whenever a requirement of an overlay zone or combining district conflicts with a requirement of the underlying base zone, the overlay zone or combining district requirement shall control. Where two or more overlay zone or combining district requirements conflict, the review authority for the requested permit or approval shall determine the appropriate requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.30.020 - Downtown ground floor overlay zone. 
A.  Purpose of Downtown Ground Floor Overlay Zone. The purpose of the Downtown Ground Floor (-GF) overlay zone is to ensure that ground floor land uses fronting Monterey Road and Third Street in Downtown Morgan Hill support an active and engaging pedestrian environment in a manner consistent with the Downtown Specific Plan. 
B.  Applicability. The -GF overlay zone applies to parcels fronting portions of Monterey and Third Streets within the Downtown Specific Plan boundary as shown on the zoning map. 
C.  Ground Floor Defined. For the purposes of this section, "ground floor" means the first floor which is above grade. 
D.  Land Uses Regulations. 
1.  Ground Floor Uses. Figure 8 in the Downtown Specific Plan identifies land uses permitted and conditionally permitted on the ground floor fronting Monterey Road or Third Street in the -GF overlay zone. These land use regulations replace the land use regulations of the underlying base district for ground floor land uses. Ground floor land uses not specifically identified in Figure 8 in the Downtown Specific Plan as permitted or conditionally permitted are prohibited in the GF overlay zone unless allowed by the planning commission in accordance with Paragraph 3 (Unlisted Uses) below. 
2.  Upper Floor Uses. Land uses permitted and conditionally permitted in upper floor tenant spaces in the -GF overlay zone shall be the same as in the underlying base zone. 
3.  Unlisted Uses. Land uses not listed as permitted or conditionally permitted in Figure 8 in the Downtown Specific Plan may be allowed with a conditional use permit if the planning commission finds the unlisted land use is equivalent to a use permitted or conditionally permitted in the -GF overlay zone in accordance with Section 18.08.040.B (Unlisted Land Uses). 
E.  Administrative Use Permits in the Ground Floor (-GF) Overlay Zone. 
1.  Purpose. Administrative use permits shall be used to allow ground floor office and personal service uses in the GF overlay zone upon finding that the retail market is not sufficiently strong to accommodate land uses permitted by-right in the GF overlay zone. 
2.  Application Requirements. Requirements for the submittal, review, and action on an Administrative Use Permit application shall be as described in Section 18.108.020 (Administrative Use Permits) and Chapter 18.104 (Common Permit Requirements) unless otherwise specified in this section. 
3.  Application Submittal Requirements. Administrative use permit applications shall contain the information and materials required by the community development director, including the following: 
a.  Statement of proposed operations, including but not limited to number of employees, proposed hours of operation, and if applicable, how the personal service use relates to the retail use within the tenant space; and 
b.  Materials which demonstrate that the subject space in the building has been advertised for lease to retail tenants for at least six months, but the owner has been unable to locate a suitable retail tenant at market rates. 
4.  Findings. To approve an administrative use permit, the community development director shall make all of the findings in Section 18.108.020.E (Findings for Approval) plus one or more of the following additional findings: 
a.  The subject space in the building has been advertised for lease to retail tenants for at least six months days, but the owner has been unable to locate a suitable retail tenant at market rates; or 
b.  The vacancy rate for commercial space exceeds five percent in the -GF overlay zone combining district; or 
c.  For personal service uses, the applicant has demonstrated that the use is ancillary to a retail use within the tenant space and provides a continuity of display window visual interest. 
5.  Conditions of Approval. The community development director may impose conditions on the approval of an administrative use permit to achieve consistency with the general plan, zoning code, or Downtown Specific Plan. Conditions may include, but are not limited to, requirements that the city and/or applicant: 
a.  Review the use at a future time or upon certain triggering events; 
b.  Set an expiration date for the administrative use permit at some future time or upon certain triggering events; 
c.  Make specific site maintenance and/or improvements; 
d.  Maintain the personal service use as ancillary to the retail use with the same tenant space and maintain the visual interest of display window with the retail component; 
e.  Install and maintain landscaping, 
f.  Maintain safe vehicular ingress, egress, and traffic circulation; and 
g.  Comply with development schedules or time limits for performance or completion of tenant improvements. 
6.  Permit Duration. Approval of an administrative use permit for ground floor uses in the -GF overlay zone shall be valid for three years from the date of approval unless an extension is granted in accordance with Subsection 7 below. 
7.  Permit Extensions. 
a.  An Administrative use permit for ground floor uses in the GF overlay zone may be extended one or more times by the community development director for up to up to three years for each extension. 
b.  An application for an extension may be submitted in writing no sooner than nine months from the expiration date of the previously approved administrative use permit. 
c.  The application submittal, review, and approval process shall be the same as for the administrative use permit that originally authorized the ground floor use. 
F.  Development Standards. The development standards that apply in the -GF overlay zone shall be the same as the underlying base zone. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.30.030 - Downtown specific plan overlay zone. 
A.  Purpose. The Downtown Specific Plan (DTSP) overlay zone identifies areas where the requirements of the Downtown Specific Plan apply. 
B.  Applicability. The DTSP overlay zone applies to parcels within the boundary of the Downtown Specific Plan as shown on the zoning map. 
C.  Effect of Downtown Specific Plan Overlay. 
1.  All proposed land uses and development within the DTSP overlay shall comply with the requirements of the Downtown Specific Plan. 
2.  In the case of conflict between the Downtown Specific Plan and the requirements of the zoning code, the Downtown Specific Plan shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.30.040 - Hillside combining district. 
A.  Purpose of Hillside Combining District. The purpose of the Hillside (H) combining district is to allow for the orderly development of hillside areas while preserving significant environmental features and protecting public safety in geologically unstable areas. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  The H combining district applies to all areas within the city having an average slope of ten percent or greater. 
2.  A planned development overlay zoning district shall be required for all subdivisions in with an H combining district where five or more lots are proposed. 
C.  Development Standards. 
1.  Building Restrictions on Steep Slopes. 
a.  Buildings, private streets, and driveways may not be constructed on slopes greater than twenty percent except as allowed by subparagraph b below. 
b.  Minor encroachments onto slopes greater than twenty percent may be allowed when the review authority finds that the proposed encroachment will not conflict with the purpose and intent of the H combining district. 
2.  Minimum Lot Area. 
a.  The minimum lot size in the H combining district shall not be less than "A" as determined by the formula: 
A = S × 2,000 
Where "S" is the average slope of the lot to be created in terms of percent. 
b.  For lots with an average slope greater than fifty percent, the minimum lot size is five acres. 
c.  Lots with an average slope of ten percent or greater may be created in exception to the slope/area formula above if the lots to be created contain an area of slope less than ten percent which is equal to or greater than the minimum lot size required by the underlying zone. In such a case, a deed restriction must be recorded for such lots which restrict building to the area in which the average slope is ten percent or less. 
3.  Calculating Ground Slope. 
a.  The average ground slope shall be calculated using the following formula: 
S = 0.00229IL/A 
Where: 
S = Average ground slope in percent 
I = Contour interval in feet 
L = Combined length of the contour lines in feet 
A = The gross area in acres of the parcel or lot 
b.  Measurements along contours shall be made at contour intervals not to exceed ten feet, and a horizontal map scale of one inch equals two hundred feet or larger. 
4.  Land Modification Restrictions. 
a.  Areas on a lot with a slope exceeding twenty percent may not be altered by grading, altering natural features, removing natural vegetation, or by any activity related to the preparation of the lot for development. 
b.  The planning commission may allow exceptions to the land modification restrictions above to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Exceptions may be granted to: 
(1)  Install fire trails; 
(2)  Remove of poisonous or noxious vegetation; 
(3)  Remove or thin vegetation as part of a fire-protection program approved by the fire chief; 
(4)  Abate geologic or seismic hazard; or 
(5)  Protect public safety through other methods as approved by the planning commission. 
5.  Open Space Requirements. Table 18.30-1 identifies the minimum percentage of lot area to remain in open space with no grading or terrain alteration. 
Table 18.30-1: Open Space Requirements 
Average Ground Slope (Percent) 	Minimum Percent of Lot Area to Remain in Open Space 
12.5 to 14.9 	32.5% 
15.0 to 17.4 	40.0% 
17.5 to 19.9 	47.5% 
20.0 to 22.4 	55.0% 
22.5 to 24.9 	62.5% 
25.0 to 27.4 	70.0% 
27.5 to 29.9 	77.5% 
30.0 and above 	85.0% 
 
6.  One Dwelling Unit Allowed Per Lot. 
a.  If no portion of a lot contains slopes of less than twenty percent, and the lot is a legally-established lot of record, one dwelling unit may be constructed on the lot. 
b.  Development when allowed by this section shall conform with the recommendations in the engineering geologic or geotechnical report prepared by a qualified engineer geologist as required by the provisions of Chapter 18.70 (Geologic Hazards) and any other conditions of approval or mitigation measures adopted for the proposed project. 
7.  Ridgeline Development. Buildings are prohibited within eighty feet of a ridgeline unless the review authority for the proposed project finds that: 
a.  There are no other feasible locations on the lot other than the proposed ridgeline building site which can accommodate the building; 
b.  The proposed development is consistent with all other requirements of the applicable zone; 
c.  The applicant has attempted a transfer of development credits (TDC) in accordance with Subsection F (Transfer of Development Credits) as an alternative to building on the proposed ridgeline site; and 
d.  The applicant has exhausted all possible avenues to accommodate development in area away from the proposed ridgeline building site. 
8.  Cut-and-Fill Slopes. Cut-and-fill slopes shall not be steeper than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) unless stabilized by a retaining wall or cribbing, as approved by the building official. 
9.  Erosion-Control Plan. The city shall approve an erosion-control plan prior to any physical development within the H combining district. The plan shall meet the standards contained in Municipal Code Chapter 13.30 - Urban Storm Water Quality Management and Discharge Control. 
D.  El Toro Mountain Open Space Preservation. 
1.  The following hillside areas of El Toro Mountain shall be preserved as open space to the maximum extent possible: 
a.  Areas above the six hundred-foot elevation in Llagas Valley and Paradise Valley; and 
b.  Areas above the five hundred-foot elevation in all other areas. 
2.  Subdivisions proposed in areas specified above shall include open-space easement dedications to guarantee the permanent preservation of open space. 
3.  Prior to approving development in the areas specified above, the review authority shall find that the applicant made every reasonable effort to avoid the development in these areas, including a transfer of development credits (TDC) and/or the establishing of a Planned Development (PD) overlay. 
E.  Transfer of Development Credits. This section allows for the transfer development credits (TDCs) from "transferor sites" in areas where development is restricted by the H combining district to "recipient sites" in other areas of the city authorized to receive TDCs. The city council may from time to time authorize by resolution a TDC from one lot to another lot, where such authorization is found to be consistent with the general plan and this section. 
1.  General Standards. 
a.  Permitted Recipient Sites. Zones in which an increase in the number of dwelling units are permitted are restricted to the residential zones listed in Chapter 18.16 (Residential Detached Zoning Districts). 
b.  Number of Units on a Site. The number of dwelling units permitted on a site may not exceed ten percent of the maximum residential development credits transfer, exclusive of density bonuses provided by other sections of this title. 
c.  Maximum Density Bonus. The maximum density bonus on any site shall not exceed twenty-five percent, including affordable housing and TDC density bonuses. 
d.  Environmental Study. An environmental study shall be prepared to determine the carrying capacity of the property from which development credits are being transferred. If environmental findings determine that the site, or a portion thereof, is unbuildable due to environmental constraints, the development credits to be transferred shall be reduced accordingly, prior to determining the number of units permissible under the slope-density formula. 
e.  Minimum Area. The site to which the TDC is proposed shall be no less than one acre. 
f.  Setback Requirements. All setback requirements of the more restrictive district found along the perimeter of the site shall apply to perimeter yards on the site to which the transfer of development credits is proposed, unless the site is zoned for PD zoning. 
g.  Calculation of TDC Credits. TDCs shall be calculated in accordance with the slope-density regulations of this section, base district minimum lot sizes and this section. 
(1)  In all hillside areas of the City, with the exception of El Toro Mountain, the number of TDCs shall be determined as provided in Section 18.30.040.D (El Toro Mountain Open Space Preservation). 
(2)  On El Toro Mountain, the number of TDCs available to property within the city limits shall be twice that determined as provided in Section 18.30.040.C.2 (Minimum Lot Area). The number of transferable development credits available to property on El Toro Mountain which is outside the city limits shall be twice that allowed by the Zoning Ordinance of Santa Clara County. The calculation of transferable development credits for El Toro Mountain shall be as follows: 
(Number of Acres/Minimum Lot Size) x 2 = Number of transferable development credits 
(3)  The number of TDCs available to properties on El Toro Mountain above that allowed to other hillside areas of the city may only be used for transfer to other properties of slopes less than twenty percent and may not be used to increase on-site development potential. 
(4)  In the calculation of TDCs, a fraction occurring at the end of a calculation which is 0.5 or larger shall be considered a full development credit. The city council may also exclude from calculation any existing dwelling and appurtenant structures on the site to be preserved. 
2.  Application. An applicant for a TDC shall contain the following information and materials: 
a.  A title report and any other documentation disclosing all existing interests or obligations against the transferor site property to be affected by the open space easement. If other interests exist, a subordination agreement (in a recordable form) acknowledging the reservation of the city of Morgan Hill's open space easement claim shall be submitted with the title report. 
b.  When known, the location and land area of the recipient site to which such credits are to be transferred, the projected total number of dwelling units that would result on the recipient site from such a transfer, and a statement of the character of the projected housing development. 
c.  A legal description of the open space to be preserved on the transferor site by the transfer, accompanied by an open space (scenic) easement suitable for recordation and the applicable open-space policy to be implemented by the transfer. 
d.  The location, site area, and related residential development credits of the transferor site which the applicant proposes to transfer. 
e.  Where applicable, the number of building allotments granted to the recipient site under the residential development control system (RDCS). 
3.  City Action. Upon approval of the planning commission and the city council of a TDC application, the City Clerk shall issue a TDC certificate to the applicant in a form approved by the city manager. The following actions must be taken prior to these development credits being effectively conveyed to and utilized by the recipient property: 
a.  Approval by the planning commission of a detailed site plan of the recipient site to which the development credits are to be transferred; 
b.  Where recipient site is known, execution and recordation with the county recorder's office of an instrument legally sufficient both in form and content to effect conveyance of the TDC from the transferor to the recipient site. Such instrument shall specifically set forth the credits to be conveyed and the resultant total residential development credits assignable to the recipient site; 
c.  Execution and recordation with the county recorder's office of an instrument legally sufficient in form and content to effect conveyance of a permanent open space easement in the transferor site dedicated to the city. Such open space easement shall be unencumbered by any prior interests or, if so encumbered, shall be accompanied by and recorded together with subordination agreement with evidence that all persons or entities having any interest in the transferor site have acknowledged the creation and transfer of development credits, consented to the terms and conditions of the open space easement, and waived the priority of any rights or claims they may have in the transferor site. Recordation of the executed open space easement and accompanying subordination agreement shall serve as notice of the dedication of open space in the transferor site and shall be incorporated in the deeds of the transferor site; and 
d.  Other requirements as established by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.30.050 - Planned development combining district. 
A.  Purpose of the Planned Development Combining District. The purpose of the Planned Development (PD) combining district is to allow for high quality development that deviates from standards and regulations applicable to base zoning districts in Morgan Hill. The PD combining district is intended to promote creativity in building design, flexibility in permitted land uses, and innovation in development concepts. The PD combining district provides land owners with enhanced flexibility to take advantage of unique site characteristics and develop projects that will provide public benefits for residents, employees, and visitors. 
B.  Where Allowed. The PD combining district may be applied to any property in Morgan Hill with an area of 1 acre or more. 
C.  Permitted Land Uses. 
1.  Permitted land uses in each PD combining district shall conform to the PD master plan that applies to the property. 
2.  Permitted land uses may deviate from the land use regulations of the applicable base zoning district provided the PD combining district allows only those land uses permitted in the applicable general plan land use designation. 
D.  Development Standards. 
1.  Development standards (e.g., height, setbacks, building coverage) for each PD combining district shall be established in the applicable PD master plan. 
2.  Development standards may deviate from development standards in the applicable base zoning district except that the maximum permitted floor area ratio and residential density may not exceed maximums established in the general plan for the applicable land use designation. 
E.  Required Approvals. 
1.  PD Master Plan and Zoning Map Amendment. Establishment of a PD combining district requires approval of a PD master plan and a zoning map amendment. 
2.  Design Review. A proposed development must receive a design permit as required by Section 18.108.040 (Design Permits). All development and land uses within a PD combining district shall be consistent with the approved PD master plan. 
F.  Preliminary Review. 
1.  When Required. Prior to submittal of an application for a PD rezoning and PD master plan, an applicant must receive preliminary input from the planning commission on the proposed planned development project. 
2.  Application. A preliminary review application for a proposed planned development project shall be submitted with the development services department in accordance with Chapter 18.104 (Common Permit Requirements). The application shall include, at a minimum, the following information and materials: 
a.  A statement describing the proposed project and how it complies with the findings required for the approval of a planned development project in Section 18.30.050.H.7 (Findings). 
b.  Project plans, diagrams, and graphics as needed to illustrate the overall development concept, including proposed land uses, buildings, circulation, open space, and any other significant elements in the project. 
3.  Public Hearing. The planning commission shall consider the preliminary review application and a public hearing noticed in accordance with Section 18.104.090 (Notice of Hearing). 
4.  Preliminary Input. 
a.  The planning commission shall provide preliminary input on project compliance with findings required for the approval of a Planned Development project in Section 18.30.050.H.7 (Findings). 
b.  Planning commission input shall not be construed as a recommendation for approval or denial of the project. Any recommendation to the applicant is advisory only and shall not be binding on either the applicant or the city. 
G.  Planned Development Rezoning. 
1.  General Procedures and Requirements. Establishing a PD combining district requires city council approval of a zoning map amendment in accordance with Chapter 18.114 (Zoning Code Amendments). All requirements for zoning map amendments in Chapter 18.114 apply to the establishment of a PD combining district. 
2.  Timing. The city council shall act on the zoning map amendment concurrently with the PD master plan. A PD combining district may be established only with concurrent approval of a PD master plan. 
3.  Reference to PD Master Plan. The ordinance adopted by the city council establishing a PD combining district shall reference the PD master plan approved concurrently with the zoning map amendment. 
H.  PD Master Plans. 
1.  Review Authority. The city council takes action on PD master plan applications following recommendation from the planning commission. 
2.  Timing. A PD master plan application shall be submitted within one year of preliminary review for the proposed project. If an application is not submitted within one year of preliminary review, the applicant shall compete a second Preliminary Review process prior to submitting the PD master plan application. 
3.  Application Submittal and Review. 
a.  PD master plan applications shall be filed and reviewed in compliance with Chapter 18.104 (Common Permit Requirements). The application shall include the information and materials required by the development services department and the information required by Paragraph 4 (Application Materials) below. 
b.  If the property is not under a single ownership, all owners must join the application, and a map showing the extent of ownership shall be submitted with the application. 
c.  It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the findings required by Paragraph 7 (Findings) below. 
4.  Application Materials. Applications for approval of a PD master plan shall include the following information and materials: 
a.  Project Description. A written description of the project proposed within the PD combining district. The project description shall include a narrative statement of the project objectives and a statement of how the proposed project will comply with general plan goals and policies for the applicable land use designation. An overview of the proposed land use, densities, open space, and parking should be included in the project description. 
b.  Community Benefits. A description of how the proposed development is superior to development that could occur under the standards in the existing zoning districts, and how it will achieve a substantial public benefits as defined in Paragraph 8 below. 
c.  Site Map. Maps depicting the existing topography, on-site structures and natural features, mature trees, and other significant vegetation and drainage patterns. The map shall show the proposed PD combining district boundaries and all properties within five hundred feet of the site boundary. 
d.  Concept Plan. An overall diagram of the project concept. This diagram shall illustrate the overall development concept, including proposed land uses, buildings, circulation, open space, and any other significant elements in the proposed project. Phases shall be clearly indicated if multiple phases are proposed. 
e.  Land Use. A map showing the location of each land use proposed within the site, including open space and common areas. The land use map shall be accompanied by a narrative description of permitted land uses, allowable accessory uses, and uses allowed by-right or with a conditional use permit. 
f.  Subdivision Map. If the project involves the subdivision of land, a tentative parcel map or tentative map required by Title 17 (Subdivisions) of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code. 
g.  Circulation. A map and descriptions of the major circulation features within the site including vehicular, bicycle, pedestrian facilities; traffic flow of internal traffic; and existing and proposed public streets and sidewalk improvements. 
h.  Public Facilities and Open Space. The amount (in square feet or acres) and percentage of site area that will be dedicated for all types of open space, including proposed recreational facilities and amenities; and any public facilities, including public utility easements, public buildings and public land uses. 
i.  Development Standards. All development standards that apply within the project, including: 
(1)  Density and/or intensity; 
(2)  Minimum lot size and dimensions; 
(3)  Maximum building coverage; 
(4)  Minimum setbacks; 
(5)  Maximum building heights; 
(6)  Signs; 
(7)  Landscaping; 
(8)  On-site parking; and 
(9)  Other items as deemed appropriate by the planning commission and city council. 
5.  Planning Commission Review and Recommendation. 
a.  The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the PD master plan application as required by Chapter 18.104 (Common Permit Requirements). 
b.  The planning commission shall recommend to the city council the approval, approval with modification, or denial of the PD master plan application. The recommendation shall be based on the findings in Paragraph 7 (Findings) below. 
6.  City Council Review and Decision. Upon receipt of the planning commission's recommendation, the city council shall conduct a public hearing and either approve, approve in modified form, or deny the PD master plan. The city council may approve the application only if all of the findings in Paragraph 7 (Findings) below can be made. 
7.  Findings. The city council may approve an application for a PD master plan if all of the following findings can be made: 
a.  The proposed development is consistent with the general plan, zoning code and any applicable specific plan or area plan adopted by the city council. 
b.  The proposed development is superior to the development that could occur under the standards applicable in the existing zoning districts. 
c.  The proposed project will provide a substantial public benefits as defined in Paragraph 8 (Substantial Public Benefit Defined) below. The public benefit provided shall be of sufficient value as determined by the planning commission to justify deviation from the standards of the zoning district that currently applies to the property. 
d.  The site for the proposed development is adequate in size and shape to accommodate proposed land uses. 
e.  Adequate transportation facilities, infrastructure, and public services exist or will be provided to serve the proposed development. 
f.  The proposed development will not have a substantial adverse effect on surrounding property and will be compatible with the existing and planned land use character of the surrounding area. 
g.  Findings required for the concurrent approval of a zoning map amendment can be made. 
8.  Substantial Public Benefit Defined. When used in this section, "substantial public benefit" means a project feature not otherwise required by the zoning code or any other provision of local, state, or federal law that substantially exceeds the city's minimum development standards and significantly advances goals of the general plan. A project must include one or more substantial public benefits to be rezoned as a planned development. The public benefit provided shall be of sufficient value as determined by city council to justify deviation from the standards of the zoning district that currently apply to the property. Examples of substantial public benefits include but are not limited to: 
a.  Housing that is affordable to lower-income households. 
b.  Public plazas, courtyards, open space, and other public gathering places that provide opportunities for people to informally meet and gather. 
c.  New or improved pedestrian and bicycle pathways that enhance circulation within the property and connectivity to the surrounding neighborhood. 
d.  Green building and sustainable development features that substantially exceed the city's minimum requirements. 
e.  Preservation, restoration, or rehabilitation of a historic resource. 
f.  Increased transportation options for residents and visitors to walk, bike, and take public transit to destinations and reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 
g.  Publicly accessible parks and open space beyond the minimum required by the city or other public agency. 
h.  Habitat restoration and or protection of natural resources beyond the minimum required by the city or other public agency. 
9.  Conditions of Approval. The city council may attach conditions of approval to a PD master plan to achieve consistency with the general plan, zoning code, and any applicable specific plan or area plan adopted by the city council. 
I.  Effect of PD Master Plan. All future development and land uses within a PD combining district shall comply with the approved PD master plan. 
1.  Land Uses. New land uses may be added in a PD combining district provided the PD master plan identifies the use as a permitted or conditionally permitted land use. Establishing a land use not specifically permitted by the PD master plan would require an amendment to the PD combining district. 
2.  Structures. New structures may be added in a PD combining district provided the structures comply with development standards established in the PD master plan (e.g., height, setback, floor area ratio). Design review consistent with Section 18.108.040 (Design Permits) is required for all new development that was not approved with the PD master plan. Development that exceeds development standards in the PD master plan is allowed only with an amendment to the PD combining district. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.30.060 - Active fault surface rupture combining district. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the Active Fault Surface Rupture (AFSR) combining district is protect the public from hazards caused by development located across active faults and to implement requirements of the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act and any successor statute or regulations (Public Resource Code Section 2621 et seq.). 
B.  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, certain terms are defined as follows: 
1.  "Active fault" is any fault which has had surface displacement within Holocene time (about the last eleven thousand years), hence constituting a potential hazard to structures that might be located across it. 
2.  "Fault trace" is the intersection of a fault surface with the earth's surface and is usually represented as a line on a map. 
3.  "Official earthquake fault zone" are those areas delineated on the most current versions of maps issued by the California State Geologist, along faults deemed "sufficiently active and well-defined" pursuant to the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zone Act (Public Resources Code Section 2621 et seq.), and the policies and criteria of the state mining and geology board and any succeeding statute or regulation. 
4.  "Project," as used in this section, means: 
a.  Any subdivision of land which is subject to the Subdivision Map Act, Division 2 (commencing with Section 66410) of Title 7 of the Government Code, and which contemplates the eventual construction of structures for human occupancy; and 
b.  Structures for human occupancy. 
c.  "Project" does not include repairs, alterations or additions to any structure within a fault zone which do not exceed fifty percent of the value of the structure or which is a conversion of an apartment complex into a condominium. 
5.  "Qualified geologist" is a certified engineering geologist pursuant to the California Geologist and Geophysicist Act (Business and Professions Code Section 7800, et seq.). 
6.  "Structures for human occupancy" are any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy, which is expected to have a human occupancy rate of more than two thousand person-hours per year. 
C.  Prohibited Development. 
1.  A structure for human occupancy identified as a project within the AFSR Combining District shall not be: 
a.  Located across the trace of an active fault; or 
b.  Located within fifty feet of an active fault unless proven not to be underlain by active branches of the fault by a geologic report prepared by a qualified geologist. 
2.  The change in use or character of occupancy of a building or structure from one not used for human occupancy to one that is used for human occupancy is prohibited unless the building or structure complies with this chapter. 
D.  Geologic Report. 
1.  Need for Report. For proposed projects located in the AFSR combining district, the applicant shall submit to the city a geologic report prepared by a qualified geologist. The applicant's geologist shall discuss the scope of work with a qualified geologist employed or retained by the city (reviewing geologist) prior to performing the investigation. The city shall file with the state geologist one copy of all completed geologic reports within thirty days following the community development director's acceptance of the report as complete. 
2.  Waiver. The community development director may waive the requirement to prepare a geologic report in the following circumstances: 
a.  If the director determines that no undue fault hazard exists based on the advice and recommendation of a qualified geologist employed or retained by the city, the director may set forth such determination in writing, citing the reasons for a waiver. Any waiver under this subsection shall be allowed only with approval of the state geologist. 
b.  Notwithstanding paragraph (a) above, for a project consisting of single-family wood-frame or steel-frame dwelling not exceeding two stories when that dwelling is not part of a development of four or more dwellings, the director may waive the requirement for a geologic report upon determining that no undue fault hazard exists based on the advice and recommendation of the qualified geologist employed or retained by the city. 
3.  Preparation. The geologic report required by this section shall be prepared and based on an investigation directed to the problem of potential surface displacement through the project site, and shall identify the location, recency, and nature of faulting that may have affected the project site in the past and may affect the project in the future. 
E.  Appeals. Decisions of the community development director and planning commission made pursuant to this section may be appealed in accordance with Chapter 18.112 (Appeals) 
F.  Additional Regulations. 
1.  In addition to the regulations set forth in this section, the development services department, with the consent of the city council, may adopt such standards or regulations as necessary to protect the public from the effects of surface rupture along active faults in official earthquake fault zones. 
2.  These standards or regulations may be more stringent than, but shall not be in conflict with, the provisions of any policies and criteria adopted by the state mining and geology board pursuant to Section 2623 et seq. of the Public Resources Code of the state. 
3.  Where more stringent standards or regulations have been adopted, the policies and criteria adopted from time to time by the state mining and geology board shall apply within the city. 
G.  Consistency with Other Regulations. 
1.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to relieve any person of requirements imposed by other sections of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code, the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), or any other applicable provision of state law. 
2.  In case of conflict between this section and other requirement of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code or state law, the more restrictive shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Part 3 - CITYWIDE STANDARDS  
Chapter 18.40 - ALTERNATIVE STANDARDS FOR MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT 
 
18.40.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide alternative development standards for medium density residential development including single-family detached and attached housing units on small lots (less than seven thousand square feet). The intent of these standards is to: 
A.  Ensure that small lot development blends with the surrounding community and is compatible with neighborhoods, is sensitive to its context, and incorporates appropriate amenities and high-quality design; 
B.  Implement residential development standards to enhance the appearance of the surrounding neighborhood and be well integrated with existing homes nearby; 
C.  Discourage abrupt transitions in height, mass, and prevailing setback patterns and separations caused by high, solid walls and blank building faces; 
D.  Recognize small lot and medium density development as a more efficient form of land use than lower density development, a means of reducing the environmental impacts of housing development, and a way to create more walkable neighborhoods; 
E.  Guide new development while accommodating creativity, innovation, and flexibility in housing design; and 
F.  Implement Morgan Hill Housing Element policies which encourage greater housing diversity and affordability in Morgan Hill. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.40.020 - Applicability. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter are intended for use in the residential attached low density (RAL) and residential attached medium density (RAM) zoning districts and are principally intended for single-family homes, townhomes, patio homes, courtyard homes, duets, and similar single-family detached and attached housing types. The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable in the residential detached (RDL, RDM, RDH), residential attached high density (RAH) and mixed use (MU-D, MU-N, MU-F) zoning districts. 
B.  The standards in this chapter may be used as an alternative to the development standards for the RAL and RAM zoning districts contained in Chapter 18.18 (Residential Attached Zoning Districts). The standards in this chapter are not mandatory but instead provide an alternative to accommodate a wider range of housing types in a manner that enhances Morgan Hill's unique feel and minimizes impacts on adjacent properties. 
C.  Modifications to homes in small lot developments already existing as of October 7, 2015 shall be exempt from these standards. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.40.030 - Design permit required. 
Proposed projects subject to the requirements of this chapter shall obtain a design permit pursuant to Section 18.108.040 (Design Permits). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.40.040 - Permitted housing types. 
Housing types allowed in the RAL and RAM zoning districts subject to the requirements of this chapter are shown in Table 18.40-1. 
Table 18.40-1: Permitted Housing Types 
Key 
P Permitted Use 
— Use not allowed 	Zoning District 
Housing Type 	RAL 	RAM 
Single-Family Detached Dwellings (SFD) 	P [1] 	— 
Duets 	P 	— 
Single-Family Attached Dwellings - Townhouse (TH) 	P 	P 
Courtyard Homes (Courtyard) 	P [1] 	— 
Duplex 	P 	P 
Multi-Family Dwellings (Multi) 	— 	P 
 
Note: 
[1] The development of detached single family dwellings shall be no greater than 25 percent of the gross buildable site area (including lots and streets). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.40.050 - Development standards. 
A.  General. Minimum lot sizes and dimensions for specific housing types are shown in Table 18.40-2. Lot sizes, dimensions, coverage limits, and setback standards may vary based on the use within the specified zoning district. 
Table 18.40-2: Medium Density Residential Development Standards 
	Housing Type 
	Duet 	Courtyard 	SFD 	TH 	Duplex 	Multi 
Lot Area (min sq. ft.) [1] [2] 	3,000 	1,920— 
2,999 	4,500— 
5,500 	1,440— 
3,999 	6,000 	6,000 
Lot Width (min) 	30 ft. 	24 ft. 	40 ft. 	24 ft. 	60 ft. 	60 ft. 
Lot Depth (min) 	85 ft. 	60 ft. 	80 ft. 	60 ft. 	85 ft. 	85 ft. 
Lot Coverage (max) [3] 	50% 	45% 	N/A 	55% 	1 story: 40% 
2+ story: 50% 	60% 
Floor Area Ratio (max) 	N/A 	N/A 	52% 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 
Height 	See base zoning district 	See 18.40.050.B 	See base zoning district 
Setbacks 						
 Front [4] 	10 ft. 	N/A 	15 feet 	N/A 	20 ft. 	15 
 Interior Side 	3 ft. [5] 	5 ft. [7] 	4 ft. [6] 	N/A 	5 ft. [7] 	5 ft. 
 Street Side 	6 ft. 	5 ft. 	8 ft. 	5 ft. 	10 ft. 	15 ft. 
 Rear 	10 ft. 	N/A 	15 ft. 	N/A 	15 ft. 	20 ft. 
 
Notes: 
[1] Subject to the density requirements specified in the General Plan. 
[2] Standards are for individual lots and not for the subdivision as a whole. 
[3] Lot coverage limits apply to individual, subdivided parcels and to accessory structures as well as the primary residential structure on the site. Development in the RAL and RAM zoning districts is also subject to an aggregate lot coverage limit for the entire subdivision. See Section 18.18.060.A. 
[4] Additional requirements apply for street-facing garages. See Section 18.40.070.H.7. 
[5] A reduced setback (as low as zero feet) is acceptable on one side yard; provided, that the sum of both side yard setbacks is at least six feet and one setback is at least four feet. 
[6] A reduced setback (as low as zero feet) is acceptable on one side yard; provided, that the sum of both side yard setbacks is at least eight feet. 
[7] A reduced setback (as low as zero feet) is acceptable on one side yard; provided, that the sum of both side yard setbacks is at least ten feet. 
B.  Townhouse Height. 
1.  The maximum building plate height of a townhouse is thirty feet. Building plate height is measured as the vertical distance from the average contact ground level at the front wall of the building to the plate line of the exterior walls which is the horizontal plane where the exterior walls meet the roof rafters or trusses 
2.  Roof elements with a minimum 5:12 roof pitch may exceed the building plate height by up to eight feet. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.40.060 - Standards for all housing types. 
A.  Aggregate Lot Coverage. For all projects in the RAL and RAM zoning districts, the sum total coverage of all proposed buildings and structures shall not exceed forty percent of the gross land area of the subdivision. 
B.  Transitional Standards. When a proposed project is adjacent to a residential zoning district, excluding the RAH zoning district, the following transitional standards shall apply: 
1.  The building setback from the adjacent residential zoning district properties shall be five feet for interior side yards; 
2.  The building setback from the abutting residential zoning district properties shall be twenty feet for rear yards for lots three thousand to five thousand ninety-nine square feet and fifteen feet for rear yards for lots one thousand four hundred forty to two thousand ninety-nine square feet. 
3.  The building height at the above-mentioned setback lines may not exceed thirty feet. On lots where heights greater than thirty feet are allowed, the height may increase at a rate of one foot of vertical rise for every one foot of linear distance away from the setback line, to the maximum indicated in the corresponding zone district. 
4.  A landscaped planter strip of at least five feet in width shall be provided along the abutting property line between a small lot subdivision or townhome development and any adjoining residential zoning district boundaries. Trees shall be planted within this area to provide screening between the small lot subdivision and the adjacent lower density uses. 
C.  Open Space — Multi-Family Dwellings. Common and private open space for multi-family dwellings shall be provided as shown in Table 18.40-3. 
Table 18.40-3: Usable Open Space for Multi-Family Dwellings 
Common Open Space [1] 
Minimum area (percent of site area) 	15% [2] 
Minimum horizontal dimension 	15 ft. 
Private Open Space [4] 
Minimum percentage of units with private open space 	50% 
Minimum area (for individual unit) 	48 sq. ft. 
Minimum horizontal dimension 	4 ft. 
 
Notes: 
[1] Common open space shall be fully landscaped and accessible to all residents. 
[2] Roof terraces and roof gardens may provide up to fifty percent of the required common open space area if the planning commission finds that roof terraces and roof gardens provide quality open space for residents and minimize noise, privacy and other potential impacts on neighboring properties. 
D.  Open Space — Attached and Detached Single-Family Homes. The following open space provisions apply specifically to small lot, courtyard, and townhome housing types, and other new developments with similar housing types. The standards recognize that small lot subdivisions may have greater common open space needs than conventional single-family development due to their smaller yard areas. 
1.  Private Open Space. Each lot must include a private open space area, such as a private yard, porch, balcony, roof garden, or patio. Private open space must be contiguous to the unit it serves and accessible and visible from the living area of the unit. The minimum amount of private open space per unit shown in Table 18.40-4 may be reduced by up to twenty-five percent if off-set by the equivalent increase in common open space. 
2.  Common Open Space. Developments which have either: (a) average lot size of smaller than four thousand three hundred fifty-six square feet (e.g., density of more than ten units per net acre) or (b) fifteen units or more, are required to provide common open space for the development's residents. Table 18.40-4 identifies the open space requirements, which vary based on lot size. Such common open space shall be visible from internal or external streets and shall be designed for informal surveillance from private residences to enhance neighborhood security. Common open space shall have a minimum usable width of fifteen feet and a minimum area of five hundred square feet, a slope of no more than ten percent, accessibility to all units, and be open to the sky. It may contain amenities which enhance usability, such as swimming pools, play equipment, benches and tables, and barbecues. Parking, loading, and service areas may not be counted as open space. 
Table 18.40-4: Usable Open Space for Attached and Detached Single-Family Homes 
Minimum Open Space Per Lot 	Average Lot Area (square feet) 
	1,440— 
1,920 	1,920— 
2,999 	3,000— 
4,356 	4,357— 
6,999 
Private Open Space [1] 	60 sq. ft. 	150 sq. ft. 	300 sq. ft. 	350 sq. ft. 
Common Open Space 	140 sq. ft. 	150 sq. ft. 	175 sq. ft. 	200 sq. ft. 
 
Notes: 
[1] Private open space per unit may be reduced by up to twenty-five percent if off-set by the equivalent increase in common open space. 
E.  Landscaping, Lighting, and Other Site Improvements. Landscaping, lighting and other site improvements shall be designed to diminish the impact of the denser development and provide a softer appearance as follows: 
1.  No more than fifty percent of any required front or street-facing side yard shall be covered with a paved or impervious surface. 
2.  A planter strip at least five feet wide shall be provided on the street-facing side of all walls fronting public or private roads in addition to landscaping provided as part of the streetscape. 
3.  A sufficient number and type of trees shall be provided to shade the sidewalks. Planting shall be done at the time public improvements are constructed. 
4.  Street lights shall be designed and scaled at a pedestrian scale with a maximum height of sixteen feet. "Cobra head" type street lights are prohibited. 
F.  Orientation. All units located along public streets shall have the primary entrance facing the street right-of-way. Exceptions to this requirement may be approved by the city for projects which are located on four-lane streets carrying high traffic volumes and streets that do not allow on-street parking. In such cases, the project may be oriented around private streets or courtyards. 
G.  Roof-Mounted Equipment. Any roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be incorporated into the roof design in such a way that it becomes an integral part of the architecture or is concealed from view. 
H.  Screening. Mechanical equipment and trash enclosures shall be screened as follows: 
1.  Air conditioners, heaters, utility equipment, meters, and similar equipment shall be screened from public view. Above-ground utility transformers and other above grade equipment shall not be located within the front yard along a street. 
2.  Fencing, landscaping, or view-obscuring structures shall be provided to screen trash cans or other refuse containers from view from public rights-of-way while still providing easy access to trash receptacles (see Figure 18.40-1). 
3.  A gate wide enough to allow for passage of city standard trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided. 
4.  Trash/recycling container storage areas shall have a smooth solid surface such as concrete or pavers. 
5.  The location of trash and recycling container storage areas shall be shown on plans submitted for planning and building permits. 
Figure 18.40-1: Standards for Trash Storage and Screening in Small Lot Subdivisions
  
I.  Homeowners' Association. A homeowners' association ("HOA") shall be required to provide ongoing maintenance for private streets and utilities, alleys, private open space and recreational facilities, stormwater drainage facilities, common landscaping, lighting, and other common areas, utilities, and facilities. 
J.  Terminology. For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
1.  Adjacent. "Adjacent" means directly abutting, having a boundary or property line(s) in common or bordering directly, or contiguous to. 
2.  Feasible. "Feasible" means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social, and technological factors. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.40.070 - Design criteria for small lot single-family subdivisions. 
A.  Applicability. The standards in this section apply to small lot single-family subdivisions. They are not applicable to townhome developments or other development where the predominant unit type is attached housing. 
B.  Unit Types. Units in small lot subdivisions may include single-family detached homes and "duets" which share a common wall on one side. 
C.  Lot Patterns. Lot patterns shall be varied to avoid monotonous streetscapes and shall include: 
1.  A variety of lot widths, depths, shapes, and sizes, such that there is a perceptible difference between lot sizes on a block. Lots shall be designed to accommodate a variety of home styles, setbacks, and garage placements; 
2.  Larger lots on corners; 
3.  Smaller lots surrounding common open space areas; and 
4.  Blocks no longer than six hundred linear feet. 
D.  Floor Plans and Front Elevations. The excessive repetition of identical floor plans and elevations shall be avoided. In subdivisions with fewer than twenty lots, at least three unique front elevations and floor plans shall be provided. In subdivisions with twenty lots or greater, at least four unique front elevations and floor plans shall be provided. Location of identical models on adjacent lots, including "back to back" lots, shall be avoided. 
E.  Four-Sided Design. Facades facing the side and rear yard shall include details which are compatible with those on the front facade, with similar types and treatments of roofs, windows, shutters, planter boxes, and other architectural elements. 
F.  Front Setbacks. Front yard setbacks shall be varied (see Figure 18.40-2). Generally, at least fifty percent of the homes shall have front yard setbacks which are greater than the minimum required (excluding porches and non-habitable space). This component may be implemented by recording "build to" lines on the final subdivision map. 
Figure 18.40-2: Small Lot Single-Family Subdivision Front Yard Setbacks
  
G.  Rear Setbacks. A variety of rear setbacks shall be provided in order to avoid the appearance of long, monotonous walls from adjacent properties along the rear lot lines. 
H.  Building Size and Design. A variety of unit types and sizes, sited to provide compatibility with nearby neighborhoods, shall be provided. Buildings shall incorporate the following design features: 
1.  Roof Variation. Rooflines along the longer axis of the building shall be broken with varied pitches at the skyline level. Features such as turrets, dormers, and other variations that add architectural interest and distinction are encouraged. 
2.  Building Height Variation. Homes shall feature a variety of building heights, potentially including single story, two-story, three-story, split level units, and units with partial second floors. Units abutting lower density development on the perimeter of a subdivision shall generally be lower in height, or split level in design to enhance compatibility. 
3.  Recessed Upper Stories. For at least fifty percent of the units, the second and third stories shall be recessed relative to the first story to reduce the appearance of building mass. The design shall avoid tall sheer walls, and preserve the privacy of adjacent properties. 
4.  Primary Entrances. Primary entrances to homes shall be in a prominent and visible location facing the street. Primary entrances shall not face the side yard setback or a deep recess of the building. 
5.  Usable Porches, Wherever Feasible. Porches shall have a minimum depth of five feet and a minimum width of eight feet, preferably extending a minimum of fifty percent of the width of the front facade, excluding the garage. Porches shall also incorporate different architectural features such as railings, short walls, trellises, and varied roof elements to provide architectural detail, character, and visual interest. 
6.  Garage Entries. There shall be a minimum of two locations of garage entries, such as front-facing attached garages, detached garages, and garages which are side-facing or accessed via a rear alley. 
7.  Recessed Garages. Garage faces shall be recessed a minimum of five feet from the primary facade of the residence (where they face the street and not a rear alley), in order to minimize the impact of the garage on the streetscape. The garage shall not comprise more than fifty percent of the front building facade (see Figure 18.40-3) on a residential unit. If additional articulation and architectural features are introduced to minimize the impact of the garage on the streetscape, the garage front facade length may be increased to sixty-seven percent. Driveways shall facilitate tandem parking where feasible. 
Figure 18.40-3: Standards for Street-Facing Attached Garages in Small Lot Subdivisions
  
I.  Driveways. Driveways shall be designed to reduce the amount of pavement within the subdivision to the greatest extent possible, as follows: 
1.  Maximum driveway width shall be twenty feet unless a wider driveway, up to twenty-four feet, is required for safe access; 
2.  Shared driveways, such that there is a single curb cut providing access to two houses, shall be encouraged in order to reduce the number of curb cuts along a street; 
3.  Driveways (and related curb cuts) shall be sited to maximize opportunities for on-street parking; and 
4.  Side driveways to rear garages shall be designed wherever feasible to create opportunities for off-street tandem parking in the side yard. 
J.  Parking. Parking requirements shall conform to the standards set in Chapter 18.72 (Parking and Loading), except as otherwise indicated below: 
1.  Two covered parking spaces shall be required for each housing unit; and 
2.  Two additional parking spaces for each unit shall be available for the use of residents and guests. These spaces may include a combination of driveway parking (including tandem parking), alley parking, on-street parking in front of the residence, and designated guest parking areas. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.40.080 - Special criteria for townhome developments. 
A.  Applicability. This section applies specifically to townhome developments. For the purposes of this section, a townhome shall be defined as a series of three or more adjacent single-family dwelling units, each on an independent parcel, which are connected by common walls along the side property lines. Townhomes include row houses but do not include duplexes or duets. Interior unit townhomes typically have zero feet side yard setbacks on both sides, while end unit townhomes have a zero feet side yard setback on one side. 
B.  Facade Articulation. All building facades shall have at least one horizontal or vertical projection or recess at least four feet in depth, or two projections at least two and one-half feet in depth, for every twenty-five horizontal feet of wall. The articulated elements must be greater than one story in height and may be grouped rather than evenly spaced in twenty-five-foot modules. Front porches, stoops, fireplaces, overhangs, trellises, and similar projections into the front yard may count toward this requirement. 
C.  Variable Roof Forms. Variable roof forms shall be incorporated into the building design. No more than two side-by-side units may be covered by one unarticulated roof. Articulations may be accomplished by changing roof height, offsets, and direction of slope and by introducing elements such as dormers, towers, and parapets. Alternative design approaches may be approved by the city, provided the goal of breaking down large building masses into smaller units is achieved. 
D.  Garage Location. Garages shall be located to the rear of the townhome and accessed via an alley or shared driveway wherever feasible. Garage faces shall be recessed a minimum of five feet from the primary facade of the residence (where the garage faces the street and not a rear alley) in order to minimize the impact of the garage on the streetscape. The garage shall not comprise more than fifty percent of the front building facade on a residential unit. 
E.  Facade Detailing and Materials. All visible building facades shall incorporate details, such as window trim, window recesses, cornices, changes in materials, or other design elements, in an integrated composition. Each side of a building that is visible from a public right-of-way, courtyard, or common open space, shall be designed with a complementary level of detailing and quality of materials. 
F.  Projections and Recesses. Facades shall incorporate balconies, bay windows, porches, and similar projections and recesses in a pattern that creates architectural interest across the length of the facade of a row of townhomes. Roofed projections or recesses shall be provided for all building entrances. 
G.  End Units. The side-facing facades at the end of a row of townhouses (or rowhouses) shall be consistent in design quality, materials, and massing with the street-facing building facades. End unit facades shall be designed to create a strong relationship with the street, with elements such as wrap around porches and bay windows facing the street or side yard area. 
H.  Entry Elevation. The ground floor elevation of a townhome shall be no more than thirty inches above the finished grade immediately adjacent to the entry. 
I.  Walkways. Walkways shall be provided to link the townhomes to recreational and other internal facilities as well as the other residential units and nearby public streets. Paseos, or pedestrian walks through common open space areas, are strongly encouraged. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.40.090 - Special criteria for courtyard home development. 
A.  Applicability. This section shall specifically apply to courtyard home development. For the purposes of this section, courtyard homes are defined as individual homes on small lots arranged around a common driveway. Courtyard homes are intended to lessen the impact of curb cuts and garages on the streetscape and enable homes to be oriented to a public street or open space rather than a driveway and street-facing garage. 
B.  Units Per Courtyard. No more than six units shall be accessed from a single courtyard. 
C.  Orientation. Homes adjacent to the street to which the courtyard connects shall face that street (rather than the courtyard) whenever feasible. 
D.  Courtyard Design and Pavement. The portion of the courtyard used for vehicle circulation shall be finished with decorative pavement and shall be at least sixteen feet wide, with a minimum width of twenty feet at its entrance to the adjacent street. Courtyards shall not exceed one hundred feet in length. 
E.  Vistas. Terminating vistas of the courtyard from nearby streets shall not be dominated by garages. 
F.  Garage Aprons. Paved areas in front of garage doors shall have a minimum backout dimension of twenty-four feet. To avoid obstruction of the courtyard, garage aprons shall be either less than six feet deep or more than eighteen feet deep. Aprons shall be limited to the rear units on a courtyard so that the parking aprons are not visible from the adjacent public or private streets. 
G.  Recessing of Garages. Garages shall be recessed behind the main dwelling unit by at least two feet. 
H.  Architectural Unity. All units on a court shall share a common architectural theme, although variations in building types and elevations on end units are encouraged. 
I.  Windows. Windows shall be sited and designed to maximize privacy and shall be set back from the property line to the maximum extent feasible. Second floor windows overlooking private open space areas of adjacent units shall be avoided wherever feasible. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.40.100 - Special criteria for condominium developments. 
A.  Applicability. This section applies specifically to condominium developments. For the purposes of this section, a residential condominium development shall be defined as: 
1.  A residential project that consists of an undivided interest in common in a portion of real property coupled with a separate interest in space called a unit, the boundaries of which are described on a recorded final map, parcel map, or condominium plan in sufficient detail to locate all boundaries thereof. The area within these boundaries may be filled with air, earth, water, or fixtures, or any combination thereof, and need not be physically attached to land except by easements for access and, if necessary, support. The description of the unit may refer to: (1) boundaries described in the recorded final map, parcel map, or condominium plan; (2) physical boundaries, either in existence, or to be constructed, such as walls, floors, and ceilings of a structure or any portion thereof; (3) an entire structure containing one or more units; or (4) any combination thereof. 
2.  The portion or portions of the real property held in undivided interest may be all of the real property, except for the separate interests, or may include a particular three-dimensional portion thereof, the boundaries of which are described on a recorded final map, parcel map, or condominium plan. The area within these boundaries may be filled with air, earth, water, or fixtures, or any combination thereof, and need not be physically attached to land except by easements for access and, if necessary, support. 
3.  An individual condominium within a condominium project may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of the real property. 
B.  Condominium Plan. A condominium plan shall contain all of the following: 
1.  A description or survey map of a condominium project, which shall refer to or show monumentation on the ground. 
2.  A three-dimensional description of a condominium project, one or more dimensions of which may extend for an indefinite distance upwards or downwards, in sufficient detail to identify the common area and each separate interest. 
3.  A certificate consenting to the recordation of the condominium plan pursuant to the provisions of the Civil Code and acknowledged as provided in Section 4290 of the Civil Code. 
C.  Utility Metering. 
1.  The consumption of gas and electricity within each unit shall be separately metered so that the unit owner can be separately billed for each utility. 
2.  Each dwelling unit shall be served by a separate city water meter. An additional separate city meter shall be provided to serve the common landscape areas in the condominium project. 
D.  Laundry Facilities. Each unit shall be provided with space and utility hookups within the unit or attached garage to accommodate a standard sized washer and dryer. The minimum dimensions shall be six feet wide and three feet deep. 
E.  Sound Transmission. Each condominium unit shall comply with the state of California's Noise Insulation Standards (Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations). 
F.  Building Code Requirements. Each unit of a condominium project and all commonly owned portions of a condominium building shall comply with all applicable building code standards. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent or prohibit the applicant or the city from providing or requiring building standards greater than those set forth in the building code where the greater standards are found to be necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this chapter. 
G.  Design Standards. Design standards in this chapter applicable to specific housing type(s) (e.g., townhomes, multi-family) shall apply to those housing types within a condominium project. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.40.110 - Special criteria for multi-family development. 
A.  Applicability. This section shall specifically apply to multi-family developments which shall be defined as a building designed and used as a residence for three or more families living independently of each other and containing three or more dwelling units. 
B.  Laundry Facilities. Adequate laundry facilities shall be provided for all multiple-unit projects with at least one washing machine and one dryer per each five dwelling units. 
C.  Storage Area. Each unit shall be provided a separate storage area consisting of at least one hundred cubic feet and having a minimum horizontal surface of twenty-five square feet. 
D.  Building Frontage and Orientation. Units shall face streets, open spaces and internal private streets whenever possible. Building fronts shall include porches and door facing streets. 
E.  Open Space. Common open space shall be centralized and directly accessible to units. Open common space shall be linked to adjacent parks, paseos, and paths. 
F.  Variable Roof Forms. Variable roof forms shall be incorporated into the building design. Articulations may be accomplished by changing roof height, offsets, and direction of slope, and by introducing elements such as dormers, towers, and parapets. Alternative design approaches may be approved by the City, provided the goal of breaking down large building masses into smaller units is achieved. 
G.  Facade Detailing and Materials. All visible building facades shall incorporate details, such as window trim, window recesses, cornices, changes in materials or other design elements, in an integrated composition. Each side of a building that is visible from a public right-of-way, courtyard, or common open space shall be designed with a complementary level of detailing and quality of materials. 
H.  Projections and Recesses. Facades shall incorporate balconies, bay windows, porches, and similar projections and recesses in a pattern that creates architectural interest across the length of the facade. Roofed projections or recesses shall be provided for all building entrances. 
I.  End Units. The side-facing facades at the end of a multi-family building shall be consistent in design quality, materials, and massing with the street-facing building facades. End unit facades shall be designed to create a strong relationship with the street, with elements such as wraparound porches and bay windows facing the street or side yard area. 
J.  Walkways. Walkways shall be provided to link the multi-family units to recreational and other internal facilities as well as the other residential units and nearby public streets. Paseos, or pedestrian walks through common open space areas, are strongly encouraged. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.44 - ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES 
 
18.44.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes standards for accessory structures and uses. The intent of these standards is to: 
A.  Ensure accessory structures and uses in residential districts are consistent with the residential character of the neighborhood; 
B.  Maintain adequate light and air between structures; 
C.  Minimize the visual impact associated with the height and bulk of accessory structures; and 
D.  Ensure that accessory structures and uses are subordinate to the primary residence on the same lot. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.44.020 - Accessory structures in all zoning districts. 
The following standards apply to accessory structures in all zoning districts: 
A.  Primary Structure Standards. Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, an accessory structure shall comply with all regulations applicable to the primary structure on the site. 
B.  Relation to Primary Structure. Accessory structures and their use shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to the primary structure on the site. 
C.  Location. Accessory structures shall be located on the same site as the primary use to which it incidental and subordinate. 
D.  Timing. Except for temporary construction trailers, accessory structures may not be constructed or established prior to the start of construction of the principal use or structure. 
E.  Accessory Structures Attached to Main Building. When an accessory building or structure is attached to the main building, it shall be made structurally a part of and have a common wall or roof with the main building and shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the Zoning Code applicable to the main building. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.44.030 - Accessory Structures in residential zoning districts. 
A.  Applicability. This section applies to the following types of accessory structures in residential zoning districts: 
1.  Roofed structures, including but not limited to detached garages, carports, sheds, shade structures, covered patios, play structures, covered dog enclosures, and gazebos, over seven feet in height and/or one hundred twenty square feet in size. 
2.  Open, unroofed structures such as decks and trellises over seven feet in height and detached from the main building on the site. 
3.  Mechanical equipment and mechanical equipment enclosures such as solar panels and water storage tanks, heating, and air conditioning equipment, and other similar mechanical equipment detached from the main building on the site. 
4.  Pools, spas and hot tubs. 
5.  Ponds eighteen inches or more in depth. 
6.  Fireplaces, barbeque structures, statuary, fountains, and other similar ornamental features. 
B.  Limitation on Use. 
1.  Accessory structures may not be used as living space which is heated and/or cooled. 
2.  A pool house under one hundred twenty square feet may contain a full bathroom. All other accessory structures may be equipped with a half bath only (toilet and sink). 
3.  An accessory structure that does not comply with these use limitations shall be considered an accessory dwelling unit subject to the requirements of Chapter 18.84 (Accessory Dwelling Units). 
C.  Development Standards. 
1.  Lot Coverage in Setback Areas. Roofed accessory structures such as garages and sheds and open, unroofed structures such as decks may collectively occupy no more than thirty percent of a required side or rear setback area. See Figure 18.44-1. 
2.  Height. Accessory structures shall comply with maximum height standards in Table 18.44-1. 
Figure 18.44-1: Accessory Structure Lot Coverage in Setback Areas
  
Table 18.44-1: Maximum Accessory Structure Height 
Accessory 
Structure 	Maximum 
Height 
In required setback areas 	
 Above ground pools, spas and hot tubs and related equipment, accessories, and improvements 	8 ft. 
 All other accessory structures 	12 ft. 
Outside of required setback areas 	As required for primary structures in zoning district 
 
D.  Setbacks from Property Lines. Accessory structures shall comply with the minimum property line setback standards in Table 18.44-2. 
E.  Building Separation. Accessory structures shall be setback the minimum distance from other structures on the lot as required by the building code. 
F.  Access Easements. Accessory structures may not be located within a public or private access easement. 
Table 18.44-2: Minimum Accessory Structure Setbacks 
Accessory Structure 	Minimum Setbacks from Property Lines 
	Front 	Side and Rear 
Roofed structures such as detached garages and sheds and open, unroofed structures such as decks and trellises 		
 Height 12 ft. or less 	Same as primary structure 	5 ft. 
 Height greater than 12 ft. 		Same as primary structure 
Mechanical equipment and mechanical equipment enclosures 		50 percent of minimum primary structure setback 
Patios and Decks [2] 		
 Height 18 in. or less 	5 ft. 	1 ft. 
 Height greater than 18 in. and less than 6 ft. 	15 ft. 	5 ft. 
 Height 6 ft.to 12 ft. 	20 ft. 	12.5 ft. 
In ground pools, spas and hot tubs 	Same as primary structure 	4 ft. 
Above ground pools, spas, hot tubs and related equipment, accessories, and improvements 	Same as primary structure 	5 ft. 
Ponds less than 18 in. in depth 	10 ft. 	1 ft. 
Fireplaces, barbeque structures, statuary and fountains [1] 		
 Height 8 ft. or less 	3 ft. 	3 ft. 
 Height 8 ft. to 12 ft. 	5 ft. 	5 ft. 
 
Notes: 
[1] All openings for freestanding fireplaces and built-in barbeques shall meet all Uniform Building Code and Uniform Fire Code requirements. 
[2] Height measured from ground to walking surface. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.44.040 - Accessory structures in non-residential zoning districts. 
Accessory structures in non-residential zoning districts are subject to the same development standards (e.g., height and setbacks) as primary structures in the applicable zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.44.050 - Accessory uses. 
A.  Residential Accessory Uses. The following requirements apply to accessory uses in residential zoning district. 
1.  Accessory uses shall be located on the same parcel as a residence and shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to the residence. 
2.  Accessory uses shall not change the character of the residential use. Examples of permitted accessory uses include home occupations and personal property sales (i.e., garage or yard sales). 
B.  Non-Residential Accessory Uses. The following requirements apply to accessory uses in non-residential zoning districts. 
1.  Accessory uses shall be a part of and clearly incidental and subordinate to the primary use to which it relates. 
2.  Accessory uses shall be located on the same site as the primary use to which it is incidental and subordinate. 
3.  Accessory uses may not necessitate an increase in required number of parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.48 - AFFORDABLE HOUSING 
 
18.48.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter identifies incentives for the production of affordable housing for lower-income households in Morgan Hill. These incentives are intended to promote the production of affordable housing consistent with the General Plan Housing Element and California Government Code Section 65915 to 65918. In case of conflict between this chapter and the Government Code, the Government Code shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.48.020 - Definitions. 
Specialized terms used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  "Density bonus" means a density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density for the net lot area as defined in Chapter 18.128 (General Terms) and as provided in Government Code Section 65915(f). 
B.  "Concession" or "incentive" means any of the following as provided in Government Code Section 65915(k): 
1.  A reduction in site development standards or a modification of zoning code requirements or architectural design requirements which exceed the minimum building standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission as provided in Part 2.5 (commencing with Section 18901) of Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code, including, but not limited to, a reduction in lot size, lot dimensions and building setbacks, and in the ratio of vehicular parking spaces that would otherwise be required, that results in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions. 
2.  Approval of mixed-use zoning if commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and if the non-residential uses are compatible with the housing development and the existing or planned development in the area where a proposed housing development will be located. 
3.  Other regulatory incentives or concessions set forth in Government Code Section 65915 or proposed by the developer or the city which result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions. 
C.  "Housing development" means a development project of five or more residential units, a subdivision or common interest development as described in Government Code Section 65915(i), or a project to substantially rehabilitate and convert an existing commercial building to residential use or the substantial rehabilitation of an existing multifamily dwelling, as described in Government Code Section 65915(i), where the result of the rehabilitation would be a net increase in available residential units. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.48.030 - Eligibility. 
To be eligible for a density bonus, a proposed housing development shall include a percentage of affordable units or provide senior citizen housing as described in Government Code Section 65915(b)(1), and if applicable, shall comply with Government Code Section 65915(c)(2)(C). A density bonus may also be granted to market-rate housing projects that donate land to the city for the development of affordable housing (Government Code Section 65915(g)) and affordable or senior housing projects that include an on-site child care facility (Government Code Section 65915(h)(1)). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.48.040 - Density bonuses. 
For eligible projects consistent with the requirements of this chapter and Government Code Section 65915, the city council shall grant an increase in the number of dwelling units permitted in the proposed project. The amount of density bonus is based on the number and degree of affordable units as specified in Government Code Section 65915. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.48.050 - Concessions and incentives. 
An applicant may request one or more concessions or incentives from the city as provided in Government Code Section 65915(d). The city council shall grant the requested concessions and incentives unless the council makes a finding described in Government Code Section 65915(d)(1). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.48.060 - Additional density bonuses. 
A proposed project may be eligible for a density bonus granted for planned development projects that incorporate community benefits as specified in Section 18.30.050 (Planned Development Overlay Zone). For projects receiving both an affordable housing density bonuses under this chapter and a planned development density under Section 18.30.050, the maximum cumulative density bonus for both density bonuses combined may not exceed thirty-five percent. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.48.070 - Affordability requirements. 
A.  For-Sale Units. A developer shall agree to and the city shall ensure that the initial occupant of all affordable for-sale units are households of low-, very low-, or moderate-income, as applicable, that the units are offered at an affordable housing cost as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5, and that affordability covenants and restrictions continue for 55 years. 
B.  Rental Units. A developer shall agree to enter into a contract with the city to ensure the continued affordability of all affordable rental units for fifty-five years or a longer period of time if required by an applicable construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program. Rents for the lower income density bonus units shall be set at an affordable rent as defined in Section 50053 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.52 - FENCES AND WALLS 
 
18.52.010 - Purpose and applicability. 
This chapter establishes standards for fences and walls that apply in all zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.52.020 - Required permits and approvals. 
A.  No Planning Permit Required. Fences and walls consistent with this chapter are permitted by-right without the requirement to obtain any planning permit unless otherwise stated. 
B.  Building Permit. Fences and walls may require a building permit as required by California Building Code. 
C.  Encroachment Permit. A fence or wall in the public right-of-way requires approval of an encroachment permit consistent with Municipal Code Chapter 12.08 (Excavation and Encroachment). 
D.  Minor Exception. The community development director may grant a minor exception to increase the maximum permit height of a fence or wall as described in Section 18.52.050 (Exceptions to Height Limits). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.52.030 - Measurement of fence and wall height. 
A.  Measurement of Height. The height of a fence or wall is measured from the finished grade at the base of the fence or wall to the top edge of the fence or wall. 
B.  Fences on Walls. If a fence is atop a wall, the fence height is measured from the base of the fence. 
C.  Different Finished Grades. If the adjacent finished grade is different on opposite sides of a fence or wall, the height is measured from the side with the lowest finished grade to the highest point on the fence or wall. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.52.040 - Height limits. 
A.  Maximum Height. Fences and walls may not exceed the maximum height shown in Table 18.52-1 and Figure 18.52-1 except as allowed by Section 18.52.050 (Exceptions to Fence Height Limit). 
Table 18.52-1: Maximum Fence and Wall Height 
Fence and 
Wall Height 	Maximum 
Height 
Fence in front setback area 	3 ft. 
Fence within 5 ft. of street side property line 	3 ft. 
Fence within all other areas of a lot 	6 ft. [1] 
 
Notes: 
[1] An additional one foot of fence height up to a maximum of seven feet is permitted for lattice work and other decorative features uniformly open to the passage of light and air. 
Figure 18.52-1: Maximum Fence and Wall Height
  
B.  Decorative Features. A decorative arch, gate, trellis or other entry feature located along a street frontage may exceed the height limit shown in Table 17.52-1. Decorative features shall be limited to ten feet in width and ten feet in height. Only one decorative feature is permitted per street frontage. See Figure 18.58-2. 
C.  Clear Triangle. Walls and fences shall comply with clear triangle requirements in Section 18.92.080 (Intersection Site Distance). 
Figure 18.52-2: Decorative Entry Features
  
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.52.050 - Exceptions to height limits. 
The community development director may approve a minor exception (Section 18.108.070) to allow an increase to the maximum permitted height of a fence or wall as described below. 
A.  Open Space and Residential Estate Zoning Districts. 
1.  Within the open space and residential estate zoning districts, the community development director may grant a minor exception to increase the maximum height of a fence in the front setback area to a maximum six feet in height. 
2.  This exception applies only to open, wrought iron or decorative fences that are at least seventy percent open to the passage of light and air. 
3.  Chain link, chain link with wood or vinyl slats, solid board fences, or any other type of view obstructing fencing may not exceed three feet in height in the front setback area. 
B.  All Zoning Districts. The community development director may grant a minor exception to increase the maximum height of a fence or wall by two feet in the front setback area and one foot behind the front setback line in the following cases: 
1.  The topography of sloping sites or a difference in grade between adjoining sites warrants such increase in height to maintain privacy, security, or effectiveness of screening. 
2.  A property is located adjacent to public parks, other public spaces or adjacent to private common area parks and open space where an increase in fence or wall height would not unreasonably affect desirable views or vistas or the open space value of abutting sites. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.52.060 - Materials. 
The following fence and wall materials and types are prohibited unless otherwise approved by the planning commission: 
A.  Residential zoning districts: Barbed wire, razor wire, chain link, and electric fences. 
B.  Commercial zoning districts: Chain link fences. 
C.  Industrial zoning districts: Barbed wire, razor wire, chain link and electric fences within the front setback area. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.52.070 - Nonconforming fences and walls. 
See Chapter 18.68 (Nonconforming Uses and Structures). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.56 - HEIGHT, SETBACK AND LOT COVERAGE EXCEPTIONS 
 
18.56.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter identifies permitted exceptions to height, setback, and lot coverage requirements for zoning districts as established in Part 2 (Zoning Districts and Overlay Zones). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.56.020 - Height exceptions. 
A.  Projections Allowed By-Right. Table 18.56-1 identifies building features which may project above the maximum permitted building height in the applicable zoning district. These projections are permitted by-right, with no discretionary permit required. 
Table 18.56-1: Allowed Projections Above Height Limits 
Structures Allowed Above Height Limit 	Maximum Coverage 	Maximum Projection 
Non-habitable decorative features such as spires, steeples, belfries, cupolas, domes 	10% of roof area [1] 	5 ft. in Residential Estate andResidential Detached zones; 10 feet in all other zones 
Parapets, fire escapes, catwalks, and open guard rails required by law 	As required by law 	As required by law 
Skylights 	No restriction 	1 ft. 
Chimneys and vent stacks 	5% of roof area 	5 ft. 
Amateur Radio Facilities 	No restriction 	35 ft. [2] 
Receive-only radio and television antennas 	No restriction 	12 feet in residential and mixed-use zones; 30 ft. in all other zones. 
Building mounted wireless communications facilities 	See Chapter 18.96 
Rooftop features for outdoor living areas, such as sunshade, open railings, trellises, and landscaping 	25% of roof area [1] 	10 ft. [2] 
Elevator shafts and stair towers (for multi-family and non-residential buildings only) 	10% of roof area [1] 	16 ft. [2] 
Rooftop equipment and enclosures 	25% [1] 	12 ft. [2] 
Flagpoles not over 8 inches in width 	N/A 	6 ft. 
Photovoltaic panels 	No restriction 	4 ft. 
Wind energy systems 	No restriction 	10 ft. 
 
Notes: 
[1] Must be set back from the exterior wall one foot for every foot of projection above the height limit. 
[2] As measured from the building roofline. 
B.  Height Exceptions Allowed with Minor Exception. The community development director may allow buildings to exceed the maximum permitted height in the applicable zoning district by up to ten percent with the approval of a minor exception. See Section 18.108.080 (Minor Modification). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.56.030 - Setback exceptions. 
A.  Projections into Required Setback. Table 18.56-2 identifies primary building features which that may project into minimum required setbacks in the applicable zoning district. These projections are permitted by-right, with no discretionary permit required. 
Table 18.56-2: Allowed Projections Into Required Setbacks 
Projecting Features 	Maximum Projection into Required Setback 	Minimum Distances from Property Lines 
Cornices, awnings, eaves, and other similar roof projections 	3 ft. 	1.5 ft. 
Canopies and similar features within any non-residential zoning district 	Two-thirds of required setback 	5 ft. 
Ground floor porches 	7 ft. 	5 ft. 
Upper story porches 	5 ft. 	5 ft. 
Uncovered stairs, ramps, stoops, or landings that service upper stories 	5 ft. 	5 ft. 
Bay windows and chimneys 	3 ft. [1] 	1.5 ft. 
 
Notes: 
[1] Features may not occupy, in the aggregate, more than one-third of the length of the building wall on which they are located. 
B.  Accessory Structures. See Chapter 18.44 (Accessory Structures and Uses) for setback requirements that apply to accessory structures. 
C.  Setback Exceptions Allowed with Minor Exception. The community development director may decrease the required front and rear setback by up to twenty-five percent and the required side setback by up to forty percent with the approval of a minor exception. See Section 18.108.070 (Minor Exception). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.56.040 - Lot coverage exceptions. 
The community development director may decrease the maximum lot coverage requirement by up to ten percent with the approval of a minor exception. See Section 18.108.070 (Minor Exception). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.60 - HISTORIC RESOURCES 
 
18.60.010 - Purpose. 
A.  General Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by providing for the identification, protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of historical resources, including buildings, structures, signs, objects, features, sites, areas, record, manuscript, historic and prehistoric archaeological sites, places, districts, designed landscapes, cultural landscapes and areas within the city that reflect special elements of the city's architectural, artistic, cultural, engineering, aesthetic, historical, political, social and other heritage. 
B.  Specific Intent. This chapter is specifically intended to: 
1.  Safeguard the heritage of the city as embodied and reflected in such resources; 
2.  Encourage public knowledge, understanding and appreciation of the city's past; 
3.  Foster civic and neighborhood pride and a sense of identity based on the recognition and use of historical resources; 
4.  Promote the enjoyment and use of historical resources appropriate for the education and recreation of the people of the city; 
5.  Preserve historic architectural styles and design preferences reflecting phases of the city's history and to encourage complementary contemporary design and construction; 
6.  Enhance property values and to increase economic and financial benefits to the city and its inhabitants; 
7.  Protect and enhance the city's attraction to tourists and visitors (thereby stimulating business and industry); 
8.  Identify as early as possible and resolve conflicts between the preservation of the historical resources and alternative land uses; 
9.  Integrate the preservation of historical resources and the extraction of relevant data from such resources into public and private land management and development processes; and 
10.  Conserve and recycle valuable community resources by continuing use and maintenance of the historic built environment. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.60.010 - Applicability. 
This chapter applies to potentially significant, significant, and designated historical resources within the city of Morgan Hill. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.60.020 - Definitions. 
A.  Terms Defined. Terms used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
1.  "Adopted survey list" is a list of resources (e.g., object, building, structure, site, area, place, record, or manuscript) which the city of Morgan Hill determines to be historically significant or significant in the architectural, engineering, scientific, economic, agricultural, educational, social, political, military, or cultural annals of Morgan Hill but have not been officially designated or listed on the local register. Resources listed on the adopted survey list shall be considered significant historical resources for the purposes of this chapter. 
2.  "Age" means the characteristic of being at least forty-five years old. 
3.  "Alteration" is exterior change or modification of character-defining features, through public or private action, of any significant or potentially significant historical resource, or of any contributing resource located within an historic district, which may include but not be limited to, exterior changes to or modification of structure, architectural details or visual characteristics such as surface texture, grading, surface paving, new structures, cutting or removal of trees and other natural features, disturbance of archeological sites or areas and the placement or removal of any exterior objects such as signs, plaques, light fixtures, street furniture, walls, fences, steps, significant plantings and landscape accessories, to the extent that such would affect the exterior character-defining features of the property containing the resource. 
4.  "Association" is the direct link between an important historic event or persons and a historic property for design, engineering or construction value and the ability to yield important information about prehistory or history. 
5.  "Buildings" are structures created to shelter human activity. Historic buildings are considered in their entirety. A building that has lost its basic structural elements is usually considered a "ruin" and is categorized as a site. 
6.  "Character-defining features" are those physical characteristics of an historical resource that convey its historical significance and justify its inclusion in or eligibility for inclusion in the National, California or Local Register. Character-defining features of a resource are documented by a qualified professional on a primary record survey form and/or a full historic evaluation; and also may consist of features mutually agreed upon by a property owner and the community development director or designated city staff. 
7.  "Design" is the combination of elements that create the form, plan, space, structure and style of a property. 
8.  "Designated historical resource" is any historical resource that has been determined to be significant and that has been designated and placed on a local register of historical resources pursuant to this chapter. 
9.  "Evaluation" is an intensive survey used to determine historical significance of a resource. An evaluation consists of completed Department of Parks and Recreation (DPR) 523 series survey forms, including: 1) Primary Record (523A); 2) Building, Structure, Object Record (523B); and 3) Any additional survey form appropriate for documentation of the subject resource. 
10.  "Feeling" is a property's expression of the aesthetic or historic sense of a particular period of time and results from the presence of physical features that, taken together, convey the property's historic character. 
11.  "Historical resources" include the following classifications: buildings, structures, sites, objects, historic district and archaeological resources that have determined to have a) Age, b) Integrity and c) Historical significance. For the purposes of this chapter and the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), the term "historical resources" shall include the following: 
a.  A resource listed in, or determined to be eligible by the State Historical Resources Commission, for listing in the National Register or the California Register of Historical Resources. 
b.  A resource included in a local register of historical resources or identified as significant in an historical resource survey meeting the requirements of section 5024.1(g) of the California Public Resources Code will be presumed to be historically or culturally significant, unless the preponderance of evidence demonstrates that it is not historically or culturally significant. 
c.  Any object, building, structure, site, area, place, record, or manuscript which the city of Morgan Hill determines to be historically significant or significant in the architectural, engineering, scientific, economic, agricultural, educational, social, political, military, or cultural annals of California or of Morgan Hill. 
d.  The fact that a resource is not listed in or determined to be eligible for listing in the California Register, and is not listed in a local register, does not preclude the city from determining that the resource is a potentially significant historical resource, such that further evaluation can be required to evaluate the resource for historic significance. 
12.  "Historic context statement" is a document adopted by the city council that describes historic periods and themes in Morgan Hill's history, which is used as a tool to assist with the assessment of a property's historic significance, by providing a framework against which to objectively qualify the property's relationship to larger themes and events. 
13.  "Historic district" is a geographically-definable area—urban or rural, small or large—possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures and/or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. A contributing resource within the district is an historical resource which contributes to the character of a historic district as described in National Register Bulletin 15. 
14.  "Historical significance" in national, state or local history, architecture, archaeology, engineering and culture is present in districts, sites, buildings, structures and objects that possess age, integrity and association with an important historical context: 
a.  That are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our national, state and/or local history and cultural heritage; or 
b.  That are associated with the lives of persons significant in our national, state and/or local past; or 
c.  That embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, region, or method of construction, or that represent the work of a master or important creative individual, or that possess high artistic values, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or 
d.  That have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history. 
15.  "Historic preservation officer" is defined as the community development director when such a designation is relevant for consultation with federal agencies for the purpose of Section 106 procedures. This designation may be used for other consultations affecting community historical resources. 
16.  "Integrity" is the ability of a property to convey its significance and evaluation of integrity is grounded in an understanding of a property's physical features and how they relate to its significance. There are seven aspects or qualities that, in various combinations, define integrity: location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association. To retain historic integrity a property will always possess several, and usually most, of the aspects. Determining which of the seven aspects are most important to a property requires knowing why, where and when the property is significant. 
17.  "Interior architectural feature" is any portion of the interior of a public space in a publicly owned building, or of a space in a privately-owned building designated or listed at the request of the owner, where the space is generally accessible for use and viewing by the general public. The feature must meet the criteria for historic significance in accordance with the criteria for designation as provided in this chapter. Proposed changes to designated historic interior spaces must follow the same procedures outlined in this chapter for alteration to exterior features. 
18.  "Local register" is a list of properties officially designated or recognized as historically significant by the city of Morgan Hill pursuant to a local ordinance or resolution adopted by the city council. 
19.  "Location" is the place where the historic property was constructed or the place where the historic event occurred. 
20.  "Object" is a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by design or nature, moveable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
21.  "Potentially significant historical resource" is a resource that is identified through a reconnaissance survey and/or by the city to have (a) age and (b) integrity but historical significance has not yet been evaluated or determined. 
22.  "Preservation" is defined as the act or process of applying measures necessary to sustain the existing form, integrity and materials of an historical resource. Work including preliminary measures to protect and stabilize the resource generally focuses upon the ongoing maintenance and repair of historic materials and features rather than extensive replacement and new construction. 
23.  "Reconnaissance survey" is a preliminary historic survey used of a defined geographic area, which identifies resources warranting further evaluation to determine historical significance, and which may also identify geographic areas and/or properties that do not have potential historical resources and will not be subject to historic review as long as the timeframe of the reconnaissance survey remains valid for such determination. A reconnaissance survey will generally include DPR 523 primary record survey forms (DPR 523A) or equivalent information for those resources determined to warrant future further evaluation. 
24.  "Reconstruction" is defined as the act or process of depicting, by means of new construction, the form, features and detailing of a non-surviving site, landscape, building, structure, or object for the purpose of replicating its appearance at a specific period of time and in its historic location. 
25.  "Rehabilitation" is defined as the act or process of making possible a compatible use for a resource through repair, alterations and additions while preserving those portions or features which convey its historical, cultural, or architectural value. 
26.  "Restoration" is defined as the act or process of accurately depicting the form, features and character of a resource as it appeared at a particular period in time by means of the removal of features from other periods in its history and reconstructing missing features from the restoration period. 
27.  "Setting" is the physical environment of a historic property. Whereas location refers to the specific place where a property was built or an event occurred, setting refers to the character of the place in which the property played its historical role. 
28.  "Site" is the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building, structure or landscape, whether standing, existing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself possesses historic, cultural, or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. A site can possess associative significance or information potential or both, and can be significant under any or all of the four criteria for evaluation of significance. 
29.  "Standards" are the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties, which is the body of information that provides acceptable approaches for preserving, rehabilitating, restoring and reconstructing significant historical resources or potentially significant historical resources. A project that follows the Secretary's Standards is considered not to result in a significant impact to the resource under the California Environmental Quality Act(CEQA). 
30.  "Structure" is a man-made feature made of interdependent and interrelated parts in a definite pattern of organization. The term "structure" is used to distinguish from "buildings" which are constructed primarily for human shelter. If a structure has lost its historic configuration or pattern of organization through deterioration or demolition, it is usually considered a "ruin" and is categorized as a site. 
31.  "Substantial adverse change" means demolition, destruction, relocation, or alteration of the character-defining features of an historical resource or its immediate surroundings such that the significance of an historical resource would be materially impaired. A project with an effect that may cause a substantial adverse change is a project that may have a significant effect on the environment under CEQA. 
32.  "Unique archaeological resource" is a type of historical resource and means an archaeological artifact, object, or site about which it can be clearly demonstrated that, without merely adding to the current body of knowledge, there is a high probability that it meets any of the following criteria: 
a.  Contains information needed to answer important scientific research questions and that there is a demonstrable public interest in that information. 
b.  Has a special and particular quality such as being the oldest of its type or the best available example of its type. 
c.  Is directly associated with a scientifically recognized important prehistoric or historic event or person. 
33.  "Workmanship" is the physical evidence of the crafts of a particular culture or people during any given period in history or prehistory. 
B.  Terms Not Defined. Terms not defined in this section shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable meaning and application. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.60.030 - Identification of historical resources. 
A.  Citywide Reconnaissance Survey. 
1.  In 2008, the city completed a reconnaissance survey to identify potential historical resources located within the city of Morgan Hill 2007 Urban Growth Boundary (UGB). The survey process included a visual survey of over 870 properties containing structures at least forty-five years in age. From the over 870 properties, 126 DPR 523A primary record survey forms were completed for properties appearing to maintain historic integrity. The reconnaissance survey will be used to exclude properties from further historic evaluation and to identify those properties requiring a full evaluation as defined in this chapter, as part of future development proposals, to determine historical significance. 
2.  The city of Morgan Hill may periodically update the citywide reconnaissance survey and/or survey additional properties located within the city limits, urban growth boundary, urban limit line, or sphere of influence boundary, for the purposes of identifying those properties or geographic areas that are determined not to be or contain potentially significant historical resources, as well as to identify those properties or areas that may contain potentially significant historical resources and will require additional evaluation in order to make determinations of age, integrity and/or significance. 
3.  The city of Morgan Hill will maintain a comprehensive record of reconnaissance surveys, evaluations and historic reports completed for properties located within the city limits, urban growth boundary and/or sphere of influence, including those completed as part of the 2008 Reconnaissance Survey and those submitted by individual applicants. 
B.  Local Register of Designated Historical Resources. The city of Morgan Hill will maintain a local register of designated historical resources consisting of resources determined by the city council to possess age, integrity and significance. The city of Morgan Hill will also maintain an adopted survey list identifying resources considered to be significant to Morgan Hill but not officially designated or listed on the local register. For the purposes of this chapter, an object, building, structure, site, area, district, unique archaeological resource, place, record, or manuscript may be classified a designated historical resource and placed on the local register by the planning commission pursuant to Section 2.36.040 if it is determined through survey and documentation to be a "historical resource" as defined in this chapter, which are determined to have (a) age, (b) integrity and (c) historical significance as defined by this chapter 
C.  Archaeological Sensitivity Maps. The city of Morgan Hill may publish or adopt archaeological sensitivity maps and/or may request the assistance of the Northwest Information Center, which is the area's historical resources information system located at Sonoma State University, for information about known archaeological sites, or about potential historic or prehistoric resources that may be determined to be significant or unique. 
D.  Site Specific Evaluations. The city of Morgan Hill may require project applicants to retain qualified consultants to prepare evaluations that can be used by the city to determine whether a property or site is a potentially significant or a significant historical resource, as part of development review and/or environmental review processes. The city may require a peer review by the city's historic consultant of any evaluation report submitted directly by an applicant. Reconnaissance surveys and evaluations shall use the adopted Morgan Hill Historic Context Statement as a tool for understanding whether and why the property is significant. A resource must be associated with an important historical context and retain integrity of those features necessary to convey that significance. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.60.040 - Local register designation process. 
Historical resources and historic districts shall be designated and placed on the local register by the planning commission as follows: 
A.  Request for Designation. The city of Morgan Hill or any property owner may request the designation of a significant or potentially significant historical resource or the designation of a historic district by submitting an application for such designation to the planning commission. The community development director, planning commission or city council may also initiate such proceedings on their own motion. 
B.  Study. The community development director will conduct a study of the proposed designation and make a preliminary determination based on such documentation as may be required, as to the appropriateness for designation. If the community development director determines the application merits consideration, the community development director shall forward such analysis and recommendation to the planning commission at a public hearing to consider designation of the historical resource or historic district. 
C.  Hold on Permits. No building alteration, demolition or relocation permits for any improvement, building or structure proposed for designation or located within a historic district that is proposed for designation shall be issued while the public hearing or any appeal related thereto is pending. 
D.  Public Notice and Hearing. The planning commission shall consider an application for the designation of a proposed historical resource or historic district at a public hearing noticed in accordance with Section 18.104.090 (Notice of Hearing). 
E.  Planning Commission Decision. At the conclusion of the public hearing for the designation of a proposed historical resource or historic district, the planning commission shall approve in whole or in part, or disapprove in whole or in part, the application, in writing. 
F.  Appeal. The planning commission decision to approve or deny the formal designation of a historical resource or historic district or to impose conditions on a project may be appealed in accordance with Section 18.60.112 (Appeals). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.60.050 - Adopted survey list designation process. 
Historical resources may be placed on the adopted survey list by the city council in the following manner: 
A.  Initiation. The city of Morgan Hill or any property owner may request the inclusion of a significant or potentially significant historical resource on the adopted survey list by submitting an application to the community development director. The planning commission or city council may also initiate such proceedings on their own motion. 
B.  Study. The community development director will conduct a study of the proposed inclusion and make a preliminary determination based on such documentation as may be required, as to the appropriateness for inclusion, and shall forward such analysis and recommendation to the planning commission and city council at a public hearing. 
C.  Hold on Permits. No alteration, demolition or relocation permits shall be issued for the subject resource while the public hearing or any appeal related thereto is pending. 
D.  Planning Commission Hearing. The planning commission shall consider an application for the inclusion of the resource on the adopted survey list at a public hearing noticed in accordance with Section 18.104.090 (Notice of Hearing). The planning commission shall recommend to the city council to either include or to not include resource on the adopted survey list. 
E.  City Council Hearing. The city council shall act on application for the inclusion of the resource on the adopted survey list at a public hearing noticed in accordance with Section 18.104.090 (Notice of Hearing). 
F.  Effect of Listing. Any proposed alteration, demolition or relocation of a historical resource listed on the adopted survey list shall be subject to the same review process and criteria outlined in this chapter for designated historical resources. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.60.060 - Determining if historical alterations, demolition or relocation permits are required. 
Development projects and building permit applications involving structures or buildings at least forty-five years in age, or located within a historic district, shall undertake the following steps in the development review process to determine if a historical alteration permit and/or historical resource demolition or relocation permit is required. Building permit applications involving only interior improvements are not subject to the provisions of this chapter, unless the building interior is specifically listed on the local register as a designated historical resource. 
A.  Prior Review. City staff shall consult the comprehensive record of reconnaissance surveys and evaluations on file at the development services department to determine whether the subject resource has been previously reviewed, and if so, the status of the resource (i.e., potentially significant, significant, not significant, or requires evaluation). 
B.  Evaluation. If the subject resource has not been previously reviewed, or if the community development director determines the existing survey and/or evaluation is no longer valid due to the age of the survey or analysis (more than five years old), or as a result of substantial change to the physical condition of the resource or its setting, the applicant may be required to provide an evaluation. Evaluations shall be prepared by a qualified consultant and shall use the California Register Criteria for Evaluation and the adopted Morgan Hill Historic Context Statement to determine significance. 
C.  Resources Found Not Significant. Resources that are surveyed, evaluated and determined not to be significant shall require no further historic review. 
D.  Significant or Potentially Significant Resources. 
1.  Resources that are surveyed, evaluated and determined to be a potentially significant or significant historical resource shall be subject to CEQA and the discretionary permit requirements established by this chapter for any proposed alteration, demolition or relocation of the resource. 
2.  The community development director may determine that no evaluation and/or no discretionary permit is required if either of the following apply: 
a.  The resource is located in a geographic area that has been determined by a valid reconnaissance survey, or other evaluation conducted by the city or applicant, not to be or contain potentially significant historical resources; or 
b.  The nature of work is minor and incidental; will not adversely affect the external appearance of the character-defining features of existing significant improvements, buildings and structures on the site; the proposed project or building permit application is consistent with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.60.070 - Historical alterations permit. 
A.  When Required. Unless waived pursuant to paragraph 18.62.030.E, it is unlawful for any person to alter or modify character-defining features of a potentially significant or significant historical resource, a resource that has been formally designated or listed on the city's adopted survey list, or which lies within an historic district, without first obtaining a Historical Alteration Permit as outlined below. Neither the community development director nor the building official shall grant any permit to carry out such work without the approval of a historical alteration permit. 
B.  Application. If a historical alteration permit is required pursuant to Section 18.60.040, the following procedures will be followed in processing the permit application: 
1.  Historical alteration permit applications shall be submitted to the development services department for review and approval. Applications shall be accompanied by materials as required by the community development director and reasonably necessary for the proper review of the project, including but not limited to information regarding the age and construction of a building or structure and building permit records; 
2.  The community development director or designated staff shall determine whether the application will be processed as "minor" or "major" historical alteration permit; 
a.  "Minor" historical alteration permits shall apply to alterations with a valuation of less than ten thousand dollars or as determined to be minor by the community development director. 
b.  "Major" historical alteration permits shall apply to alterations with a valuation of ten thousand dollars or greater. 
3.  City staff will review applications for compliance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards and may require that the applicant deposit funds for the city to retain the services of a qualified historic consultant if necessary; 
4.  Environmental review of a historical alteration permit application will be required as follows: 
a.  If the proposed alteration or modification is in compliance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties, the potential impact on historical resources shall be considered less than significant and the project would be exempt from CEQA unless other factors are identified which could cause other potentially significant environmental impacts. 
b.  If the proposed alteration or modification is not in compliance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards then CEQA review will be required. 
5.  Historical alteration permit applications (both minor and major) will require the review and approval of the community development director or designated staff, except as provided below: 
a.  Any application involving preparation of an initial study, negative declaration or environmental impact report shall be referred to the planning commission for approval at a duly noticed public hearing. 
b.  The community development director may also require a historical alteration permit application to be reviewed and approved by the planning commission at his/her discretion. 
6.  As part of the review process, the community development director or planning commission may impose conditions on a project to bring the proposed work into compliance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards. 
7.  The community development director or planning commission decision to approve or deny a historical alteration permit or to impose conditions on a project may be appealed in accordance with Chapter 18.112 (Appeals). 
C.  Reconstruction of potential historical and historical resources shall also comply with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards and require a historical alteration permit as described under subsection B, above. If all of the conditions of reconstruction as defined in this chapter and by the standards for reconstruction cannot be met, then reconstruction should not be undertaken and CEQA analysis is required. Reconstruction, though not encouraged, may be a viable option, though rare. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.60.080 - Historical resource demolition or relocation permit. 
A.  When Required. It is unlawful for any person to tear down, demolish, remove or relocate a potentially significant or significant historical resource, a resource that has been formally designated or listed on the city's adopted survey list, or which lies within an historic district, without first obtaining a historical resource demolition or relocation permit as outlined below. Neither the community development director nor the building official shall grant any permit to carry out such work without the prior approval of a historical resources demolition or relocation permit by the planning commission. 
B.  Application. If a historical resource demolition or relocation permit is required pursuant to Section 18.60.050, the following procedures will be followed in processing the permit application: 
1.  Applications for a historical resource demolition or relocation permit shall be submitted to the development services department for review and consideration by the planning commission. Applications shall be accompanied by materials as required by the community development director and reasonably necessary for the proper review of the project, including but not limited to information regarding the age and construction of a building or structure and building permit records. 
2.  City staff will review applications for compliance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards and may require that the applicant deposit funds for the city to retain the services of a qualified historic consultant if necessary. 
3.  Environmental review of a historical resource demolition or relocation permit application will be required as follows: 
a.  If the proposed demolition or relocation is in compliance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties, the potential impact on historical resources shall be considered less than significant and the project would be exempt from CEQA unless other factors are identified associated with the proposed project which could cause potentially significant environmental impacts. 
b.  If the proposed demolition or relocation is not in compliance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards then CEQA review will be required. 
4.  Notice of public hearing for the planning commission consideration of a Historical Resource Demolition or Relocation Permit application shall be provided in accordance with Section 18.104.090 (Notice of Hearing). 
5.  The planning commission shall complete its review and shall render its decision after the conclusion of a public hearing on the application. In review of permits sought to wholly or partially relocate or demolish a potentially significant or significant historical resource, or resources within an historical resource site or historic district, the planning commission may approve or disapprove the issuance of the permit or permits. The planning commission may also approve the issuance of the permit with conditions to bring the proposed work into compliance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards. 
6.  The planning commission decision to approve or deny a historical resource demolition or relocation permit may be appealed to the city council in accordance with Chapter 18.112 (Appeals). 
7.  To move a designated historical structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the applicant must first obtain written approval from the Keeper of the National Register prior to the move to ensure that the resource will retain its National Register status; and 
8.  To move a designated historical structure that is not National Register listed but is a locally designated historical resource, the community development director shall obtain sufficient information to ensure the new location substantially recreates the original location in terms of siting, setback, ordinal orientation and all other features that marked the original location, in order to retain its local register status. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.60.090 - Archaeologically sensitive areas. 
The following requirements apply to projects proposed within an area identified as archaeologically sensitive on the city's adopted archaeological sensitivity map. 
A.  Status Determination. 
1.  The city shall consult with the Northwest Information Center to determine if the project is located within or adjacent to a known archaeological site. 
2.  If the city determines that the project is located within or adjacent to a known archaeological site, the following requirements apply: 
a.  The project shall obtain a Historical Alteration Permit. 
b.  The project's CEQA review shall consider potentially significant impacts on archaeological resources and identify appropriate mitigation measures to be imposed as conditions of approval in addition to the standard conditions in Subsection B below. 
c.  The project shall comply with the standard conditions of approval in Subsection C below. 
3.  If the city determines that the project is not located within or adjacent to a known archaeological site, the applicant may either: 
a.  Prepare an archaeological survey for the site to identify necessary mitigation measures; or 
b.  Comply with the standard conditions of approval in Subsection C below. If the project complies with these standard conditions of approval, the city shall find that potentially significant impacts on archaeological resources are reduced to a less than significant level and that the preparation of an archaeological resources report is not required. 
B.  Standard Conditions of Approval. 
1.  Applicability. The conditions of approval in paragraphs 2 and 3 below apply to: 
a.  All projects located within or adjacent to a known archaeological site; and 
b.  Projects not located within or adjacent to a known which elected to comply with these conditions pursuant to A.3 above. 
2.  On-Site Archaeologist. An archaeologist shall be present on-site to monitor all ground-disturbing activities. If historical or archaeological artifacts are found during construction, the following protocol shall be followed: 
a.  Work within thirty feet of the artifacts shall halt immediately. And the archaeologist shall determine if the artifacts qualify as a unique archaeological resource as defined by this chapter. 
b.  If the archaeologist determines that the artifacts are not a unique archaeological resource, the archaeologist shall submit to the community development director a brief memorandum or letter that describes the artifacts, assesses their significance, and describes of the methods used to determine their significance. Construction may continue upon the Director's approval of the archaeologist's determination. 
c.  If the archaeologist determines that the artifacts qualify as a unique archaeological resource, the archaeologist shall submit to the community development director an action plan that recommends measures to avoid or minimize impacts to the resource. The action plan shall be prepared in conformance with California Public Resources Code 21083.2. Construction may continue only after the director's approval of the action plan. 
3.  Discovery of Human Remains. If human remains are discovered during construction, the project shall comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including California Health and Safety Code Section 7050.5 and CEQA Guidelines Section 15064.5(e). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.60.100 - Maintenance and repair of historic resources. 
A.  Requirement to Keep in Good Repair. The owner, occupant or other person in actual charge of a historical resource, or an improvement, building or structure in an historic district shall keep in good repair all of the exterior portions of such improvement, building or structure as necessary to prevent deterioration and decay of any exterior architectural feature. 
B.  Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the community development director and the building official to enforce this section. 
C.  Ordinary Maintenance and Repair. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on any property covered by this chapter that does not involve a change in design, material or external appearance thereof 
D.  Public Safety. This chapter shall not prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition or relocation of any such feature when the building official certifies to the community development director that such action is required for the public safety due to an unsafe or dangerous condition which cannot be rectified through the use of the California Historical Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.60.110 - Appeals. 
A.  General. Decisions of the community development director and planning commission as described in Subsection B and C below may be appealed in accordance with Chapter 18.112 (Appeals). 
B.  Community Development Director Decisions. The following decisions by the community development director may be to the planning commission: 
1.  The decision to approve or deny alteration to a potentially historical or historical resource or site; and 
2.  The decision to impose conditions on a project involving the alteration of a potentially historical or historical resource or site. 
C.  Planning Commission Decisions. The following decisions by the planning commission may be appealed to the city council: 
1.  The determination made after a public hearing that an object, site or structure be placed on the local register as a designated historical resource or not be placed on the local register as a designated historical resource or historic district; 
2.  The decision to grant or deny an approval to tear down, demolish, or relocate any improvement, or any portion thereof, which is a potentially historical or historical resource or site; 
3.  The decision to approve or deny alteration to a potentially historical or historical resource or site; 
4.  The decision to impose conditions on a project involving the alteration of a potentially historical or historical resource or site; and 
5.  Any item acted on by the planning commission on appeal or referral from the community development director. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.60.120 - Enforcement and penalties. 
A.  Methods of Enforcement. In addition to the regulations of this chapter, other chapters of the municipal code and other provisions of law which govern the approval or disapproval of applications for permits or licenses covered by this chapter, the community development director and building official have the authority to implement the enforcement thereof by any of the following means: 
1.  Serving notice requiring the removal of any violation of this chapter upon the owner, agent, occupant or tenant of the improvement, building, structure or land; 
2.  Calling upon the city attorney to institute any necessary legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and the City Attorney is authorized to institute any actions to that end; and 
3.  Calling upon the chief of police and authorized agents to assist in the enforcement of this chapter. 
B.  Injunctive Relief. In addition to any of the remedies described in Subsection A above, the city attorney may maintain an action for injunctive relief to restrain or enjoin or to cause correction or removal of any violation of this chapter, or for an injunction in appropriate cases. 
C.  Restoration. Any person who demolishes, alters, or constructs a building or structure in violation of this act shall be required to restore the building or structure and its site to its appearance prior to the violation. Any action to enforce this subsection shall be brought by the city attorney. This civil remedy shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any criminal prosecution and penalty. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.60.130 - Preservation incentives. 
A.  Permit Fees. The city council may waive or reduce any processing fees for permits or other procedures for an owner of a designated historical resource undertaking work on the resource. The community development director is authorized to accelerate the processing of any other required applications to comply with city requirements. 
B.  Historic Preservation Funding Program. The city of Morgan Hill may establish a funding program and guidelines for use by owners of a designated historical resource, as defined in this chapter. Funding subsidies may be available for an owner undertaking work on an historical resource who is prevented by economic constraints from completing work in compliance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards. The community development director may develop an application for requested subsidies. Evaluation criteria could include the significance of the historical resource, owner need and necessity for the work to be undertaken. All work undertaken shall meet the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties. Emergency measures to ensure the stability of a damaged designated historical resource shall be an allowable cost. 
C.  Mills Act. The city of Morgan Hill may maintain the provision of the Mills Act, adopted in 1972 by the State of California and amended in 1984 to allow an owner of a designated historical resource to have the property tax amount abated based on the provisions of the act. The owner and the city shall enter into an agreement which defines the actions to be taken by the owner to ensure the restoration, or protection and continued compatible use of the property. 
D.  Marks Historical Rehabilitation Act. The city of Morgan Hill may adopt provisions of the Marks Historical Rehabilitation Act. Under the provisions of this Act, the city of Morgan Hill may issue tax-exempt revenue bonds for the purpose of financing the historical rehabilitation of buildings with significance to the city of Morgan Hill, the state of California, or the United States. 
E.  Historic Easements. The city of Morgan Hill may participate in the development of a historic easement for a designated historical resource, including cultural/historic landscapes and all other historical resource types. The purpose of the easement is to protect the city's historical resources for the benefit of the community by allowing the owner to obtain a tax credit for the restoration, protection, or continued compatible use of the historical resource. The value of the revised deed restrictions may be held by the city or appropriate historical society or preservation organization with the expertise to oversee the enforcement of the easement for the current owner and any subsequent property owner. 
F.  Historical Building Code. Significant and designated historical resources shall be eligible to use the California Historical Building Code, which can allow for alternate methods of meeting building code requirements. 
G.  Planned Development Overlay. Owners of designated historical resources may submit an application for a planned development overlay zoning of the property in accordance with Section 18.30.050. The planned development overlay may allow other conditional uses on the site beyond those uses allowed by the underlying base zoning district and/or different development standards including but not limited to setbacks, height and parking standards. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.64 - LANDSCAPING 
 
18.64.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes landscaping standards to enhance the aesthetic appearance of developed areas in Morgan Hill and to promote the efficient use of water resources. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.64.020 - Applicability. 
The requirements in this chapter apply to projects requiring a design permit as specified in Section 18.108.040 (Design Permits) and that involve either: 
A.  The construction of new buildings; or 
B.  Additions that increase by twenty-five percent or more the floor area or market value of one or more buildings on the property. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.64.030 - Water conservation in landscaping ordinance. 
In addition to the requirements of this chapter, all applicable development in Morgan Hill shall also comply with Chapter 18.148 (Water Conservation in Landscaping) as required by the California Water Conservation in Landscaping Act (Government Code Section 65591 et seq.). If conflicts occur between Chapter 18.148 and this chapter, the more restrictive shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.64.040 - Landscape plan required. 
All projects subject to the requirements of this chapter shall submit a landscape plan as part of the design permit application and subsequent building permit applications. 
A.  Required Contents. Landscape plans shall include the following features and information: 
1.  Site boundaries. 
2.  Existing conditions on the property, including contours and existing structures. 
3.  Structures immediately adjacent to the property. 
4.  New structures and improvements proposed as part of the development project. 
5.  Existing landscaping, trees, and vegetation to be retained specifying plant location, species, and size. Details of existing trees shall also include tree diameter measured forty-eight inches above existing grade and outer limit of tree canopy. 
6.  New landscaping proposed as part of the development project specifying plant location, species, and size. 
7.  Irrigation plan specifying the location, type, and size of all components of the irrigation system. 
8.  Proposed grading. 
9.  Additional information as determined by the development services department to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Review and Approval. The development services department shall review all landscape plans to verify compliance with this chapter. Landscape plans shall be approved by the review authority responsible for approving the design permit required for the proposed project. 
C.  Changes to Approved Landscape Plans. 
1.  Substantial modifications to an approved landscape plan shall be allowed only by the review authority which approved the landscape plan. 
2.  The community development director may approve minor modifications to a landscape plan previously approved by the planning commission. Minor modifications are defined as changes to a landscape plan that do not alter the general design character of the landscaped area or alter a feature of the landscaped area specifically required by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.64.050 - Required landscape areas. 
A.  Residential Zoning Districts. 
1.  All required front and street side setback areas, excluding areas required for access to the property, shall be landscaped and maintained. See Figure 18.64-1. 
2.  Landscaping may consist of any combination of living plants, such as trees, shrubs and grass or related natural features, such as rock, stone, or mulch. Decorative hardscape featuring pervious materials is permitted within required landscaping areas. 
Figure 18.64-1: Required Landscaped Area in Residential Zoning Districts
  
B.  Non-Residential Zoning Districts. 
1.  The minimum landscaped area on a site for non-residential zoning districts is shown in Table 18.64-1. 
2.  In the MU-D and MU-N, and MU-F zones, outdoor dining areas, courtyards, and other similar quasi-public areas may count toward landscaping requirements. In all other zoning districts these areas may not count toward landscaping requirements. 
Table 18.64-1: Minimum Landscaped Area in Non-Residential Zones 
Zone 	Minimum Landscaped Area 
MU-D, MU-N, MU-F 	5% 
CO, CN, CG, CH, CS 	10% 
All Other Zones 	As determined by theDesign Permit review authority 
 
3.  Except in the industrial zoning district, all required front and street side setback areas shall be landscaped, excluding areas required for access to the property and public or quasi-public open space such as courtyards and outdoor seating. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.64.060 - General landscape requirement. 
A.  General Standards. 
1.  Plant Selection. A minimum of ninety percent of plants and trees shall be drought-tolerant as defined by the water use classification of landscape species (WUCOLS). Native plants adapted to the local climate are preferred. 
2.  Turf Lawns. 
a.  Turf areas shall be limited to twenty-five percent of the landscaped area. The planning commission may approve larger areas if the lawn area provides functional open space. 
b.  Drought-tolerant grass species shall be used exclusively. 
c.  Turf shall not be used on berms, slopes, or median islands where runoff is a problem. 
3.  Slopes. Turf and high water use plants shall not be planted on berms and slopes greater than twenty-five percent. 
4.  Plant Groupings. Where irrigation is proposed, plants shall be grouped in separate hydrozones (i.e., plants within each irrigation valve area shall have the same watering requirements). 
5.  Water Features. Decorative water features (e.g., fountains, ponds, waterfalls) must be approved by the planning commission and shall have recirculating water systems. 
6.  Watering Times. Watering shall start after eight p.m. and end before 10:00 a.m. 
7.  Public Safety. Plant species shall be selected and located so that at maturity they do not interfere with pedestrian, bicycle, or vehicular circulation and do not conflict with overhead lights or utility lines. 
B.  Irrigation and Water Efficiency. Irrigation systems shall be designed to avoid runoff, low head drainage, overspray, and other similar conditions where water flows outside of landscaped areas. Irrigation systems shall feature the following equipment: 
1.  Irrigation systems shall meet a minimum irrigation efficiency of seventy-five percent. 
2.  Separate landscape water meters for landscape areas exceeding five thousand square feet. 
3.  Irrigation controllers capable of percent adjustment, multiple programming, and rain sensor. 
4.  Overhead sprays shall have a precipitation rate of no more than three-quarters of one inch per hour. 
5.  Separated valves and circuits based on water use and sun exposure. Separate valves for turf and non-turf and berm areas are required. 
6.  Sprinkler heads and emitters selected for proper area coverage, application rate, operation pressure, adjustment capability, and ease of maintenance. 
7.  Rain-sensing override devices are required for all irrigation systems. 
8.  Drip or bubble irrigation are required for all trees. 
9.  State-approved back flow prevention devices shall be installed on all irrigation systems. 
C.  Timing of Installation. Landscaping systems shall be installed prior to final building permit inspection or certification of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.64.070 - Landscaping maintenance and enforcement. 
The following maintenance requirements and enforcement procedures apply to landscaping installed as part of a design permit approved by the city. 
A.  Maintenance Required. 
1.  Approved Plans. Landscaping shall be maintained consistent with the plans approved as part of the design permit. Any significant alteration to the landscaping requires community development director approval. 
2.  Dead and Dying Plants. All landscaping shall be maintained free of physical damage or injury from lack of water, excess chemical fertilizer or other toxic chemical, blight or disease. Dead or dying plants shall be removed and replaced with landscaping of similar size and maturity. 
3.  Weed Removal. Landscaping shall be kept free from weeds and undesirable grasses. 
4.  Tree Pruning. Trees shall be allowed to grow their natural size and shape. Periodic pruning shall be as appropriate for the health of the tree species and may not exceed twenty-five percent of the tree height or volume at any given time. 
5.  Tree Topping/Heading Cuts. Topping/heading cuts that reduce a tree's size and height by shortening of limbs or branches back to a predetermined crown limit is prohibited unless the community development director approves a tree removal/cutting permit in accordance with Municipal Code Chapter 12.32 (Restrictions on Removal of Significant Trees). 
B.  Landscape Maintenance Agreements and Bonds. 
1.  General. 
a.  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the community development director may require a landscape maintenance agreement and/or a landscape maintenance bond to guarantee the proper maintenance of landscaping installed for a development project. 
b.  Landscape maintenance agreements and bonds shall not be required for landscaping maintained by a homeowners association. 
2.  Landscape Maintenance Agreement. When required, landscape maintenance agreements shall guarantee maintenance of landscaping for a minimum of two years following installation. 
3.  Landscape Maintenance Bond. 
a.  The community development director may require an applicant to submit a landscape maintenance bond in addition to or instead of a landscape maintenance agreement. 
b.  Landscape maintenance bonds shall be in an amount equal to one hundred percent of the value of landscaping and irrigation systems for the project, shall be held by the city for two years, and shall be administered in accordance with Section 18.104.180 (Performance Guarantees). 
C.  Compliance and Enforcement. 
1.  Notification of Violation. Whenever the community development director determines that landscaping is maintained in violation of approved design permit plans, the director may require, upon thirty days' written notice, that the property owner correct the violation. The director's determination of violation may be appealed to the planning commission in accordance with Chapter 18.112 (Appeals). 
2.  City Correction of Violation. If the property owner does not correct violation the director may cause work to be done to bring the landscaping into compliance. The method of reimbursement for such work shall be stated in the landscape maintenance agreement signed by the permit hold and may include forfeiture of a landscape maintenance bond up to one hundred percent of the cost of landscape improvements. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.68 - NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES 
 
18.68.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes regulations for nonconforming parcels, uses, and structures. These regulations are intended to: 
A.  Allow for the development and use of legal nonconforming parcels; 
B.  Ensure that nonconforming uses and structures do not adversely impact neighboring properties; 
C.  Allow for the limited enlargement or intensification of nonconforming uses and structures; 
D.  Allow for limited repairs and maintenance to nonconforming structures; and 
E.  Provide for the elimination of nonconforming uses as appropriate due to abandonment, obsolescence, and destruction. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.68.020 - Applicability. 
This chapter applies to existing parcels, uses, and structures that do not conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which they are located. Nonconforming signs are subject to the requirements in Chapter 18.88 (Signs). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.68.030 - General. 
A.  Continuation. A nonconforming parcel, use, or structure may be continued if it was legally established in compliance with all applicable regulations in effect at the time it was established. 
B.  Legally Established Defined. To be considered legally established, a legal nonconforming parcel, use, or structure shall have been physically constructed or in existence, not merely contemplated. Conditional use permits, variances, building permits, or other permits not exercised within the required time do not establish legal nonconforming status. 
C.  Burden of Proof. Any person asserting a right to a nonconforming use or structure has the burden of proof to demonstrate that the nonconformity was legally established. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.68.040 - Nonconforming parcels. 
A.  Development Permitted. Legally established parcels with nonconforming dimensions (e.g., parcel width and depth) shall be permitted all development rights of the zoning district in which it is located. 
B.  Conformance with Standards. Development on legal nonconforming parcels shall comply with all setback, building coverage, parking, and other standards of the applicable zoning district, except as allowed by Subsection C below. 
C.  Multi-Family Density. On legally established existing lots which do not comply with minimum area standards, the maximum density of a multi-family use shall be five percent less than normally required in the applicable zoning district. For example, in a zoning district with a maximum density of twenty units per acre, the maximum density for a multi-family use on a lot that does not comply with the minimum area standard shall be nineteen units per acre. 
D.  Boundary Adjustments. The boundaries of a nonconforming parcel may not be adjusted in any way that decreases the parcel area or reduces the parcel width or depth. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.68.050 - Nonconforming use of land. 
A.  Continuation Permitted. A nonconforming use of land may continue so long as: 
1.  The nonconforming use is not enlarged, increased, or extended to occupy a greater area of land; and 
2.  The nonconforming use is not moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel. 
B.  Cessation of Use. If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for a period of more than ninety days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which the land is located. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.68.060 - Nonconforming use of structures. 
A.  Change in Ownership, Tenancy, or Management. A change in ownership, tenancy, or management of a nonconforming use shall not affect its legal nonconforming status. 
B.  Resuming a Nonconforming Use. A nonconforming use changed to a conforming use shall not return to a nonconforming use. 
C.  Replacement of a Nonconforming Use. A nonconforming use may not be replaced by another nonconforming use. 
D.  Intensification of Use. 
1.  The enlargement of a structure or site occupied by a nonconforming use, or the intensification in any way of the operation of a nonconforming use, shall require the approval of an administrative use permit. 
2.  To approve a proposed intensification to a nonconforming use, the community development director shall make all administrative use permit findings (Section 18.108.020) in addition to the findings in Section 18.68.080 (Findings). 
E.  Discontinuation of Use. A nonconforming use discontinued for six consecutive months or for twelve months during any two-year period shall not be reestablished and may be replaced only by a conforming use. 
F.  Uses Without Required Permits. A legally established use which is allowed in a zoning district but which lacks a required permit (e.g., administrative use permit, conditional use permit) shall be considered a nonconforming use until the use receives the permit as required by the zoning code. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.68.070 - Nonconforming structures. 
This section identifies allowed modifications to nonconforming structures, summarized in Table 18.68-1. 
Table 18.68-1: Allowed Modifications to Nonconforming Structures 
Project Affecting a Nonconforming Structure 	Permit Required [1] 
Nonstructural repairs, maintenance, and interior alterations 	None 
Structural repairs, modifications, and additions that do not alter or affect the nonconforming aspect of the structure 	None 
Structural repairs, modifications, and additions that alter or affect the nonconforming aspect of the structure 	Design Permit 
Structural repairs, modifications, and additions that increase or exacerbate the nonconforming aspect of the structure 	Variance 
Reconstruction of an involuntarily damaged or destroyed residential structure 	Design Permit 
 
Notes: 
[1] The proposed project may require permits and approvals for other reasons not related to its nonconforming status. For example, additions or enlargements to a single-family dwelling often requires a design permit. 
A.  Alterations Permitted By-Right. 
1.  Maintenance, nonstructural repairs, and nonstructural interior alterations to any portion of a nonconforming structure are permitted if the changes and improvements do not enlarge or extend the structure. 
2.  Structural modifications to a nonconforming structure that do not alter or affect the nonconforming aspect of the structure are permitted. For example, an addition to a structure with a non-conforming setback is permitted if no structural changes are made to the portion of the structure projecting into the required setback, and if the addition complies with all setback, height, floor area ratio, and other applicable development standards. 
B.  Alterations Requiring a Design Permit. 
1.  Structural repairs and improvements that affect the nonconforming aspect of a nonconforming structure are allowed with a design permit if the improvement does not increase or exacerbate the nonconformity. For example, structural repairs to a building wall within a required setback are permitted with a design permit if the wall is not moved closer to the property line and the length of the wall within the required setback is not increased. 
2.  To approve such an alteration, the community development director shall make all design permit findings (Section 18.108.040) in addition to the findings in Section 18.68.080 (Findings). 
C.  Alterations Requiring a Variance. 
1.  Alterations to a non-conforming structure that increase or exacerbate the nonconformity requires a variance. For example, a remodel that increases the length of an existing building wall located within a required setback is allowed only with the approval of a variance. 
2.  To approve such an alteration, the planning commission shall make all variance findings (Section 18.108.100) in addition to the findings in Section 18.68.080 (Findings). 
D.  Damage or Destruction. Except as allowed by Subsection E below, a nonconforming structure damaged or destroyed for any reason shall be brought into full compliance with the requirements of the zoning code if the cost of reconstruction exceeds fifty percent of its market value as determined by the county assessor on the last equalized assessment roll at the time of its destruction. 
E.  Involuntary Damage or Destruction — Residential Structures. 
1.  If a legally established nonconforming building occupied by a residential use is damaged or destroyed by earthquake, fire, flood, or other calamity, the structure may be reconstructed as it existed and may be continued as a legal nonconforming structure with the approval of a design permit. 
2.  "Reconstructed" means rebuilding a damaged or destroyed structure in a manner similar but not identical to the original structure. A reconstructed structure generally recreates the original building footprint, mass, and height, but may deviate from design details such as architectural design and the arrangement of doors, windows, and rooflines. 
3.  The city may attach conditions of approval as necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, including requirements to reduce or eliminate previously existing nonconformities. 
4.  Reconstruction of damaged or destroyed buildings may not increase or exacerbate previously existing nonconformities or create new nonconformities. 
5.  The construction of the replacement structure must begin within twenty-four months of the date of the calamity which damaged or destroyed the structure. 
F.  Moved Structures. A nonconforming structure that is moved to a new location shall conform to all standards of the applicable zoning district. 
G.  Nonconforming Screening, Fences, and Landscaping. 
1.  Legally established nonconforming screening, fences, and landscaping may continue and remain except as required by Paragraph 2 below. 
2.  For additions or renovations that increase by twenty-five percent or more the floor area or market value of one or more buildings on a property, any nonconforming screening, fences, and landscaping shall be brought into compliance with the requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.68.080 - Findings. 
The community development director may approve an administrative use permit for a nonconforming use or structure if all of the following findings can be made in addition to the findings in Section 18.108.020 (Administrative Use Permits): 
A.  Available evidence indicates that the nonconforming use was legally established. 
B.  The nonconforming use has not resulted in a notable negative impact or nuisance to the surrounding area. 
C.  The nonconforming use is compatible with the general character of the surrounding area. 
D.  The proposed action is consistent with the purpose and intent of the applicable zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.70 - GEOLOGIC HAZARDS 
 
18.70.010 - Purpose. 
The purposes of this chapter is to: 
A.  To prevent increases in the potential for loss of life, injury and property damage caused by geologic hazards in Morgan Hill; 
B.  To specify geologic maps which will serve as a consistent basis for evaluating development applications; 
C.  To control land development in the city in a manner that avoids or mitigates the potential effects of known geologic hazards; 
D.  To help guide the city in making decisions regarding maintenance and repair of existing city facilities and in making decisions regarding the siting of future facilities; 
E.  To protect the city from liability of failure to consider available geologic information in making development decisions; and 
F.  To comply with the requirements of the California Seismic Hazards Mapping Act (Public Resources Code Section 2690 et seq.) in a manner that considers the State's Special Publication 117A: "Guidelines for Evaluating and Mitigating Seismic Hazards in California," and with consideration of the "Recommended Procedures for Implementation of DMG Special Publication 117 Guidelines for Analyzing and Mitigating Landslide Hazards in California" (published by the Southern California Earthquake Center) as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.70.020 - Definitions. 
A.  Terms Defined. Terms used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
1.  "Acceptable level of risk" is that level of risk that provides reasonable protection of the public safety, though it does not necessarily ensure continued structural integrity and functionality of the project. 
2.  "City geologic hazards map" is the geologic map (1991) and ground movement potential map (1991) prepared at a scale of one inch equals two hundred feet by Pacific Geotechnical Engineering, subject to modification provided for in Section 18.7045.030. 
3.  "City geologic hazard zones" are areas identified on the city geologic hazard map in the following ground movement potential categories: "Suf" (only if a sensitive use), "Sun (only if a sensitive use)", "Sls (only if a sensitive use)", "Slq", "Sgw", "Puf", "Ps", "Pdf", "Prf", "Pd", "Paf", "Ms" or "Md". 
4.  "Director" is the community development director. 
5.  "Discretionary approval" is any approval granted pursuant to Title 17 or Title 18 of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code. 
6.  "Geologic report" is either or both of the following, as required and deemed appropriate for the site and proposed project by the director: 
a.  An "engineering geologic report", which means that document prepared and signed by an engineering geologist; and/or 
b.  A "geotechnical engineering report", which means that document prepared and signed by a registered geotechnical engineer. 
7.  "Off-site" is any seismic or geologic hazards not located within the project site which is identified in a geologic investigation or geotechnical report that could adversely affect the project site or be affected by the project. 
8.  "Project," as used in this chapter, means: 
a.  Any subdivision of land which is subject to the Subdivision Map Act, Division 2 (commencing with Section 66410) of Title 7 of the Government Code, and which contemplates the eventual construction of structures for human occupancy; and 
b.  Structures for human occupancy. 
c.  "Project" does not include repairs, alterations or additions to any structure within a seismic hazard zone, which do not exceed either fifty percent of the value of the structure or fifty percent of the existing floor area of the structure. 
9.  "Qualified geologist" is either or both of the following, as specified and deemed appropriate for the site and proposed project by the director: 
a.  A certified engineering geologist pursuant to the California Geologist and Geophysicist Act (Business and Professions Code section 7800, et seq.); 
b.  A registered professional engineer certified as a geotechnical engineer pursuant to the California Professional Engineers Act (Business and Professions Code sections 6700—6799). 
10.  "Seismic hazard zone" means those areas that are within either one or both of the state seismic hazard zone and/or the city geologic hazard zone. 
11.  "Sensitive use" means: 
a.  Large dams; 
b.  Manufacturing, storage or handling of hazardous materials; 
c.  Facilities critically needed for services after a disaster: hospitals, ambulance services, fire stations, police stations, telephone exchanges, radio and TV stations, emergency operation centers; 
d.  Facilities whose continuing function is critical: power plants, power intertie, sewage treatment plants, water plants; 
e.  Small dams whose failure would expose downstream population to injury; 
f.  Critical transportation links: regional highways, bridges, rail lines, overpasses, tunnels; 
g.  Major local utility lines and facilities, including power substations, gas and water mains; 
h.  Facilities highly desirable for shelter after a disaster: civic buildings; 
i.  Any building three or more stories in height; 
j.  Public and private schools and child care; 
k.  Public assembly places with capacity of fifty persons or more; 
l.  Gas stations; 
m.  Health care clinics, convalescent homes; 
n.  Hotels and motels; 
o.  Churches; 
p.  Public assembly places with capacity for fifty to two hundred ninety-nine persons; and 
q.  Industrial uses or facilities. 
12.  "State seismic hazard zones" are areas identified as prone to earthquake-induced landsliding or liquefaction on maps compiled by the California State Geologist, pursuant to the Seismic Hazard Mapping Act (Public Resources Code Section 2690 et seq.) and the policies and criteria of the State Mining and Geology Board and any succeeding statute or regulation. 
B.  Terms Not Defined. Words and phrases not defined in this section shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable meaning and application. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.70.030 - City geologic map modification. 
Further study may indicate the need to modify the city geologic maps (geologic map and ground movement potential map) by adjusting the boundaries between map units or changing the designation of map units. Modifications can be made as follows: 
A.  Applicant Initiation. An applicant, property owner, or authorized representative of a property owner may initiate proceedings to modify the geologic maps. 
1.  A person applying for a modification of the geologic maps shall document the reasons for modification with a map at a scale of one inch equals two hundred feet or larger and a report prepared by a certified engineering geologist. 
2.  The engineering geologist employed or retained by the city shall review all such applications and prepare a written report to the community development director containing his or her findings and recommendations. The modification may be approved by the community development director if the director finds: 
a.  That new information has been provided which demonstrates that the existing boundary or unit designation is inaccurate; and 
b.  That the proposed change will correct and update the maps. 
3.  Decisions by the director may be appealed by the applicant in the manner specified in Chapter 18.112 (Appeals). 
B.  Modification to the maps may be initiated by the city council, in which case the city council shall request a recommendation by the community development director, the engineering geologist employed or retained by the city, and the planning commission. 
1.  The city council shall hold a noticed public hearing on the proposed modification. 
2.  Following the public hearing, the city council may modify the maps, only if the council finds: 
a.  That new information has been provided which demonstrates that the existing boundary or unit designation is inaccurate; and 
b.  That the proposed change will correct and update the maps. 
3.  If land has been stabilized through engineering solutions, the engineering geologist employed or retained by the city may recommend to the director that such stabilization be annotated on the geologic maps to reflect the increase in relative stability and that development be allowed to occur consistent with the engineering solution. Upon concurrence by the community development director, the maps may be annotated as directed. 
4.  Changes to the maps shall be posted within thirty days of approval of a map modification. Each change will be identified on the map by date, file number or other means of identification determined appropriate by the community development director. 
5.  Maintenance of Maps and Records. The development services department shall be responsible for maintaining the geologic map and ground movement potential map and records of actions modifying the maps. Up-to-date maps and copies of geotechnical and engineering geology reports will be kept in the development services department. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.70.040 - Geologic clearance. 
No discretionary approval for development, grading permit or building permit shall be issued for any project located in the G overlay zone unless the director has first approved an application for geologic clearance pursuant to this chapter. 
A.  Geologic Clearance Application. 
1.  The applicant may simultaneously file an application for geologic clearance and for any discretionary approval for development, grading permit or building permit. 
2.  An application for geologic clearance pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the director on the form provided by the city. 
3.  All application fees shall be paid at the time an application is filed, in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees adopted by resolution of the city council. The director may require the applicant to enter into an agreement with the city for geologic review services by a qualified geologist employed or retained by the city, in an amount as determined needed to pay for the full costs of the review associated with the application for geologic clearance. 
B.  Conditions of Geologic Clearance. The director, or any appellate body, may impose conditions on the geologic clearance. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Mitigation measures recommended in the geotechnical report; 
2.  Slope stabilization; 
3.  Surface and subsurface drainage control; 
4.  Off-site improvements to mitigate a geologic hazard which potentially affects either the site proposed for development or applicable off-site areas; 
5.  Use restrictions to avoid or mitigate hazardous geologic conditions; 
6.  Implementation of an approved erosion control plan; and 
7.  Adequate guarantees that all private improvements located within a seismic hazard zone will be properly maintained. 
C.  Acknowledgment of Hazards. Upon the approval of an application for geologic clearance and where the geologic report proposes mitigation of hazards to an acceptable level of risk, the city may require, as a condition of issuance of the building permit or of a development agreement that all property owners of property within the proposed project sign a statement acknowledging the specific geologic hazards reported in the geologic report and accept the associated risks and responsibilities. The city may require recordation of the acknowledgment as a deed restriction recorded on title to the property. The acknowledgment statement shall contain the following: 
1.  The names and signatures of property owner, including holders of security interests. 
2.  The street address and assessor's parcel number of the subject property. 
3.  A map depicting the subject property signed and stamped by a licensed land surveyor or a registered engineer licensed to practice land surveying. 
4.  A legal description of the subject property signed and stamped by a licensed land surveyor or a registered engineer licensed to practice land surveying. 
5.  The title, date and authors of all geologic reports prepared or relied on for the proposed land use. 
6.  The following statement: "The undersigned owners hereby acknowledge the geologic conditions identified in the referenced reports, agree to mitigate the hazards to the extent feasible, accept all risks associated with geologic hazards including any unidentified hazards, and agree to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the city of Morgan Hill and its officers, agents and employees from any claim, liability, loss, injury or damage arising out of, or in connection with, any development activity or geologic hazards related to this property. This acknowledgment runs with the land and is binding on the undersigned and all of their successors, heirs and assigns." 
D.  Revocation and Suspension. A geologic clearance may be revoked or suspended whenever the director determines that any of the following circumstances has occurred: 
1.  The geologic clearance was granted in error, was granted on the basis of incorrect or misinterpreted information, or was granted in violation of any law, ordinance or regulatory provision. 
2.  The review upon which the geologic clearance was granted was incomplete and further geologic information or analysis is necessary. 
3.  The findings made pursuant to Section 18.7045.100 are incorrect. 
4.  There is sufficient uncertainty about any geologic hazard, either on or off-site, which makes it reasonable to require further geologic evaluation. 
5.  Scientific or technological advancement, a change in geologic conditions, or previously unknown facts or geologic analysis make it reasonable to require further geologic evaluation. 
6.  The development proposal upon which the geologic clearance is based is modified and the geologic evaluation does not address the project as modified. 
E.  Notice. Notification of the denial of the geologic clearance, the issuance of such geologic clearance with conditions, or the revocation or suspension of such geologic clearance, shall be mailed to applicant, postage prepaid, at the address given for purposes of such notice on the application. 
F.  Appeal. The applicant may appeal the denial, revocation or suspension of the geologic clearance or any condition imposed on the geologic clearance pursuant to the applicable appellate provisions set forth in Chapter 18.64112 (Appeals) of this code. 
G.  Issuance of Geologic Clearance. No geologic clearance shall be issued unless the director, based on an independent review of a geologic report, finds that the nature and severity of the seismic and geologic hazards at the project site have been adequately evaluated in a geologic report and appropriate mitigation measures have been proposed. For the purpose of the review, the director shall consult with a qualified geologist employed or retained by the city, who will advise whether the site-specific investigation is sufficiently thorough, the findings regarding identified hazards are valid, and the proposed mitigation measures achieve an acceptable level of risk. The issuance of a geologic clearance shall not be construed as a determination that the project site is free from any geologic hazard. Such clearance shall mean only that based on the information provided, it is the judgment of the director or the city that any geologic hazard or risk will be mitigated to an acceptable level of risk as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.70.050 - Geologic evaluations. 
A.  Geologic and Seismic Hazards Investigation Report. The geologic report shall be prepared by a qualified geologist, as specified and deemed appropriate to the site and proposed project by the director. The geologic report shall contain: 
1.  Project description. 
2.  Site-specific evaluations of the seismic and geologic hazards affecting the project. The evaluation shall identify the portions of the project site containing seismic and geologic hazards and describe the geologic and geotechnical conditions at the project site, including an appropriate site location map showing the locations of such hazards. 
3.  Identification of any known off-site seismic or geologic hazards. 
4.  Recommendation for appropriate mitigation measures that will reduce geologic or seismic risk to acceptable levels of risk. 
5.  Name of report preparer(s), and signature(s) of the qualified geologist; and the author or author's license number(s) and expiration date(s). 
6.  A geologic report prepared pursuant to this chapter may be in combination with or as part of the geologic report prepared pursuant to the procedures established under Section 18.30.060 (Active Fault Surface Rupture Overlay Zone). 
B.  Geologic Investigation. Any geologic exploration or investigation for the purpose of completing a geologic report shall comply with the following: 
1.  An investigation study plan containing proposed scope of the investigation and mitigation for any dust, erosion, habitat or other impacts resulting from any exaction or boring activities shall be submitted to the director for approval before commencement of the investigation. 
2.  The investigative study shall include, at a minimum, a slope stability analysis and subsurface and/or reconnaissance level investigation, to: 
a.  Establish the boundaries, depth and characteristics of each landslide within the study area(s) which could affect or be potentially affected by the development; and 
b.  Assess the static and seismic stability of landslides identified in the subarea which could affect or be potentially affected by the development including, but not limited to landslides identified in Subsection B.1., above; and 
c.  Identify current geologic conditions and potential future groundwater conditions which could affect or be potentially affected by the development; and 
d.  Evaluate the potential for future earth movement which could affect or be potentially affected by the development and its possible effect on public and private property; and 
e.  Identify and recommend adequate mitigation of any geologic hazard within the study area(s) which could affect or be potentially affected by the development. 
3.  The subsurface exploration, as applicable, and slope stability analysis shall include but not limited to all of the following items as specified and deemed appropriate for the site and proposed project by the director: 
a.  Deep, continuously sampled or cored borings drilled to a depth sufficient to penetrate all potential critical landslide rupture surfaces; and 
b.  Large diameter borings; and 
c.  Installation and monitoring of piezometers or groundwater monitoring wells to evaluate groundwater conditions; and 
d.  Exploratory trenching to evaluate the surface, geologic structure, fault/shear zones, and toe(s) of identified landslide(s); and 
e.  Geophysical logging of boreholes; and 
f.  Laboratory shear strength testing. 
4.  A long-term study shall be conducted, unless the investigative study demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the director, that: 
a.  No deep-seated active or potentially unstable landslide exists which could affect or potentially be affected by the proposed development such that more than an acceptable level would be created; or 
b.  The proposed development site and any new, expanded or upgraded infrastructure serving the development will not be endangered by deep-seated active or potentially unstable landsliding such more than an acceptable level of risk would be created and will not increase the danger that any other property or public improvements will be impacted by potentially unstable landsliding, such that more than an acceptable level of risk would be created; or 
c.  Implementation of recommendations presented in the report of the investigative study will mitigate to an acceptable level of risk any identified risks associated with a deep-seated active or potentially unstable landslide which could affect or be potentially affected by the development or any new, expanded or upgraded infrastructure. 
C.  Long-term Study. If required by the director pursuant to Section 18.4705.110, the applicant shall submit a long-term study plan for approval by the director and shall conduct such study in preparation of the geologic report. 
1.  The purpose of the long-term study is to better characterize deep-seated active or potentially unstable landslides, which could affect or potentially be affected by the proposed development, determine the depths, direction and area of movement, define the limits of sliding, determine the rate of movement over time, help determine the mechanism of movement, and verify that implemented mitigation measures have been effective in providing for an acceptable level of risk. The long term study shall include, at a minimum, continuous monitoring and analysis to address slope stability under both static and seismic conditions. 
2.  The qualified geologist employed or retained by the city shall review the completed report of the long-term study in order to advise the director and city in determining whether or not the study has identified adequate mitigations of risks to acceptable levels of risk for large, deep-seated, active or potentially unstable landslides within the subregional study area(s) which could affect or potentially be affected by the proposed development. 
3.  The director shall provide the applicant with a notice following any determination regarding the requirement of a long-term study or the adequacy of the mitigations identified in the long-term study. 
a.  The notice shall be provided as set forth in Section 18.7045.070. 
b.  The director's determination shall become final at the close of business on the tenth business day after the notice was mailed. 
4.  Before a determination becomes final as provided in Subsection C above, the applicant may appeal the director's final determination under this section pursuant to the applicable appellate provisions set forth in Chapter 18.64 of this code. 
D.  Consultant Services. If an applicant has agreed in writing to bear the full cost of the consultant services, the director may select and retain an independent qualified geologist as consultant(s) to the city to provide additional information and analysis to be considered by the director or an appellate body in the application review or appeal process. 
1.  The applicant shall, pursuant to a written agreement, deposit with city a sum of money, adequate to fully cover the cost of the consultant(s) services prior to the consultant(s) review of the application or record on appeal and any fees related thereto. 
2.  Nothing prepared or recommended by the consultant(s) shall limit the discretion of the director, or any appellate body on appeal, in considering all information available to it in making the findings set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.70.060 - Waiver of geologic and seismic hazards investigation report requirement. 
A.  For a specific project, the director may waive the requirements for a geologic report under Section 18.7045.090 if he or she finds and determines that the geologic or geotechnical conditions at the project site are such that public safety is adequately protected and no mitigation is required. This finding shall be based on the recommendation and advice of a qualified geologist employed or retained by the city, or based on a report prepared by a qualified geologist presenting evaluation of sites in the immediate vicinity having similar geologic and geotechnical characteristics which shall be reviewed in the same manner as a review of a geologic report set forth in Section 18.7045.090. The director shall set forth such determination in writing, citing the reasons for a waiver. For any waiver of the requirement for a geologic report granted for a project located in an area identified as state seismic hazard zones, the Director shall also require a report prepared by a qualified geologist, and provide a written commentary that addresses the report conclusions and justifications for applying the conclusions contained in the report to the project site. The director shall record such waiver with the county recorder and file a separate copy, together with the report and commentary, with the state geologist within thirty days of the waiver. 
B.  Notwithstanding subsection A above, if a project consists of single-family wood-frame or steel-frame dwelling(s) not exceeding two stories when that dwelling is not part of a development of four or more dwellings, then the director may waive the requirement for a geologic report under Section 18.7045.090 if, based on the advice and recommendation of a qualified geologist employed or retained by the city, he or she determines that no geologic hazard(s) exists. The director shall set forth such determination in writing, citing the reasons for a waiver. 
C.  The director may also waive any or all requirements under Sections 18.7045.110 and 18.7045.120 for any project that is not a sensitive use if he or she determines, with consultation with a qualified geologist employed or retained by the city, that such requirement(s) are not necessary to make the finding or determination under Section 18.7045.090. 
D.  The director may condition any waiver granted pursuant to this chapter with the following: 
1.  The existing public storm drainage system has sufficient capacity, as determined by the city engineer, to convey present and future storm water runoff. 
2.  The construction has been designed in a manner which, at a minimum: 
a.  Prevents any additional storm water runoff or drainage on site; and 
b.  Provides for the drainage of any storm water runoff or drainage from the structure, driveway or other paved surfaces directly into the public storm drainage system. 
3.  A grading plan in accordance with the grading ordinance has been approved by the director, which provides, at a minimum: 
a.  Balanced grading, unless the applicant has demonstrated, to the satisfaction of the director, that an imbalance would promote increased soil or slope stability; 
b.  Retaining walls which are not a part of the structure and which do not exceed four feet in height; 
c.  Soil cuts and fills, other than necessary for the foundation of the structure, which do not exceed five feet in depth, measured from the existing ground surface to the proposed ground surface; 
d.  A subdrainage system satisfactory to the director; and 
e.  Erosion control measures deemed by the director to be appropriate for all graded areas and the time of year in which the grading is anticipated to occur; and 
f.  The minimum amount of grading necessary to establish the reasonable use. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.70.070 - Owner obligations. 
A.  Prior to permit issuance, the owner shall submit to the city a plan review letter from a qualified geologist, which confirms that the plans conform with the recommendations presented in the approved geologic report. 
B.  Prior to or at the time of final inspection, the owner shall provide the director a construction observation letter and certification, signed by a qualified geologist attesting that: 
1.  All completed work and construction complies with the plans and specifications of the project, which have incorporated the mitigation measures in conformance with the geologic evaluation and the geologic clearance. 
2.  Any additional geologic hazard not previously identified, which was encountered during construction, was immediately reported by the applicant or their agent to the director. 
C.  The owner of any real property shall take reasonable actions as are necessary to prevent any natural or artificial geologic condition on such real property from threatening the safety of persons or other property. 
D.  Whenever the director determines that any natural or artificial condition on a property may potentially endanger the safety of persons or other properties the director may issue a notice of hazardous condition and require that reasonable actions be taken to mitigate the geologic hazard to an acceptable level within the time specified in the notice. 
E.  Failure to fully comply with any condition of the geologic clearance, violation of any provision of this chapter or maintenance of any property within any seismic hazard zone in such a manner that a natural or artificial geologic condition on such real property which could be reasonably corrected or made less dangerous, is allowed to threaten the public health, safety or welfare, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.70.080 - Additional regulations. 
In addition to the regulations set forth in this chapter, the development services department, with the consent of the city council, may adopt such standards or regulations as are necessary to protect the public from geologic and seismic hazards. These standards or regulations may be more stringent than, but shall not be in conflict with, the provisions of any policies and criteria adopted by the state mining and geology board pursuant to Section 2690 et seq. of the Public Resources Code of the state, except where more stringent standards or regulations have been adopted, the policies and criteria adopted from time to time by the state mining and geology board shall apply within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.70.090 - Consistency with other regulations. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to relieve any person of requirements imposed by other sections of this code or by state law, except that the provisions of this chapter shall take precedence over any less stringent provision of this code with which it is in conflict. Specifically, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to relieve any person of requirements imposed under the California Environmental Quality Act and Chapters 15.08 15.54 or 18.74108.040 (Design Permits) of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.72 - PARKING AND LOADING 
 
18.72.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes on-site parking and loading requirements in order to: 
A.  Provide a sufficient number of on-site parking spaces for all land uses. 
B.  Provide for functional on-site parking areas that are safe for vehicles and pedestrians. 
C.  Ensure that parking areas are well-designed and contribute to a high-quality design environment in Morgan Hill. 
D.  Allow for flexibility in on-site parking requirements to support a multi-modal transportation system and sustainable development pattern. 
E.  Ensure that on-site parking areas do not adversely impact land uses on neighboring properties. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.72.020 - Applicability. 
A.  New Buildings and Uses. On-site parking and loading as required by this chapter shall be provided anytime a new building is constructed or a land use is established where no land use previously existed. 
B.  Change of Use. Where an existing use is changed to a new use, parking shall be provided for the incremental intensification of the new use. For example, if a new use requiring five on-site parking spaces replaces an existing use requiring four on-site parking spaces, the new use must provide one additional parking space regardless of the number of on-site parking spaces provided by the existing use. 
C.  Expansions and Enlargements. Where an existing structure is expanded or enlarged, additional parking is required to serve only the expanded or enlarged area. Additional parking is not required to remedy parking deficiencies existing prior to the expansion or enlargement. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.72.030 - Required parking spaces. 
A.  MU-D and RAH Zoning Districts. Land uses in the Downtown Mixed Use (MU-D) and Residential Attached High Density (RAH) zoning districts shall provide on-site parking as specified in Table 18.72-1. Required parking for uses not listed in Table 18.72-1 shall be the same as required for land uses in other zoning districts as shown in Table 18.72-2. 
Table 18.72-1: Required On-Site Parking, MU-D and RAH Zoning Districts 
Land Use 	Number of Required Parking Spaces 
Retail 	2.8 per 1,000 sq. ft. 
Office 	4 per 1,000 sq. ft. 
Residential 	
Units 600 sq. ft. or less 	1 per unit 
Units 600 — 1,350 sq. ft. 	1.5 per unit 
Units greater than 1,350 sq. ft. 	2 per unit 
 
B.  Other Zoning Districts. Land uses in zoning districts other the Downtown Mixed Use (MU-D) and Residential Attached High Density (RAH) zoning districts shall provide on-site parking as specified in Table 18.72-2. 
Table 18.72-2: Required On-Site Parking, Other Zoning Districts 
Land Use 	Number of Required Parking Spaces 
Residential Uses 	
Agricultural Labor Accommodations 	1 per 2 beds 
Caretaker Quarters 	1 per unit 
Duplexes and Duets 	2 covered per unit 
Group Housing 	1 per bedroom 
Live/Work Unit 	2 per unit 
Mixed Use Residential 	As required for each individual use, except that parking serving residential uses may be uncovered 
Multi-Family Dwellings 	
 Studio or One-Bedroom 	1 covered and 0.5 uncovered per unit 
 Two Bedroom 	1 covered and 1 uncovered per unit 
 Three Bedroom 	1 covered and 1.5 uncovered per units 
Nursing Homes and Long Term Care 	1 per two beds 
Recreational Vehicle (RV) Park 	1 per 250 sq. ft. of office floor area 
Residential Care Facilities, Large and Small 	0.6 per bedroom 
Accessory Dwelling Units 	See Chapter 18.84 (Accessory Dwelling Units) 
Senior Housing, Multi-Family Dwellings 	1 covered per unit 
Senior Housing, Single-Family Dwellings 	50% of units with 2 covered spaces, 50% with 1 covered space 
Single-Family Dwellings, Attached and Detached 	2 covered per unit 
Public and Quasi-Public Uses 	
Cemeteries 	1 per 4 seats in a chapel or other assembly area 
Colleges and Trade Schools 	1 per 40 sq. ft. of classroom area 
Community Assembly 	1 per 5 fixed seats, or 1 per 35 sq. ft. of assembly space, whichever is more, plus 1 per 250 sq. ft. of office area 
Cultural Institutions 	1 per 4 fixed seats, or 1 per 60 sq. ft. of assembly area for uses without fixed seats 
Day Care Centers 	1 per 300 sq. ft. used for daycare 
Emergency Shelters 	1 per 8 beds plus 1 per 300 sq. ft. of office or other non-residential floor area 
Government Offices 	1 per 250 sq. ft. 
Home Day Care, Large 	1 per 400 sq. ft. of floor area used for daycare and 1 per employee in addition to what is required for the residential use. 
Home Day Care, Small 	None in addition to what is required for the residential use. 
Hospitals 	1 per each two beds 
Instructional Services 	1 per 2 employees plus 1 per 4 students at maximum enrollment 
Medical Offices and Clinics 	1 per 200 sq. ft., or 5 per doctor/dentist, whichever is greater 
Parks and Recreational Facilities 	As determined by a parking demand study 
Public Safety Facilities 	1 per 1,000 sq. ft. and 2 additional parking spaces for station vehicles 
Schools, Public and Private 	Elementary and middle schools: 1 per classroom, plus 1 per 250 sq. ft. of office area. 
High schools: 7 per classroom. 
Social Services 	1 per 200 sq. ft. 
Commercial Uses 	
Adult Businesses 	1 per 250 sq. ft. 
Animal-Related Commercial Uses 	
 Animal Boarding 	1 per employee plus an area for loading and unloading animals on site. 
 Veterinarian Clinics and Hospitals 	1 per 500 sq. ft. 
Banks and Financial Institutions 	1 per 250 sq. ft. 
Business Support Services 	1 per 250 sq. ft. 
Cinemas and Theaters 	1 per 3.5 seats or one per 32 square feet of seating area, whichever is greater 
Commercial Parking 	1 per employee 
Commercial Recreation, Indoor 	Establishments with seating: 1 for each 4 fixed seats, or 1 for every 30 sq. ft. of seating area where temporary or moveable seats are provided. 
Athletic clubs: 1 per 150 sq. ft. of floor area. 
Bowling alleys: 2 per lane. 
Game courts (e.g., tennis): 2 per court. 
Swimming pools: 1 per 200 sq. ft. of pool area plus 1 per 500 sq. ft. of area related to the pool. 
Other commercial entertainment and recreation uses: as determined by the Director. 
Commercial Recreation, Outdoor 	As determined by a parking demand study 
Drive-Through Facilities 	As required by use served. 
Eating and Drinking Uses 	
 Bars and Nightclubs 	1 per 100 sq. ft. 
 Restaurants, Fast Food 	1 per 100 sq. ft. for establishments with more than 12 seats. 1 per 250 sq. ft. for establishments with 12 seats or less 
 Restaurants, Sit Down 	1 per 100 sq. ft. 
 Tasting Rooms 	1 per 100 sq. ft. of tasting area 
Equestrian Centers 	As determined by a parking demand study 
Funeral Parlors and Mortuaries 	1 per 4 permanently located seats or 1 per 45 sq. ft. of assembly space 
Lodging Facilities 	
 Bed and Breakfast Lodging 	1 per guest room plus 1 for each 10 rooms 
 Hotels and Motels 	1 per guest room plus 1 for each 10 rooms 
Mini-Storage 	2 spaces or 1 per 250 storage units, whichever is greater, plus 1 additional covered and 1 additional uncovered for an on-site manager residence 
Personal Services 	1 per 250 sq. ft. 
Plant Nurseries 	1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of site area for the first 10,000 sq. ft., then 1 per each additional 5,000 sq. ft., plus 1 per each 250 sq. ft. of floor area. Min. 7 spaces plus 1 space per vehicle to be parked on the site overnight 
Professional Offices 	1 per 250 sq. ft. 
Retail 	
 Convenience Markets 	1 per 250 sq. ft. 
 Farmers Market 	As determined by a parking demand study 
 General Retail 	1 per 250 sq. ft. 
 Home Improvement Centers 	1 per 250 sq. ft. 
 Large Commodity Retail 	1 per 350 sq. ft. 
 Open-Air Sales 	1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of site area 
Vehicle-Related Uses 	
 Gas and Service Stations 	1 per 200 sq. ft. 
 Towing and Impound 	1 per 250 sq. ft. of office space in addition to space for storage of towing vehicles 
 Vehicle Rentals 	1 per 250 sq. ft. of office space in addition to space for storage of rental vehicles 
 Vehicle Repair and Maintenance, Major and Minor 	1 per 200 sq. ft. 
 Vehicle Sales and Leasing 	5 per for the first 10,000 sq. ft. of lot area and 1 for each additional 3,000 sq. ft. 
 Vehicle Washing 	5 per for the first 10,000 sq. ft. of lot area and 1 for each additional 3,000 sq. ft. 
Wholesaling 	1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area plus 1 per 300 sq. ft. of office area 
Industrial Uses 	
Construction and Material Yards 	1 per 2,500 sq. ft. 
Food and Beverage Production 	1 per 500 sq. ft. 
Warehousing and Distribution 	1 per 1,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per 300 sq. ft. of office area 
Manufacturing, Light and General 	1 per 500 sq. ft. 
Research and Development 	1 per 350 sq. ft. 
Salvage and Wrecking 	1 per 500 sq. ft. 
Warehousing and Distribution, Large 	1 per 1,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per 300 sq. ft. of office area 
Warehousing and Distribution, Small 	As determined parking demand study, but no less than 1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
Warehousing and Distribution, Outdoor Storage 	1 per 1,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per 300 sq. ft. of office area 
Transportation, Communication, and Utility Uses 	
Freight/Truck Terminals and Warehouses 	1 per 1,000 sq. ft. plus 1 per 300 sq. ft. of office area 
Parking Lot and Structures 	1 per 300 sq. of office area 
Recycling Facilities 	
 Reverse Vending Machine 	1 per machine 
 Recycling Collection Facility 	1 per 1,000 sq. ft. 
 Recycling Processing Facility 	1 per 1,000 sq. ft. 
Transportation Terminals 	As determined by parking demand study 
Utilities, Major 	1 for each employee on the largest shift plus 1 for each vehicle used in connection with the use. Minimum of 2. 
 
C.  Guest Parking. 
1.  Number of Guest Spaces. All residential land uses shall provide the minimum number of guest parking spaces as specified in Table 18.72-3. 
Table 18.72-3: Required Guest Parking Spaces 
Land Use 	Number of Guest Spaces 
Single-Family Dwellings 	1 per 4 units 
Multi-Family Dwellings 	1 per 3 units 
Multi-Family Dwellings for Senior Citizens 	1 per 5 units 
 
2.  Location of Guest Spaces. Guest spaces shall be located no more than 150 feet from the residential dwellings they serve. 
3.  Downtown Exemption. Guest parking is not required for proposed residential development within the Downtown Specific Plan overlay zone. 
D.  Calculation of Required Spaces. 
1.  Floor Area. Where a parking requirement is a ratio of parking spaces to floor area, the floor area is assumed to be gross floor area, unless otherwise stated. The floor area of a use shall be calculated as described in Section 18.12.050 (Floor Area and Floor Area Ratio). 
2.  Employees. Where a parking requirement is stated as a ratio of parking spaces to employees, the number of employees is based on the largest shift that occurs in a typical week. 
3.  Seats. Where a parking requirement is stated as a ratio of parking spaces to seats, each twenty-four inches of bench-type seating at maximum seating capacity is counted as one seat. 
4.  Fractional Spaces. In determining the number of required parking, fractions of spaces over one-half shall be rounded up to the next whole number. 
E.  Unlisted Uses. 
1.  Commercial uses not listed: One space for each two hundred fifty square feet of gross floor area. 
2.  The parking requirement for land uses not listed in Table 18.72-1 and Table 18.72-2 shall be determined by the community development director based on the requirement for the most comparable similar use, the particular characteristics of the proposed use, and any other relevant data regarding parking demand. 
F.  Sites with Multiple Uses. Where more than one land use is conducted on a site, the minimum number of required on-site parking spaces shall be the sum of the number of parking spaces required for each individual use. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.72.040 - General requirements. 
A.  Availability and Use of Spaces. 
1.  Required parking spaces for multi-family and non-residential uses shall be permanently available and maintained to provide parking for the use they are intended to serve. 
2.  Owners, lessees, tenants, or persons having control of the operation of a use for which parking spaces are required shall not prevent or restrict authorized persons from using these spaces. 
3.  Required parking spaces shall be used exclusively for the temporary parking of vehicles and shall not be used for the sale, lease, display, repair, advertising, or storage of vehicles, trailers, boats, campers, mobile homes, merchandise, or equipment, or for any other use not authorized by the zoning code. 
B.  Location of Parking. 
1.  Residential Uses. Required minimum on-site parking to serve all residential uses shall be located on the same parcel or site as the use which it serves. 
2.  Non-Residential Uses. Required minimum on-site parking to serve all non-residential residential uses shall be located on the same parcel or site as the use which it serves except as allowed by Section 18.72.050.D (Off-Site Parking). 
C.  Electric Vehicle Charging. 
1.  When Required. Electric vehicle charging stations shall be provided: 
a.  For new structures or uses required to provide at least twenty-five parking spaces; and 
b.  Additions or remodels that increase an existing parking lot of fifty or more spaces by ten percent or more. 
2.  Number of Charging Stations. The number of required charging stations shall be as follows: 
a.  Twenty-five to forty-nine parking spaces: One charging station. 
b.  Fifty to one hundred parking spaces: Two charging stations, plus one for each additional fifty parking spaces. 
3.  Location and Signage. Charging stations shall be installed adjacent to standard size parking spaces. Signage shall be installed designating spaces with charging stations for electric vehicles only. 
D.  Garage and Carport Setbacks. Garages and carports in the detached residential zoning districts shall comply with setback requirements in Section 18.16.030 (Garage and Carport Setbacks). 
E.  Parking for Persons with Disabilities. 
1.  Parking spaces for persons with disabilities shall be provided in compliance with California Code of Regulations Title 24. 
2.  Parking spaces required for the disabled shall count toward compliance with the number of parking spaces required by Table 18.72-1 and Table 18.72-2. 
F.  Camper, Boat, and Trailer Parking. Camper, boat, and trailer parking spaces shall be located and screened so as not to be visible from the public street. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.72.050 - On-site parking alternatives. 
A.  Purpose. This section identifies alternatives to required on-site parking to: 
1.  Allow for creative parking solutions; 
2.  Enhance economic vitality in Morgan Hill; 
3.  Promote walking, biking, and use of transit; and 
4.  Encourage the efficient use of land resources consistent with the general plan. 
B.  Required Approval. Unless otherwise indicated, all reductions in on-site parking described in this section require planning commission approval of a conditional use permit. 
C.  In-Lieu Payments. Within the MU-D and MU-N zoning districts, on-site parking requirements may be satisfied by payment of an in-lieu parking fee consistent with the city's Downtown in-lieu fee parking program. 
D.  Off-Site Parking. 
1.  For multi-family housing and non-residential uses, the planning commission may allow off-site parking if the commission finds that practical difficulties prevent the parking from being located on the same lot it is intended to serve. 
2.  On-site parking shall be located within a reasonable distance of the use it is intended to serve, as determined by the planning commission. 
3.  A covenant record, approved by the city attorney, shall be filed with the county recorder. The covenant record shall require the owner of the property where the on-site parking is located to continue to maintain the parking space so long as the building, structure, or improvement is maintained in Morgan Hill. This covenant shall stipulate that the title and right to use the parcels shall not be subject to multiple covenant or contract for use without prior written consent of the city. 
E.  Consolidated Parking. 
1.  The required on-site parking for multiple uses may be consolidated into one central parking area located within the same block or within three hundred feet of any individual use. 
2.  The number of parking spaces required shall be the sum total of the required parking for each individual use unless the city approves a shared parking reduction in accordance with Section 18.72.050.F (Shared Parking). 
F.  Shared Parking. Multiple land uses on a single parcel or development site may use shared parking facilities when operations for the land uses are not normally conducted during the same hours, or when hours of peak use differ. The planning commission may allow shared parking if: 
1.  The parking will be shared by non-residential land uses only; 
2.  A parking demand study approved by the community development director demonstrates that there will be no substantial conflicts between the land uses' principal hours of operation and periods of peak parking demand; 
3.  The total number of parking spaces required for the land uses does not exceed the number of parking spaces anticipated at periods of maximum use; and 
4.  The proposed shared parking facility is located no further than four hundred feet from the primary entrance of the land use which it serves. 
G.  Valet Parking. The planning commission may allow up to twenty-five percent of the required on-site parking spaces to be valet spaces. Valet parking shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Valet parking lots must be staffed at all times by an attendant who is authorized and able to move vehicles. 
2.  A valet parking plan shall be reviewed and approved by the community development director in consultation with the city engineer. 
3.  Valet parking may not interfere with or obstruct vehicle or pedestrian circulation on the site or on any public street or sidewalk. 
4.  The use served by valet parking shall provide a designated drop-off and pick-up area. The drop-off and pick-up area may be located adjacent to the building, but it may not be located within a fire lane, impede vehicular and/or pedestrian circulation, or cause queuing in the right-of-way or drive aisle. 
H.  Low Demand. The number of required on-site parking spaces may be reduced if the planning commission finds that the land use will not utilize the required number of spaces due to the nature of the specific use. This finding shall be supported by the results of a parking demand study approved by the community development director in consultation with the city engineer. 
I.  Transportation Demand Management Plan. The planning commission may reduce the number of required on-site parking spaces for employers that adopt and implement a transportation demand management (TDM) plan subject to the following requirements and limitations: 
1.  A TDM Plan reduction is available only to employers with twenty-five or more employees. 
2.  Required on-site parking spaces may be reduced by no more than fifteen percent. 
3.  The TDM plan shall be approved by the community development director in consultation with the city engineer. 
4.  The TDM plan shall identify specific measures that will measurably reduce the demand for on-site parking spaces. 
5.  The employer shall appoint a program coordinator to oversee transportation demand management activities. 
6.  The program coordinator must provide a report annually to the planning commission that details the implementation strategies and effectiveness of the TDM plan. 
7.  The planning commission may revoke the TDM plan at any time and require additional parking spaces on site upon finding that that the plan has not been implemented as required or that the plan has not produced the reduction the demand for on-site parking spaces as originally intended. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.72.060 - Parking design and development standards. 
A.  Conformance with City Standards. All parking spaces, lots, driveways and other improvements intended and used for vehicle parking and circulation shall comply with the design standards and standard details for construction as maintained by the city of Morgan Hill engineering division. 
B.  Parking Space and Lot Dimensions. 
1.  General. The dimensions of parking spaces, maneuvering aisles, and access ways within a parking lot shall conform to the city's official parking space standard specifications maintained by the engineering division and as shown in Figure 18.72-1. All required parking spaces shall be full size parking spaces. Alternatively, with the issuance of a design permit, up to thirty percent of the required parking spaces may be compact spaces. 
2.  Garage Spaces. All parking spaces within a structure shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and twenty feet in length. 
3.  Access to Spaces. All access to spaces in a parking lot shall be from the lot. 
4.  Driveway Width. The minimum required driveway with at the street entrance shall be as shown in Table 18.72-4. 
Figure 18.72-1: Parking Lot Dimensions
  
Notes: 
[1] Minimum ten-foot width for spaces with one or two sides adjacent to a landscaped area. 
Table 18.72-4: Minimum Driveway Widths 
Land Use Served by Driveway 	Minimum Width at Street Entrance 
Commercial Uses 	
One-Way Driveway 	25 ft. 
Two-Way driveway 	35 ft. 
Residential Uses 	
One-way Driveways 	12 ft. at street entrance 
Two-way Driveways 	18 ft. at street entrance 
 
5.  Circulation Drive Aisle Width. Main circulation drive aisles within a shopping center or other commercial development shall be a minimum of thirty feet in width. 
6.  Stacking Area. All parking lots shall provide a minimum forty-foot stacking from the travel lane of the adjoining street. 
C.  Surfacing. 
1.  All parking spaces, maneuvering aisles, and access ways shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, or other all-weather surface. 
2.  Permeable paving materials, such as porous concrete/asphalt, open-jointed pavers, and turf grids, are a permitted surface material, subject to approval by the development services department. 
D.  Tandem Parking Spaces. Tandem parking spaces are permitted for all residential land uses, provided that they comply with the following standards: 
1.  Parking spaces in a tandem configuration shall be reserved for and assigned to a single dwelling unit. All required guest parking shall be provided as single, non-tandem parking spaces. 
2.  Tandem parking spaces shall not block the use of the driveway to access other parking spaces located within the parking area. 
3.  Tandem parking spaces shall be used to accommodate passenger vehicles only. 
E.  Forward Entrance and Exit. For parking areas adjacent to an arterial or collector roadway, sufficient maneuvering area shall be provided so that vehicles may enter and exit an abutting street in a forward direction. 
F.  Parking Lifts. Required parking may be provided using elevator-like mechanical parking systems ("lifts") provided the lifts are located within an enclosed structure or otherwise screened from public view. 
G.  Lighting. 
1.  A parking area with six or more parking spaces shall include outdoor lighting that provides a minimum illumination of 1.0 foot-candles over the entire parking area. 
2.  Outdoor lighting as required above shall be provided during nighttime business hours. 
3.  All parking space area lighting shall be energy efficient and designed so that any glare or spillage is directed away from residential properties. 
4.  All fixtures shall be hooded and downward facing. 
5.  Parking structures shall provide indoor lighting as required by the California Building Code. 
H.  Pedestrian Access. 
1.  Parking lots with more than thirty parking spaces shall include a pedestrian walkway in compliance with ADA requirements. 
2.  The design of the pedestrian walkway shall be clearly visible and distinguished from parking and circulation areas through striping, contrasting paving material, or other similar method as approved by the community development director. 
I.  Screening. Parking lots of six spaces or more shall comply with the following screening standards. 
1.  Location. Screening shall be provided along the perimeter of parking lots fronting a street or abutting a residential zoning district. 
2.  Height. 
a.  Screening adjacent to streets shall have a minimum height of three feet. 
b.  For parking lots within ten feet of a residential zoning district, screening shall have a minimum height of six feet. 
3.  Materials. Required screening may consist of one or more of the following materials: 
a.  Low-profile walls constructed of brick, stone, stucco or other durable and graffiti-proof coating material. 
b.  Evergreen plants that form an opaque screen. 
c.  An open fence combined with landscaping to form an opaque screen. 
d.  A berm landscaped with ground cover, shrubs, or trees. 
e.  Parking lots within ten feet of a residential zoning district shall be screened by a six-foot masonry wall. 
J.  Driveway Spacing. 
1.  Driveways shall be setback from street intersections as shown in Table 18.72-5: 
Table 18.72-5: Driveway Setbacks from Intersections 
Use Served by Driveway 	Minimum Distance from Intersection 
Residential 	10 ft. 
Commercial 	25 ft. 
Industrial 	30 ft. 
Other Uses 	As required by the City Engineer 
 
2.  Setbacks shall be measured from corner radius or t feet, whichever is greater. The corner radius shall be the arc length measured between the linear distance of the adjoining street. 
K.  Adjustments to Parking Design and Development Standards. The Planning Commission may allow adjustments to parking design and development standards in this section through the approval of a Minor Exception as described in Chapter 18.108.070 (Minor Exceptions). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.72.070 - Parking lot landscaping. 
A.  General Standards. All landscaping within parking lots shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 18.72 (Landscaping) in addition to the standards within this section. 
B.  Landscaping Defined. Except as otherwise specified in this section, landscaping and landscaped areas shall consist of plant materials, including any combination of trees, shrubs, and ground cover. 
C.  Interior Landscaping. All areas within a parking lot not utilized for parking spaces or access/circulation shall be landscaped. For parking lots with more than fifteen spaces, the minimum amount of interior landscaping is specified in Table 18.72-6. Interior landscaping is defined as any landscaped area surrounded on at least two sides by parking spaces or drive aisles, and excluding areas around the perimeter of the parcel or development site. 
Table 18.72-6: Minimum Required Parking Lot Landscaping 
Number of Required Parking Spaces 	Percent of Surface Parking Area to be Landscaped 
16 to 30 	10% 
31 to 60 	15% 
Over 60 	20% 
 
D.  Shade Trees. 
1.  One shade tree shall be provided for every five parking spaces in a parking lot. 
2.  Shade trees shall be a minimum twenty-four-inch box in size and shall provide a minimum thirty-foot canopy at maturity. 
3.  Shade trees shall be of a type that can reach maturity within fifteen years of planting and shall be selected from a city-recommended list of canopy tree species. 
4.  Shade trees shall be arranged in a parking lot to provide maximum shade coverage (based on a thirty-foot canopy) on August 21. The arrangement should approximate nearly fifty percent shade coverage. 
E.  Concrete Curbs. 
1.  All landscape areas shall be separated from parking spaces, drive aisles and driveways by a continuous, raised concrete curb. Raised concrete curbs shall be a minimum of six inches high by four inches deep. 
2.  The city may approve alternatives to raised concrete curbs as needed to comply with any mandatory stormwater drainage standards. 
F.  Parking Space Landscaping. A maximum of two feet at the front end of a parking space may be landscaped with low shrubs or ground cover in which a vehicle could extend over in lieu of paving surface. This landscaping may not count toward minimum required parking lot landscaped area. 
G.  Timing. Landscaping shall be installed prior to the city's authorization to occupy any buildings served by the parking area, or prior to the final inspection for the parking lot. 
H.  Green Parking Exemptions. Parking lots that incorporate solar panels, bioswales, and other similar green features not otherwise required by post construction stormwater requirements are eligible for reduced parking lot landscaping requirements with the approval of a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.72.080 - Bicycle parking. 
A.  Applicability. All multi-family developments of five units or more and commercial and commercial parking lots of ten spaces or more shall provide bicycle parking as specified in this section. 
B.  Types of Bicycle Parking. 
1.  Short-Term/Class II Bicycle Parking. Short-term/class II bicycle parking provides shoppers, customers, messengers and other visitors who generally park for two hours or less a convenient and readily accessible place to park bicycles. 
2.  Long-Term/Class I Parking. Long-term/dlass I bicycle parking provides employees, residents, visitors and others who generally stay at a site for several hours a secure and weather-protected place to park bicycles. Long-term parking may be located in garages or other limited access areas for exclusive use by tenants or residents. 
C.  Bicycle Parking Spaces Required. Short-term and long-term bicycle parking spaces shall be provided as specified in Table 18.72-7. 
Table 18.72-7: Required Bicycle Parking Spaces 
Land Use 	Required Bicycle Parking Spaces 
	Short-Term Spaces 	Long-Term Spaces 
Multi-Family Dwellings and Group Housing 	10% of required automobile spaces; minimum of 4 spaces 	1 per 5 units 
Non-Residential Uses 	10% of required automobile spaces 	1 per 20 required automobile spaces for uses 10,000 sq. ft. or greater 
 
D.  Short-Term/Class II Bicycle Parking Standards. Short-term bicycle parking shall be located within one hundred feet of the primary entrance of the structure or use it is intended to serve. 
E.  Long-Term Bicycle Parking Standards. The following standards apply to long-term bicycle parking: 
1.  Location. Long-term bicycle parking shall be located on or within seven hundred fifty feet of the use that it is intended to serve. 
2.  Security. Long-term bicycle parking spaces shall be secured. Spaces are considered secured if they are: 
a.  In a locked room or area enclosed by a fence with a locked gate; 
b.  Within view or within one hundred feet of an attendant or security guard; 
c.  In an area that is monitored by a security camera; or 
d.  Visible from employee work areas. 
F.  Parking Space Dimensions. 
1.  Minimum dimensions of two feet by six feet shall be provided for each bicycle parking space. 
2.  An aisle of at least five feet shall be provided behind all bicycle parking to allow room for maneuvering. 
3.  2 feet of clearance shall be provided between bicycle parking spaces and adjacent walls, polls, landscaping, pedestrian paths, and other similar features. 
4.  Four feet of clearance shall be provided between bicycle parking spaces and adjacent automobile parking spaces and drive aisles. 
G.  Rack Design. Bicycle racks must be capable of locking both the wheels and the frame of the bicycle and of supporting bicycles in an upright position. 
H.  Cover. Required cover for bicycle parking spaces shall be permanent, designed to protect the bicycle from rainfall, and at least seven feet above the floor or ground. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.72.090 - On-site loading. 
A.  Applicability. All retail, hotel, warehousing, manufacturing, and similar uses that involve the frequent receipt or delivery of materials or merchandise shall provide on-site loading spaces consistent with the requirements of this section. 
B.  Number of Loading Spaces. The minimum number of required loading spaces shall be as specified in Table 18.72-8. 
Table 18.72-8: Required Loading Spaces 
Floor Area 	Required Loading Spaces 
Less than 15,000 sq. ft. 	None 
15,000 to 25,000 sq. ft. 	1 
25,000 to 100,000 sq. ft. 	2 
100,000 to 200,000 sq. ft. 	3 
200,000 to 300,000 sq. ft. 	4 
Greater than 300,000 sq. ft. 	4 plus 1 per each additional 100,000 sq. ft. 
 
C.  Location. 
1.  Required loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the use they are intended to serve. 
2.  No loading space shall be located closer than fifty feet to a residential zoning district, unless the loading space is wholly enclosed within a building or screened by a solid wall not less than eight feet in height. 
D.  Dimensions. 
1.  Each loading space shall have minimum dimensions of twelve feet wide, forty feet long, and fourteen feet in vertical clearance. 
2.  Deviations from the minimum dimensions standards may be approved by the community development director if the spatial needs are less than the minimum required due to the truck size and type that will be utilized in the operation of a specific business. 
E.  Design and Configuration. 
1.  Loading spaces shall be configured to ensure that loading and unloading takes place on-site and not within adjacent public rights-of way. 
2.  Sufficient maneuvering area shall be provided for loading spaces so that vehicles may enter and exit an abutting street in a forward direction. 
3.  Loading spaces and their associated maneuvering areas shall not encroach into required employee or visitor parking areas or other on-site areas required for vehicle circulation. 
4.  Loading spaces shall be striped and clearly identified as for loading purposes only. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.76 - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 
 
18.76.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes performance standards for uses and activities to protect the community from nuisances, hazards, and objectionable conditions; promote compatibility of different land uses; and to protect environmental resources. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.76.020 - Applicability. 
This chapter applies to all new and existing land uses, including permanent and temporary uses, in all districts unless an exemption is specifically provided. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.76.030 - General prohibitions. 
Land or buildings shall not be used or occupied in a manner creating any dangerous, injurious, or noxious fire, explosive or other hazard that would adversely affect the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.76.040 - Air contaminants. 
A.  No uses or activity may operate in a manner that emits excessive dust, fumes, smoke, or particulate matter, excluding standards set under state and federal law. 
B.  Sources of air pollution shall comply with all rules established by the Environmental Protection Agency (Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40), the California Air Resources Board, and the Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD). 
C.  Operators of activities, processes, or uses that require approval to operate from the BAAQMD shall file a copy of the permit with the development services department within thirty days of permit approval. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.76.050 - Fire and explosive hazards. 
A.  All uses and activities involving storage of flammable or explosive materials shall provide adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion and adequate fire-fighting and fire-suppression equipment. 
B.  Fire-fighting and fire-suppression equipment and devices standard in industry shall be approved by the Fire Department. 
C.  Burning of waste materials in open fires is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.76.060 - Glare. 
No use or activity may produce direct or sky-reflected glare that is visible at a distance of five hundred feet from the use or activity, except for signs as allowed by Chapter 18.88 (Signs). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.76.070 - Hazardous materials. 
A.  The use, handling, storage and transportation of hazardous materials shall comply with the California Hazardous Materials Regulations and the California Fire and Building Codes, as well as the laws and regulations of the California Department of Toxic Substances Control and the county environmental health agency. 
B.  Any use that handles, stores, or transports hazardous materials requires a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.76.080 - Liquid and solid wastes. 
A.  Liquids and solids of any kind may not be discharged, either directly or indirectly, into a public or private body of water, sewage system, watercourse, or into the ground, except in compliance with applicable regulations of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board (California Administrative Code, Title 23, Chapter 3 and California Water Code, Division 7). 
B.  Solid wastes shall be handled and stored so as to prevent nuisances, health, safety and fire hazards, and to facilitate recycling. There shall be no accumulation outdoors of solid wastes conducive to the breeding of rodents or insects, unless stored in closed containers. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.76.090 - Noise. 
A.  No land use or activity may produce a noise level in excess of the standards in Table 18.76-1. 
Table 18.76-1: Maximum Noise Levels 
Receiving Land Use 	Maximum Noise Level at Lot Line of Receiving Use [1] 
Industrial and Wholesale 	70 dbA 
Commercial 	65 dbA 
Residential or Public/Quasi Public 	60 dbA 
 
Notes: 
[1] The planning commission may allow an additional 5 dbA noise level at the lot line if the maximum noise level shown in Table 18.76-1 cannot be achieved with reasonable and feasible mitigation. 
B.  Noise standards in Table 18.76-1do not apply to noise generated by vehicle traffic in the public right-of-way or from temporary construction, demolition, and vehicles that enter and leave the site of the noise-generating use (e.g., construction equipment, trains, trucks). 
C.  All uses and activities shall comply with Municipal Code Chapter 8.28 (Noise). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.76.100 - Odors. 
A.  No use or activity shall produce objectionable odors that are perceptible without instruments by a reasonable person at the lot line of a site. 
B.  Odors from temporary construction, demolition, and vehicles that enter and leave the site (e.g., construction equipment, trains, trucks, etc.) are exempt from this standard. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.76.110 - Radioactivity. 
No radiation of any kind shall be emitted that is dangerous to humans. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.76.120 - Electromagnetic interference. 
A.  No use or activities may cause electromagnetic interference with normal radio and television reception in a residential district, or with the function of other electronic equipment beyond the lot line of the site in which it is situated. 
B.  All uses and activities shall comply with applicable Federal Communications Commission regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.76.130 - Vibration. 
Vibration transmitted through the ground that is discernible without instruments at the lot line of the establishment or use is prohibited. Vibrations from temporary construction, demolition, and vehicles that enter and leave the lot (e.g., construction equipment, trains, trucks, etc.) are exempt from this standard. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.80 - RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS 
 
18.80.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes standards for the development and operation of recreational vehicle (RV) parks. These standards are intended to: 
A.  Ensure that RV parks are compatible with surrounding land uses; 
B.  Provide a suitable environment for travelers and other occupants of RV parks; 
C.  Protect RV parks as a recreational amenity serving temporary visitors; and 
D.  Ensure RV parks conform to applicable state laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.80.020 - Definitions. 
Specialized terms used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  Recreational Vehicle (RV). A vehicular-type unit designed for temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, which either has its own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. The term "recreational vehicle" includes, but is not limited to: 
1.  Motor homes constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle. 
2.  Travel trailers built on a chassis and drawn by a motorized vehicle. 
3.  Campers mounted on a truck chassis. 
4.  Camping trailers and similar folding structures mounted on wheels. 
5.  Park trailers built on a single chassis, mounted on wheels, with a gross trailer area not exceeding four hundred square feet in the setup mode, and certified by the manufacturer as complying with ANSI A119.5. 
B.  Recreational Vehicle (RV) Park. An establishment designed, established, or used for exclusive occupancy by two or more recreational vehicles. RV parks are owned by a single owner or organizations where RV spaces are temporarily rented or leased to a person occupying an RV. 
C.  Recreational Vehicle (RV) Space. A designated and defined are of land within an RV park intended for temporary location of an RV as a dwelling unit. 
D.  Recreational Vehicle (RV) Space, Short Term. An RV space designated for stays of thirty days or less in one continuous stay, and no more than ninety days in any consecutive three hundred sixty-five-day period. 
E.  Recreational Vehicle (RV) Space, Transitional. An RV space designated for stays of thirty-one to two hundred forty-four days in any consecutive three hundred sixty-five-day period. Transitional RV spaces are intended for persons moving to the Morgan Hill who may be in transition to permanent housing and require a temporary address in prior to obtaining permanent housing. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.80.030 - Compliance with state law. 
A.  All RV parks shall conform to Title 25, Chapter 5 of the state of California Administrative Code, Division 13 of the California Health and Safety Code, and all other state laws and regulations that apply to RV parks. 
B.  In the event of conflict between any this chapter and any controlling state law or regulation, the state law or regulation shall apply. If the state law or regulation is not controlling, then the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.80.040 - Permits required. 
A.  Conditional Use Permit. 
1.  When located in a district that identifies RV parks as a permitted use, the establishment and operation of an RV park requires a conditional use permit. 
2.  The Conditional Use Permit for an RV park shall specify the number and proportion of short term and transitional spaces permitted in the RV park. 
B.  Design Permit. Establishment of an RV park requires planning commission approval of a design permit. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.80.050 - Occupancy requirements. 
A.  Length of Occupancy. 
1.  The maximum length of occupancy in an RV park is as follows: 
a.  Short Term RV Spaces: No more than thirty days in one continuous stay, and no more than ninety days in any consecutive three hundred sixty-five-day period. 
b.  Transitional RV Spaces: No more than two hundred forty-four days in any consecutive three hundred sixty-five-day period. 
2.  Occupancy in an RV park for more than two hundred forty-four days is prohibited. 
3.  Occupancy for longer than thirty days of any RV space designated by the conditional use permit as a short term RV space requires an amendment to the conditional use permit. 
B.  Permitted Vehicles. Occupancy of an RV space is limited to one RV and one additional motor vehicle. Permanent buildings are prohibited within RV spaces. 
C.  Tag of Certification. An RV which stays for more than thirty continuous days in a RV park shall have a tag of certification documenting compliance with state and federal RV manufacturing requirements. A tag of certification may be issued by: 
1.  The California Department of Housing and Community Development under Section 4032, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 3 of the California Code of Regulations ("state insignia") or other state or Canadian province; or 
2.  The Recreational Vehicle Industry Association (RVIA) or a third-party certification company recognized by the city as being substantially equivalent. 
D.  Registration Required. 
1.  RV parks shall maintain a register listing the name, home address, vehicle identification number, and length of each of each park occupant. Erasures or alterations on the register is prohibited and unlawful. 
2.  Each register page shall include a statement that the register is open to City inspection at all times. Registers shall be kept in a conspicuous place and shall be made available for city inspection upon request. 
E.  City Verification. The city has the authority to allow a designated city staff member to visit an RV park, record vehicle identification numbers, vehicle license numbers and vehicle model types in spaces. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.80.060 - Development standards. 
All RV parks shall comply with the following development standards: 
A.  Park Size and Dimensions. 
1.  Minimum RV park area: five acres total and two thousand square feet per RV space. 
2.  Maximum RV park area: Twenty acres. 
3.  Minimum street frontage: One hundred feet. 
B.  RV Space Size and Dimensions. 
1.  Minimum RV space area: One thousand square feet. 
2.  Minimum RV space depth: Forty feet. 
3.  Minimum RV space frontage on an internal RV park road: Twenty feet. 
C.  RV Park Roadways. 
1.  Minimum internal roadway width: Twenty-eight feet. 
2.  Minimum entry roadway width: Thirty-two feet or sixteen feet for one-way traffic originating and terminating in a two-way roadway. 
3.  Roadways shall be paved to a thickness and material to meet city standards. 
D.  Setbacks. 
1.  Structures and vehicles shall be setback the minimum distance from exterior park boundaries as required by the applicable zoning district. 
2.  Structures and vehicles shall be setback a minimum of ten feet from vehicles in separate spaces, buildings, and roadways. 
3.  The main entrance of a park shall have an additional ten feet of landscaped setback above the minimum front setback of the applicable zoning district. 
E.  Permanent Buildings. 
1.  An RV park may contain one or more permanent buildings solely to serve residents of the park. 
2.  Permanent buildings shall comply with the development standards of the applicable zoning district and the setback requirements in Subsection D above. 
3.  Permanent buildings may not occupy more that fifteen percent of an RV park. 
4.  Permanent buildings may be used only for the following purposes: 
a.  RV park administration and office. 
b.  Recreational amenities and meeting areas. 
c.  Sales of packaged food, sundries and other convenience items customarily sold by convenience stores. 
d.  Storage of park equipment, excluding commercial storage for nonresidents of the RV park. 
e.  Other subordinate uses as described in the conditional use permit for the RV park which are necessary and customary in order to operate a park. 
F.  Amenities. An RV park shall provide amenities in proportion to the area of the park as follows: 
1.  Restrooms: One restroom building for the first fifty spaces, plus one additional building for each additional one hundred spaces. Restrooms shall include separate toilets for men and women and shower facilities. 
2.  Solid waste stations: one per two hundred spaces in addition to a sewer connection for each space. 
3.  Recreation centers: one per two hundred spaces. The first recreation center shall contain a swimming pool. Additional play areas may include an athletic field, picnic shelter, horseshoe pits, volleyball court, shuffleboard court, tennis court, additional swimming pools or similar facilities. 
G.  Landscaping. 
1.  All required front setbacks and RV park entrances shall be landscaped consistent with city standards and requirements. 
2.  The minimum landscaped area for each RV space is ten percent of the space area or two hundred feet, whichever is greater. At least one evergreen tree shall be planted and maintained within each RV space. No more than seventy percent of a space shall be nonpermeable (paved) area. 
3.  The minimum landscaped area for the RV overall is twenty percent of total park area, including individual RV space landscaping. Required amenities listed in Subsection F above, including recreational buildings and pools, may be counted within the park landscaping requirement. 
4.  Each RV park shall have at least one five hundred-foot by one hundred-foot area as a unified landscaped area visible from inside the park. 
H.  Sewer. Each RV space shall be connected to a sewer lateral meeting City standards which is connected to the RV park master sewer system. The RV park master sewer system shall be connected to the City sewer system. Septic tank connections are prohibited. 
I.  Water. Each vehicle space shall be connected to a water lateral meeting City standards which is connected to the RV park master water system, providing potable, safe and sanitary water. The RV park master water system shall be connected to the city water system. 
J.  Pets. Each RV space shall be treated as a residence for purposes of the city regulations regarding number of pets, leash laws and related pet regulations. 
K.  Perimeter Screening. Each RV park shall have a perimeter fence or wall built to city standards, at least six feet high, except that a fence or wall is not required in the landscaped front setback if individual RV spaces are not visible through the setback area from an adjacent public roadway. 
L.  Accessory buildings and awnings. An RV space may contain temporary accessory building as follows: 
1.  Accessory Buildings. One factory-enamel-coated metal shed per RV space, not to exceed fifty square feet in area, which is portable and not permanently affixed to the ground. Permitted use of such shed may include storage of the personal effects of the occupant or shelter for a pet. 
2.  Awnings. One canvas, fiberglass or factory-enamel-coated metal awning per RV space, which may be freestanding or attached to the RV, which does not exceed in height, length or width the height, length or width of the RV and which is portable and not permanently affixed to the ground. 
3.  All accessory buildings and awnings within RV spaces shall be the properties of the occupants of the space and shall not remain on the space after the occupants have vacated the space; nor shall the park owner own or maintain such accessory buildings or awnings on spaces. 
M.  Signs. An RV park may have identification, directory, and directional signs as permitted by Chapter 18.88 (Signs). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.84 - ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS 
 
18.84.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes standards for the location and construction of accessory dwelling units in conformance with Government Code Section 65852.2. These standards are intended to allow for accessory dwelling units as an important form of affordable housing while preserving the character and integrity of residential neighborhoods in Morgan Hill. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.84.020 - Permits required. 
A.  Zoning Clearance. Accessory dwelling units consistent with the requirements of this chapter are allowed by-right with the issuance of a zoning clearance. 
B.  Time Limit to Act. The city shall complete its review of an accessory dwelling unit application requiring a zoning clearance and approve or deny the application within one hundred twenty days after receiving an application. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.84.030 - Permitted zoning districts. 
Accessory units are permitted in any zoning district where single-family detached dwellings are a permitted land use as identified in Part 2 (Zoning Districts and Overlay Zones) of the zoning code. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.84.040 - Accessory dwelling units in existing space. 
An accessory dwelling unit within an existing primary dwelling, garage, or other accessory structure is permitted regardless of all other standards in this chapter if the accessory dwelling unit: 
A.  Complies with all applicable building and safety codes; 
B.  Provides independent exterior access from the primary dwelling; and 
C.  Complies with all side and rear yard setback requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.84.050 - Site and design standards. 
A.  General. Accessory units are subject to the same requirements that apply to primary dwellings on the same lot in the applicable zoning district except as specified in this section. 
B.  Number of Accessory Units. No more than one accessory dwelling unit is permitted on a single lot. 
C.  Relationship to Primary Dwelling. 
1.  An accessory dwelling unit may be within, attached to, or detached from the primary dwelling. Attachment to the primary dwelling shall be by sharing a common interior wall or common roof. No passageway (as defined in Government Code Section 65852.2(i)(5)) is required in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit. 
2.  An accessory dwelling unit shall have its own kitchen, bathroom facilities, and entrance separate from the primary dwelling. 
3.  The city shall allow junior accessory dwelling units as defined in Government Code Section 65852.22 with an efficiency kitchen and bathroom facilities shared with the primary dwelling. 
4.  The accessory dwelling unit shall be clearly subordinate to the primary dwelling by size, appearance, and location on the parcel. 
D.  Maximum Unit Size. 
1.  Detached Accessory Units. Table 18.84-1 identifies the maximum floor area for detached accessory dwelling units. 
Table 18.84-1: Maximum Accessory Unit Floor Area 
Zoning District 	Maximum Floor Area 
RE 10 	1,200 sq. ft. 
RE 2.5 	1,000 sq. ft. 
RE 1 	900 sq. ft. 
All other zoning districts 	750 sq. ft. 
 
2.  Attached Accessory Units. The maximum floor area of attached accessory dwelling units is thirty percent of the floor area of the primary dwelling or the floor area specified in Table 18.84-1, whichever is less. 
E.  Separation from Primary Dwelling. Detached accessory dwelling units must be setback a minimum of six feet from the primary dwelling unit. 
F.  Property Line Setbacks. 
1.  No setback is required for an existing garage that is converted to an accessory dwelling unit. 
2.  A minimum setback of five feet from the side and rear property lines is required for an accessory dwelling unit constructed above a garage. 
G.  Parking. 
1.  Except as specified in this subsection, on-site parking for accessory dwelling units shall comply with all parking requirements in Chapter 18.72 (Parking and Loading). 
2.  In addition to on-site parking spaces required for the primary dwelling unit, on-site parking spaces shall be provided for accessory dwelling units as shown in Table 18.84-2. 
Table 18.84-2: Required On-Site Parking Spaces for Accessory Dwelling Units 
Accessory Dwelling Unit Size 	Required Number of On-Site Parking Spaces 
Studio and one-bedroom accessory dwelling units 	1 space (may be tandem) 
Two-bedroom accessory dwelling units 	2 spaces (may be tandem) 
 
3.  On-site parking spaces for accessory dwelling units may be covered or uncovered and may be located within the front, side or rear setback areas. 
4.  No off-street parking is required for an accessory dwelling unit in the following cases: 
a.  The accessory dwelling unit is located within one-half mile of the Morgan Hill Caltrain station or a bus transit stop with a frequency of service interval of fifteen minutes or less during the morning and afternoon peak commute periods. 
b.  The accessory dwelling unit is located within a National Register Historic District or other historic district officially designated by the city council. 
c.  When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the accessory dwelling unit. 
d.  When there is a car share vehicle pick-up/drop-off location within one block of the accessory dwelling unit. 
5.  When an existing garage, carport, or covered parking structure is demolished in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit, and the zoning code requires that those parking spaces be replaced, the replacement spaces may be located in any configuration on the same lot as the accessory dwelling unit, including, but not limited to, as covered spaces, uncovered spaces, or tandem spaces, or by the use of mechanical automobile parking lifts. 
H.  Design. The design of accessory dwelling units shall be compatible with the design and scale of the primary dwelling (using substantially the same landscaping, color, materials and design on the exterior) and the general character of the neighboring residential properties. 
I.  Doors and Windows. Openings (e.g., doors and windows) on exterior walls that are closest to and face adjacent residentially-zoned properties shall be designed to minimize privacy impacts and maintain access to light and ventilation on adjacent properties. 
J.  Utility Connections. 
1.  General. An accessory dwelling unit shall not be considered a new residential use for the purposes of calculating local agency connection fees or capacity charges for utilities, including water and sewer service. 
2.  Accessory Dwelling Units in Existing Space. For an accessory dwelling units within an existing primary dwelling, garage, or other accessory structure, the city shall not require an applicant to install a new or separate utility connection directly between the accessory dwelling unit with and the utility or impose a related connection fee or capacity charge. 
3.  Attached and Detached Accessory Dwelling Units. 
a.  For detached accessory dwelling units and accessory dwelling units attached to and added on to a primary dwelling, the city shall require a new or separate utility connection directly between an attached or detached accessory dwelling unit and the utility. 
b.  Consistent with Government Code Section 66013, the connection may be subject to a connection fee or capacity charge that shall be proportionate to the burden of the proposed accessory dwelling unit, based upon either its size or the number of its plumbing fixtures, upon the water or sewer system. This fee or charge shall not exceed the reasonable cost of providing this service. 
4.  Fire Sprinklers. The city shall not require accessory dwelling units to provide fire sprinklers if they would not be required for the primary residence under the current fire code. 
K.  Septic Tank Disposal System. 
1.  In areas where septic tank disposal systems are allowed due to lack of sanitary sewer lines, detached accessory dwelling units shall be served by separate and independent septic tank sewage disposal systems. All leach lines shall be designed and installed in accordance with current septic system requirements of the Santa Clara County Environmental Health Services. 
2.  In other areas of the city, accessory dwelling units shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system through the existing lateral line serving the primary dwelling unit. 
L.  Maximum Number of Bedrooms. An accessory dwelling unit may contain no more than two bedrooms. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.84.060 - Deed restrictions. 
A.  Deed Restriction Required. Before obtaining a building permit for an accessory dwelling unit, the property owner shall file with the county recorder a declaration of restrictions containing a reference to the deed under which the property was acquired by the current owner. The deed restriction shall state that: 
1.  The accessory dwelling unit may not be sold separately from the primary dwelling. 
2.  The accessory dwelling unit is restricted to the approved size as set forth in Section 18.84.040 (E). 
B.  Binding on Future Owners. The above declarations shall be binding upon any successor in ownership of the property. Lack of compliance shall be cause for code enforcement and/or revoking the city's approval of the accessory dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.88 - SIGNS 
 
18.88.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes standards relating to the permitted type, size, height, placement, number, and design of signs. The intent of these standards is to: 
A.  Support economically viable businesses serving city residents, workers, and visitors. 
B.  Allow for signage that identifies businesses in a fair and equitable manner. 
C.  Protect and enhance the aesthetic qualities of the city. 
D.  Minimize hazards to motorists and pedestrians resulting from excessive, confusing, and distracting signs. 
E.  Allow for a simple and streamlined sign permitting process. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.88.020 - Definitions. 
A.  Abandoned Sign. A sign whose advertised use or service has ceased to function for a period of ninety days or more. 
B.  Off-Site Sign. A sign advertising a land use, business, product, or service not located or available on the premises where the sign is located. 
C.  Portable Sign. A movable sign not permanently attached to the ground or building. 
D.  Sign. Any structure, object, or device that uses letters, numbers, graphics, colors or other means of communication to advertise, announce, or communicate information of any kind to the public. 
E.  Sign Copy. The area of a sign occupied by letters, numbers, graphics, or other content intended to communicate information. 
F.  Sign Face. The area of a sign where sign copy is placed. 
G.  Types of Signs. 
1.  A-Frame Sign. A portable sign with two opposing flat faces designed to be self-supporting on the ground. 
2.  Awning Sign. A sign incorporated into, attached, or painted on the face or valance of an awning. 
3.  Banner Sign. A sign composed of lightweight, flexible, non-rigid material either enclosed or not enclosed in a rigid frame. 
4.  Beacon Sign. A beam of light designed to draw attention to a particular location. 
5.  Changeable Copy Sign. A sign with copy that that can be changed or rearranged electronically or manually without altering the face or surface of the sign. 
6.  Directional Signs. A sign that provides directions to a place, structure or use, excluding signs installed by a public agency. 
7.  Directory Sign. A sign which lists and identifies the location of the occupants of a multi-tenant building or site. 
8.  Hospital Sign. A sign for a medical facility providing patient services primarily on an in-patient basis. 
9.  Inflatable Balloon Sign. A sign consisting of a flexible envelope of nonporous materials that gains its shape from inserted air or other gas. 
10.  Flags. Fabric, textile, or material with colors and/or patterns which display a symbol of a nation, state, company, or idea. 
11.  Freeway-Oriented Sign. A sign intended to be viewed primarily by motorists traveling on Highway 101. 
12.  Freestanding Sign. A sign attached to an independent, freestanding structure that is not attached to a building. 
13.  Marque Sign. A sign made a part of or in any manner attached to a marquee. 
14.  Monument Signs. A freestanding sign that is supported by a solid-appearing base constructed of permanent material. 
15.  Pole Sign. A freestanding sign that is supported by one or more poles which do not have a solid-appearing base constructed of permanent material. 
16.  Post Sign. A temporary sign suspended from a horizontal swingpost that is attached to a vertical post mounted in the ground. 
17.  Projecting Sign. A sign permanently attached to a building or wall such that the sign face or faces are perpendicular to the building or wall. 
18.  Property Identification Sign. A sign identifying the name of a residential property or subdivision with ten or more units. 
19.  Roof Signs. A sign erected upon, against, or directly above a roof above the parapet of a building. 
20.  Site Sign. A temporary sign allowed on sites with uses under construction or not yet occupied. 
21.  Suspended Sign. A sign attached to or suspended from the underside of an arcade, canopy, or marquee and oriented to pedestrian traffic. 
22.  Wall Sign. A sign attached to or painted on the exterior wall of a structure with the display surface of the sign approximately parallel to the building wall. 
23.  Window Sign. A sign posted, painted, placed, or affixed in or on a window exposed to public view. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.88.030 - Required permits. 
A.  Sign Permits. 
1.  When Required. A sign permit is required to install, display, or alter a sign except for signs exempt from sign permit requirements as specified in Section 18.88.040 (Signs Allowed Without Permits). 
2.  Review Authority. 
a.  The community development director shall review and act on all sign permit applications except for signs reviewed by the planning commission as specified in Paragraph b below. 
b.  The planning commission shall review and act on sign permit applications for the following types of signs: 
(1)  Changeable copy message board for automotive-related business adjacent to Highway 101 consistent with Section 18.88.100.B (Changeable Copy Signs); 
(2)  Freestanding freeway-oriented signs consistent with Section 18.88.100.C (Freestanding Freeway Oriented Signs); 
(3)  Off-site hospital signs consistent with Section 18.88.100.D (Hospital Signs); 
(4)  Off-site monument signs consistent with Section 18.88.100.D (Off-site Monument Signs); 
(5)  Adjustments to sign standards consistent with Section 18.88.070 (Adjustment to Sign Standards); and 
(6)  Master sign programs consistent with Section 17.88.110 (Master Sign Programs). 
3.  General Permit Requirements. The submittal and processing of Sign Permit applications shall comply with Chapter 18.104 (Common Permit Requirements). 
4.  Public Notice and Hearing. 
a.  A noticed public hearing is not required for sign permits applications reviewed and acted upon by the community development director. 
b.  The planning commission shall review and act on a sign permit application at a noticed public hearing in compliance with Chapter 18.104 (Common Permit Requirements). 
5.  Findings for Approval. To approve a sign permit application, the review authority shall make all of the following findings: 
a.  The proposed signs are consistent with the general plan, zoning code, and any applicable specific plan or area plan adopted by the city council. 
b.  The proposed signs comply with all applicable standards in this chapter. 
c.  The proposed sign will not adversely impact the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
d.  The number, size, placement, design, and material of the proposed signs are compatible with the architectural design of buildings on the site. 
B.  Encroachment Permit. A sign which projects into the public right-of-way requires city engineer approval of an encroachment permit. 
C.  Building Permit. For signs that require a building permit, the city may not issue the sign permit until the building permit has been approved by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.88.040 - Signs allowed without permits. 
A.  Types of Signs. The following signs are exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter and shall not be counted towards the allowable sign area or number of signs on a parcel: 
1.  Alley and Service Area Signs. Signs fronting an alley or service area mounted flat against a wall and not exceeding twenty-five square feet in aggregate area. 
2.  Commemorative Plaques. One commemorative plaque identifying a building name, date of construction, or similar information that is cut into, carved, or made of stone, concrete, metal, or other similar permanent material. 
3.  Decorations. Holiday and cultural observance decorations on private property which do not include any commercial advertising. 
4.  Directional Signs. On-site directional signs located entirely on the property to which they pertain, identifying direction to parking, restrooms, and similar public facilities, each not exceeding five feet in height and five square feet in area for non-residential uses and two square feet for residential uses. 
5.  Directory Signs. One directory sign per street frontage as follows: 
a.  Maximum area: One square foot per tenant up to twenty-four square feet. 
b.  Maximum height: Six feet if freestanding. 
c.  Internal illumination prohibited. 
6.  Flags. Flags bearing noncommercial messages or graphic symbols as follows: 
a.  No more than three flags are permitted per parcel. 
b.  For flags flown on a flagpole longer than six feet, the longest dimension of the flag shall not exceed one-third the height of the flagpole; otherwise the longest flag dimension shall not exceed six feet. 
7.  Government Signs. Signs installed by a governmental agency, including signs advertising community activities and local nonprofit, civic, or fraternal organizations. 
8.  House Number and Nameplates. House numbers and nameplates up to four square feet for each residential dwelling. 
9.  Informational Signs. Signs with information for the safety and convenience of the public such as address, hours and days of operation, whether a business is open or closed, no smoking notices, up to three square feet per sign and ten feet in total. 
10.  Internal Signs. Signs within a building, or on the premises of a building, that are not visible from the public right-of-way and are intended for interior viewing only. 
11.  No Trespassing Signs. "No trespassing" signs, each not more than one square foot in size, placed at each corner and each entrance to property, and at intervals of not less than one hundred feet, or in compliance with the requirements of state or federal law. 
12.  Non-Commercial Bulletin Boards. One bulletin board on a parcel occupied by a non-commercial place of public assembly, with a maximum area of twelve square feet. 
13.  Real Estate Listings. Real estate listings posted in the window of a real estate office, with a maximum area of twenty-five percent of the total window area. 
14.  Restaurant Menu Signs. Restaurant menu signs attached to a building, with a maximum area of three square feet. 
15.  Temporary Signs. Temporary signs consistent with Section 18.88.120 (Temporary Signs). 
16.  Traffic-Control Devices. Official traffic-control devices in accordance with Municipal Code Chapter 10.16 (Traffic-Control Devices) 
B.  Changes to Sign Face. Changes to a sign face that do not structurally alter or enlarge a legally-established sign are exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter. 
C.  Routine Maintenance. The painting, cleaning, repair, and normal maintenance of a legally-established sign are exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter. 
D.  Murals and Decorations. Murals and decorations on the exterior of a building that do not advertise a product, business, or service are not considered signs and are not subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.88.050 - Prohibited signs. 
A.  Prohibited Sign Types. The following types of signs are prohibited: 
1.  Banners signs and pennants except when uses as a temporary sign consistent with Section 18.88.120 (Temporary Signs). 
2.  Beacon signs and searchlights. 
3.  Inflatable balloon signs and signs attached to inflated or gas-filled features. 
4.  Off-site signs, except for: 
a.  Off-site hospital signs consistent with Section 18.88.100.D (Hospital Signs); 
b.  Off-site monument signs consistent with Section 18.88.100.D (Off-site Monument Signs); 
c.  Off-site directional signs for community assembly uses in compliance with Section 18.88.100.H (Off-site Directional Signs for Community Assembly Uses) 
d.  Temporary off-site directional signs in compliance with Section 18.88.120.D (Temporary Off-site Directional Signs). 
5.  Pole signs. 
6.  Portable signs. 
7.  Roof signs. 
8.  Abandoned signs. 
9.  Murals and decorations on the exterior of a building that advertise a product, business, or service. 
B.  Prohibited Location or Placement. Signs with the following location and/or placement characteristics are prohibited: 
1.  Signs attached to or placed adjacent to any utility pole, parking meter, traffic signpost, traffic signal, or any other traffic control device. 
2.  Signs attached to trees. 
3.  Signs erected or maintained with horizontal or vertical clearance from overhead utilities less than required by state agencies. 
4.  Signs installed without permission of the owner or the owner's agent of the property on which the sign is located. 
5.  Signs mounted or attached to a vehicle parked for the purpose of calling attention to or advertising a business establishment. 
6.  Signs projecting over a public roadway which have not received an encroachment permit from the city engineer. 
7.  Signs that obstruct or interfere with the free use of a fire escape, exit, stairway, door, ventilator or window in violation of the California Building or Fire Code. 
8.  Signs that interfere with visibility at an intersection, public right-of-way, driveway, or other point of ingress/egress. The city may require sign setbacks greater than specified in this chapter as needed to maintain adequate visibility for motorists and pedestrians. 
C.  Prohibited Design Features. Signs with the following design features and/or physical characteristics are prohibited: 
1.  Signs which constitute a traffic hazard due to highly reflective and fluorescent painted signs. 
2.  Signs which simulate in size, color, lettering, or design a traffic control sign or signal. 
3.  Animated signs which move, rotate, revolve and other similar signs that visibly moving or rotating parts or visible mechanical movement of any kind. 
4.  Signs which flash, blink, change color, or change intensity including digital display and electronic readerboard signs, except for changeable-copy signs for automotive businesses adjacent to Highway 101 and movie theater signs consistent with Section 18.88.120 (Changeable Copy Signs). 
5.  Signs emitting audible sounds, odor, or visible matter. 
6.  Signs that feature a flag, pennant, whirligig, or any device which is designed to wave, flutter, rotate or display other movement under the influence of wind. 
7.  Any sign that utilizes visible guy wires, angle irons and iron frame structures. 
8.  Signs or sign structures which have become a public nuisance or hazard due to inadequate maintenance, or dilapidation. 
D.  Prohibited Sign Content. 
1.  The following sign content is prohibited: 
a.  Obscene or indecent text or graphics. 
b.  Text or graphics that advertise unlawful activity. 
c.  Text or graphics that constitute defamation, incitement to imminent lawless action, or true threats. 
d.  Text or graphics that present a clear and present danger due to their potential confusion with signs that provide public safety information (for example, signs that use the words "Caution," or "Danger," or comparable words, phrases, symbols, or characters in such a manner as to imply a safety hazard that does not exist). 
e.  Content advertising a use that has ceased to function for a period of 90 days or more. 
2.  The content prohibited by paragraph 1 above is either not protected by the United States or California Constitutions or are offered limited protection that is outweighed by the substantial governmental interests in protecting the public safety and welfare. It is the intent of the city council that each subparagraph of paragraph 1 above be individually severable in the event that a court of competent jurisdiction were to hold one or more of them to be inconsistent with the United States or California Constitutions. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.88.060 - General standards. 
A.  Measuring Sign Area. 
1.  Sign area is measured as the area of all sign copy, framing, or other display enclosed within a continuous perimeter composed of squares or rectangles. See Figure 18.88-1. 
Figure 18.88-1: Measurement of Sign Area
  
2.  Supporting framework or bracing that is clearly incidental to the display itself shall not be calculated as sign area. 
3.  The area of a double-faced (back-to-back) sign shall be calculated as a single sign face if the distance between each sign face does not exceed 18 inches and the two faces are parallel with each other. 
4.  The area of spherical, free-form, sculptural or other non-planar signs are measured as fifty percent of the sum of the area enclosed within the four vertical sides of the smallest four-sided polyhedron that will encompass the sign structure. See Figure 18.88-2. 
Figure 18.88-2: Non-Planer Sign Area
  
B.  Building Code Compliance. All signs shall comply with Chapter 15.08 (Building Code) and Chapter 15.12 (Electrical Code) of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code. 
C.  Maintenance. Signs, including all supports, braces, and anchors, shall be maintained in a state of good repair at all times. If the city determines that a sign has been damaged beyond fifty percent of its serviceable value, the sign shall be repaired and brought into compliance with all applicable requirements of this chapter. 
D.  Building Surface Repair. When an existing sign is replaced or modified, any newly exposed portions of a building surface on which the sign is displayed shall be repaired and repainted to restore a uniform appearance to the surface. Compliance with this requirement includes the removal of any excess conduit and supports, and the patching or filling of any exposed holes. 
E.  Illumination. 
1.  Non-residential signs may be internally or externally illuminated except where specifically prohibited. Internal illumination is permitted only when the portion of the sign that appears illuminated is primarily the sign lettering, registered trademark, or logo. 
2.  The light source for externally illuminated signs shall be positioned so that light does not shine directly on adjoining properties or cause glare for motorists or pedestrians. 
3.  Exposed bulbs are not permitted. 
4.  Freestanding signs within the gateway areas as shown in the city of Morgan Hill Scenic Gateway Guidelines shall be non-illuminated or indirectly illuminated by exterior lighting sources only. 
F.  Materials and Design. 
1.  Except for interior window signs, all permanent signs shall be constructed of wood, metal, plastic, glass, or similar durable and weatherproof material. 
2.  The design of signs, including its shape, features, materials, colors, and textures, shall be compatible with the design character of the development or use it identifies and will not have an adverse effect on the character and integrity of the surrounding area. 
G.  Downtown Signs. Signs located within the Downtown Specific Plan overlay zone shall comply with the signage guidelines in the Downtown Specific Plan to the extent appropriate as determined by the review authority. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.88.070 - Adjustments to sign standards. 
This section establishes procedures to allow the planning commission to approve signs that deviate from certain standards to provide reasonable flexibility in the administration of the sign ordinance. 
A.  Permit Required. Adjustments to sign standards allowed by this section requires planning commission approval of a sign permit. 
B.  Permitted Adjustments. The planning commission may allow adjustment to the following sign standards: 
1.  The maximum permitted sign area up to a twenty-five percent increase. 
2.  The maximum permitted sign height up to twenty-five percent increase. 
3.  The maximum number of permitted signs. 
4.  Requirements for temporary signs. 
C.  Findings. The planning commission may approve an adjustment to sign standards as allowed by this section if the following findings can be made in addition to findings required to approve the sign permit applications: 
1.  The sign will be compatible with adjacent structures and uses and is consistent with the character of the neighborhood or district where it is located. 
2.  The sign will not adversely impact neighboring properties or the community at large. 
3.  The adjustment is necessary due to unique characteristics of the subject property, structure, or use. 
4.  The sign will be consistent with the purpose of the zoning district, the general plan, any applicable specific plan, and any adopted area or neighborhood plan. 
5.  The adjustment will not establish an undesirable precedent. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.88.080 - Sign standards for non-residential zones. 
The sign standards in this section apply to properties in the mixed use (MU-D, MU-N, MUF), commercial (CN, CG, CH, CS), industrial (IL, IG, IC, IO), public facilities (PF), and sports recreation leisure (SRL) zones. 
A.  Signs Exempt from Permit Requirements. Signs that are exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter and do not count towards the allowable sign area or number of signs on a parcel are identified in Section 18.88.040 (Signs Allowed Without Permits). 
B.  Total Sign Area. 
1.  General. The maximum permitted aggregate sign area allowed on a parcel is as follows and as shown in Figure 18.88-3. 
Figure 18.88-3: Maximum Aggregate Sign Area - Single Frontage Outside Downtown Specific Plan Overlay Zone
  
a.  Mixed Use Zones: One and one-half square feet per lineal feet of street frontage to a maximum of one hundred square feet. 
b.  Commercial, Industrial, Public Facilities, and Sports Recreation Leisure Zones: Two square feet per lineal feet of street frontage to a maximum of one hundred square feet. 
2.  Downtown Specific Plan Overlay Zone. The maximum permitted aggregate sign area allowed on a parcel in the Downtown Specific Plan Overlay Zone is as follows. 
a.  Buildings fronting Monterey Road, Third Street, and Depot Street: One square feet per lineal feet of street frontage. 
b.  Buildings Fronting Other Streets: Three-fourths of one square foot per lineal feet of street frontage. 
3.  Sites with Multiple Frontages. On parcels and sites with more than one frontage on a public street (excluding alleys), the maximum permitted sign area is calculated as follows: 
a.  Corner and Through Lots. Where a lot fronts on two streets (a corner or "through lot"), either both the front and side, or front and rear lot lines as related to the applicable frontages may be used for calculating the allowable sign area. 
Figure 18.88-4: Maximum Aggregate Sign Area - Single Frontage Outside Downtown Specific Plan Overlay Zone
  
b.  Three or More Frontages. Where a lot has three or more frontages on a public street, the length of only two contiguous sides, one of which must be the principal street frontage, are added together to determine allowable sign area. 
4.  Multiple-Occupancy Commercial Sites with Limited Frontage. Where a multiple-occupancy commercial site has public street frontage equal to twenty percent or less of the perimeter measurement of the site, the maximum allowable sign area for the site is calculated as follows: 
a.  One square foot of sign area per one lineal foot of public street frontage; plus 
b.  One lineal foot of exterior building walls fronting on driveways and parking lots that are generally used for public access and are located on the same site. 
5.  Minimum Allowance in Multi-Tenant Projects. For multi-tenant commercial projects, the aggregate sign area may be increased to the extent that each tenant has a minimum of one-half of one square foot of sign area per lineal foot of business frontage on the primary street frontage. 
C.  Standards for Sign Types. Signs within non-residential zoning districts shall comply with Section 18.88.100 (Standards for Specific Sign Types). 
D.  Signage Guidelines — Downtown Signs. Signs located within the Downtown Specific Plan overlay zone boundaries shall conform to the signage guidelines in the Downtown Specific Plan. 
E.  Temporary Signs. Temporary signs allowed in non-residential zoning districts are identified in Section 18.88.120 (Temporary Signs). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.88.090 - Sign standards for residential and open space zones. 
The sign standards in this section apply to signs in the residential and open space zoning districts. 
A.  Signs Exempt from Permit Requirements. Signs that are exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter and do not count towards the allowable sign area or number of signs on a parcel are identified in Section 18.88.040 (Signs Allowed Without Permits). 
B.  Property Identification Signs. Residential properties or subdivisions with ten or more units may have property identification signs consistent with the following standards: 
1.  Maximum Number: Two per street entrance. 
2.  Permitted Type: Monument sign or attached to a masonry wall. 
3.  Minimum Setbacks: Five feet from property line. 
4.  Maximum Sign Area: Thirty-two square feet, which may be a single sign or divided between two signs on opposite sides of the street entrance. 
5.  Maximum Height: Six feet for monument signs. 
6.  Landscaping: Must include landscaping around the base with minimum horizontal dimension of at least Four feet. 
7.  Illumination: External illumination only. 
C.  Non-Residential Signs. Signs for permitted non-residential uses in residential zones shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Maximum Number: One monument sign and one wall sign per street frontage. 
2.  Permitted Type: Monument and wall signs. 
3.  Maximum Sign Area: Thirty-two square feet for monument signs and twenty-four square feet for wall signs. 
4.  Maximum Height: Six feet for monument signs and twelve feet for wall signs. 
5.  Minimum Setback: Ten feet from property line for monument signs. 
6.  Illumination: External illumination only. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.88.100 - Standards for specific sign types. 
This section establishes standards for specific sign types where such signs are permitted. 
A.  Awning Signs. 
1.  Maximum Area: Two-thirds of awning valance area and fifteen percent of awning face, or twenty-five square feet, whichever is less. 
2.  Maximum Projection from Building Wall: No greater than the awning. 
3.  Minimum Vertical Clearance: Six feet. 
4.  Minimum Horizontal Clearance: Two feet from street or drive aisle curb. 
5.  Placement: Sign may only be mounted on the wall area below the second floor. 
6.  Materials: Awnings shall be constructed of durable, long lasting fabric. Plastic or vinyl material is not permitted. 
B.  Changeable Copy Signs. The city council finds that automotive-related businesses near to Highway 101 have unique needs for communicating their message due to large market area of car dealerships, the site area required to maintain inventory, and the tendency for multiple car dealerships to cluster in a single location. the City Council also finds that movie-theatres have unique needs for communicating their message due to the number of and frequent change to films typically showing at a single time. 
1.  Where Permitted: Changeable copy signs are permitted only for: 
a.  Automotive-related business within one hundred feet of the Highway 101 right-of-way; and 
b.  Movie theatres. 
2.  Frequency of Copy Change: Copy may change no frequently than every two minutes. 
C.  Freestanding Freeway-Oriented Signs. The city council finds that large retail developments adjacent to Highway 101 have unique needs of communicating their message due to the high speed of vehicles traveling on the highway and the size and number of tenants located immediately to the freeway. 
1.  Eligibility: Freestanding freeway-oriented signs are permitted on sites that are: 
a.  Occupied by an existing or proposed unified commercial retail development of one hundred thousand square feet or more; 
b.  A minimum of ten acres; and 
c.  Directly abuts the Highway 101 right-of way. 
2.  Permit Required. Freestanding freeway-oriented signs require planning commission approval of a sign permit. 
3.  Maximum Number: One per site. 
4.  Maximum Height: Fifty feet. 
5.  Maximum Area: Two hundred square feet. Ancillary components of a sign such as shopping center identification that does not exceed twenty-five percent of the total sign area may be excluded from the calculation of the sign area. 
6.  Setbacks: Ten feet minimum from the highway right-of-way or other distance as determined by Caltrans and two hundred feet minimum from a residential zone. 
7.  Total Aggregate Sign Area: The area of a freestanding freeway-oriented sign shall not be included in the calculation of the maximum total aggregate sign area for the parcel or site. 
8.  Minimum Separation: A freestanding freeway-oriented sign shall be separated a minimum of one thousand feet from another freestanding freeway-oriented sign. 
9.  Design: The sign shall be compatible with surrounding development and the uses which it serves in general appearance and materials. 
10.  Landscaping. The sign base area shall be located in an irrigated landscaped planting area. 
D.  Hospital Signs. The city council finds that special allowance for off-site hospital signs are necessary to facilitate wayfinding to a hospital in case of an emergency and to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Two types of off-site hospital signs are permitted: freeway-oriented hospital signs and hospital directional signs. 
1.  Off-Site Freeway-Oriented Hospital Signs. 
a.  Location: Signs must be located within one hundred feet of the Highway 101 right-of-way and within five hundred feet the closest highway off-ramp closest to the hospital. 
b.  Maximum Number: one sign per hospital. 
c.  Maximum Height: fifteen feet. 
d.  Maximum Area: four hundred twenty-five square feet. 
2.  Off-Site Hospital Directional Signs. 
a.  Maximum Number: As necessary to provide adequate wayfinding to the hospital as determined by the community development director. 
b.  Maximum Height: six feet. 
c.  Maximum Area: fifteen square feet. 
3.  Permit Required. Off-site freeway-oriented hospital signs and off-site hospital directional signs require planning commission approval of a sign permit. 
E.  Marque Signs. 
1.  Maximum Number: one per use. 
2.  Maximum Height: thirty-five feet. 
3.  Maximum Area: five hundred square feet total for all sign faces. 
4.  Use Restriction: Limited to theatres, auditoriums, and indoor amusement/entertainment facilities. 
5.  Maximum Projection from Building Wall: twelve feet. 
6.  Minimum Vertical Clearance: eight feet. 
7.  Placement: Sign shall be affixed to a building wall directly above the primary public entrance of the use. 
8.  Animation: Flashing or chase lights only. 
F.  Monument Signs. 
1.  Maximum Number: one per street frontage or one per vehicle access point from street, whichever is greater 
2.  Maximum Height: eight feet. 
3.  Maximum Area: one-half of one square foot per lineal foot of property street frontage up to fifty square feet. 
4.  Setbacks: six feet minimum from vehicle access ways and three feet minimum from property lines. 
5.  Minimum Separation: Monument signs shall be separated a minimum of seventy-five feet from monument signs on abutting properties and one hundred feet from monument signs on the same property. 
6.  Landscaping: The sign base area shall be located in an irrigated landscaped planting area. 
G.  Off-Site Monument Signs. 
1.  Permit Required: The planning commission may allow an off-site monument sign consistent with this section with the approval of a sign permit. 
2.  Findings for Approval: The planning commission may approve a sign permit an off-site monument sign upon making all of the following findings: 
a.  The site is geographically located such that the business has limited visibility from an arterial road. 
b.  The proposed off-site signage is necessary and appropriate to allow the business to be competitive with other businesses of a similar nature located elsewhere. 
c.  The proposed off-site signage will not have a significant adverse effect on the character and integrity of the surrounding area. 
3.  Standards: Off-site monument signs shall comply with standards for monument signs in Subsection C (Monument Signs) above. 
4.  Additional On-Site Sign Prohibited: A business that is advertised on an off-site sign may not also be advertised on an on-site monument sign. 
H.  Off-Site Directional Signs for Community Assembly Uses. City council finds that community assembly uses have unique needs for communicating their messages due to their frequent location in residential neighborhoods and role as quasi-public uses within the community. 
1.  Eligible Uses: The city may install off-site directional signs for community assembly uses as defined in Section 18.124.030 (Community Assembly Uses). 
2.  Maximum Number: Two per use. 
3.  Location: Within public right-of-way. 
4.  Other Requirements: Signs shall be installed and maintained by the city at the applicant's expense. 
I.  Projecting Signs. 
1.  Maximum Number: One per building or tenant space. 
2.  Maximum Area: Eight square feet. 
3.  Maximum Projection from Building Wall: Four feet. 
4.  Signs in a Public Alley: A sign which projects into a public alley shall be located at least fourteen feet above the alley grade and may not project more than twelve inches from the wall to which it is attached. 
5.  Minimum Vertical Clearance: eighteen feet. 
6.  Minimum Horizontal Clearance: two feet from the street or drive aisle curb. 
7.  Placement: Signs may only be mounted on the wall area below the second floor. 
J.  Suspended Signs. 
1.  Maximum Area: five square feet. 
2.  Maximum Projection from Building Wall: no greater than the structure to which it is attached. 
3.  Minimum Vertical Clearance: eight feet. 
4.  Minimum Horizontal Clearance: two feet from street or drive aisle curb. 
5.  Placement: Sign shall be suspended below a ground-level awning, canopy, or ceiling of an arcade and shall be adjacent to the primary public entrance to the use. 
K.  Wall Signs. 
1.  Maximum Number: One per building frontage for single-tenant buildings and one per tenant space for multi-tenant buildings. 
2.  Maximum Height: Not to exceed the roof line or parapet of the building wall to which it is attached. 
3.  Maximum Area: For single-tenant buildings, one and one-half square feet per lineal foot of building wall to which it is attached. For multi-tenant buildings, one and one-half square feet per lineal foot of tenant frontage to which it is attached. 
4.  Projection from Building Wall: Not to exceed six inches. 
5.  Placement: Sign shall be attached to the building wall of the use associated with the sign. For multi-tenant buildings, sign shall be affixed to the portion of the wall where the business is located. 
L.  Window Signs. 
1.  Maximum Area: twenty-five percent of window to which it is attached. 
2.  Placement: Permitted only on ground floor windows. 
3.  Transparency: A minimum of seventy-five percent of the total window area for a use shall be transparent and free of signage features. Any sign attached to a window, within two feet of a window, or attached to a display located within two feet of a window is considered a window sign. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.88.110 - Master sign program. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the master sign program is to provide a coordinated approach to signage for multi-family development and multi-tenant commercial developments. 
B.  Applicability. A master sign program is required for: 
1.  Multi-family uses with more than one permanent sign proposed; 
2.  Any non-residential development with four or more tenants; and/or 
3.  Any building containing more than one business or tenant in the Downtown Specific Plan overlay zone. 
C.  Permit Required. A master sign program requires planning commission approval of a sign permit. 
D.  Applications. Applications shall be filed with the development services department on the appropriate city forms, together with all the necessary fees, deposits, exhibits, maps, and other information required by the department to clearly and accurately describe the proposed master sign program. 
E.  Master Sign Program Contents. All master sign programs shall identify the materials, color, size, type, placement and general design of signs located on a project or property. 
F.  Design Standards. 
1.  Master sign programs shall feature a unified and coordinated approach to the materials, color, size, type, placement and general design of signs proposed for a project or property. Master sign programs may allow for variety in the design of individual signs provided that the signs contribute to a consistent visual theme within the property. 
2.  A Master sign program may deviate from standards contained in this chapter relating to permitted sign height, number of signs, sign area, and type of sign. A master sign program may not allow a prohibited signs as identified in Section 17.80.060 (Prohibited Signs). 
G.  Effect of Master Sign Program. 
1.  All subsequent signs proposed for a development or property subject to an approved master sign program shall comply with the standards and specifications included in the master sign program. 
2.  Signs consistent with an approved master sign program are allowed with an administrative sign permit. 
3.  Approval of a master sign program shall supersede the regulations of this chapter. Any aspect of the proposed signs not addressed by the master sign program shall be in compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.88.120 - Temporary signs. 
A.  Residential Zoning Districts. Temporary signs in residential zoning districts shall comply with the standards in Table 18.88-1. 
Table 18.88-1: Temporary Residential Sign Standards 
	Type of Temporary Sign 
	Window, Wall, Freestanding, and Post Signs 	Site Signs 
Number of Signs 	No max. 	1 per property frontage; 2 max. 
Area Per Sign 	6 sq. ft. max. 	32 sq. ft. max. 
Area for All Signs Combined 	24 sq. ft. max. per parcel 	64 sq. ft. max. per site 
Sign Height 	6 ft. max. 	8 ft. max. sign face, 12 ft. max. total 
Setback from Property Line 	No min. setback 	5 ft. min. 
Illumination 	Not permitted 	
Duration 	See 18.88.130.C 
Other Requirements 	— 	Allowed only on sites with residential uses under construction or not yet occupied. 
 
B.  Non-Residential Zoning Districts. Temporary signs in non-residential zoning districts shall comply with the standards in Table 18.88-2. 
Table 18.88-2: Temporary Non-Residential Sign Standards 
	Type of Sign 
	Wall 	Freestanding 	Banner 	Window 	Site 
Number of Signs 	No max. 	1 max. per property 	No max. 	1 per property frontage; 2 max. 
Area Per Sign 	32 sq. ft. 	25% of window area 	32 sq. ft. 
Area for All Signs Combined 	1.0 per lineal property frontage 	64 sq. ft. per site 
Sign Height 	8 ft. 	No max. 	8 ft. sign face, 12 ft. total 
Setback from Property Line 	No min. setback 	5 ft. min. 
Illumination 	Not permitted 
Duration 	See Section 18.88.120.C 
Other Requirements 	— 	Allowed only on sites with uses under construction or not yet occupied. 
 
C.  Duration. Temporary signs in all zoning districts shall be removed the earliest of when: 
1.  A commercial message is obsolete and has become misleading (e.g., a "for lease" or "for sale" sign in front of a building that is leased or sold); 
2.  The sign falls into disrepair; or 
3.  The sign has been displayed for the maximum number of days shown in Table 18.88-3. 
Table 18.88-3: Temporary Sign Duration Standards 
Sign Type and Material 	Maximum Duration 
Wall, Freestanding, Banner, and Window Signs 	
Paper or cardboard sign face 	3 days 
Laminated paper; plastic lined polyethylene bags and comparable materials 	30 days 
Wood, corrugated plastic, metal, or vinyl sign face 	3 months 
Post Signs 	
Wood, corrugated plastic, or metal sign face and finished wood or metal structure 	9 months 
Site Signs 	
Vinyl sign face 	1 month 
Corrugated plastic sign face 	6 months 
Wood or metal sign face 	1 year 
 
D.  Temporary Off-Site Directional Signs. The city council finds that due to the existing configuration of streets and general development pattern there is a need to enhance wayfinding to large new development projects in Morgan Hill. As such, the city may allow temporary off-site directional signs within the public right-of-way as described below. 
1.  When Allowed. Temporary off-site directional signs are allowed to provide enhanced wayfinding to any development project under construction or not yet occupied on a site of two acres or more. 
2.  Location. Temporary off-site directional signs may be located within park strips between the curb and sidewalk or behind the sidewalk within the public right-of-way. 
3.  Permit Required. 
a.  Installation of temporary off-site directional signs requires the approval of a temporary use permit in accordance with Section 18.92.150 (Temporary Uses and Structures). 
b.  Applications for temporary off-site directional signs shall show the proposed location of signs in addition to all required fees, information, and materials as specified by the development services department. 
c.  Temporary use permits shall be valid for one year and may extended in accordance with Section 18.104.210 (Time Limits and Extensions). 
d.  The city may revoke the temporary use permit at any time if the signs threaten the public health, safety, and welfare. 
4.  Number and Size of Signs. 
a.  A maximum of thirty off-site directional signs are permitted per project. 
b.  Each sign may have an area of no more than four square feet per side and a height of no more than four feet. 
5.  Sign Material and Design. 
a.  Signs shall be constructed of flexible and weatherproof plastic or reinforced paper material that is permanently attached to a plastic or wooden stake. The top of the stake shall be flat or rounded and shall not be pointed. 
b.  Signs may not be illuminated, inflatable or have moving parts. 
c.  Signs may not include balloons, streamers, ribbons or other similar devices designed to move in the wind. 
d.  Signs may not resemble traffic-control signs or devices. 
6.  Display Hours. 
a.  Signs may be displayed in the period from five p.m. on Friday to no more than four hours after sunset on Sunday, and from five p.m. on the day prior to a holiday to no more than four hours after sunset on the day of the holiday. 
b.  Stakes and cable ties must be removed when the signs are removed. 
7.  Sign Attachment. 
a.  Signs shall be securely positioned and shall be either: 
(1)  Staked into the ground, or 
(2)  Attached to poles or posts by means of at least two plastic strips that are a minimum of one-quarter-inch wide (commonly known as "cable ties"), provided that no sign may be attached to any utility pole, traffic signal light post or to any pole or post displaying a traffic sign, motorist call box or historical marker as provided in Section 21464(a) of the California Vehicle Code. Where placement on a pole is allowed, a maximum of one directional sign may be installed. Cable ties must be sufficiently spaced to insure that the support stake is mounted parallel to the pole or post. 
b.  Signs may not be attached in any manner to trees, utility poles, utility cabinets, street or traffic signs, benches, hydrants, mailboxes, traffic signal light post, or any pole or post displaying a traffic sign, motorist call box or historical marker. 
8.  Sign Location. 
a.  Sign must be separated by at least five hundred feet when on the same roadway, except that two signs on the same roadway may be may be located within fifty feet of an intersection if the signs are directing traffic to turn at the intersection. 
b.  Signs must be setback at least twenty-five feet from a temporary park strip sign for a different development project. 
c.  Signs may not be located: 
(1)  Within eighteen inches of a curb where parking is allowed; 
(2)  In any bus stop zone; 
(3)  So that any part of the sign extends into any bus stop zone or sidewalk area; 
(4)  Within twenty feet of a driveway or curb cut access ramp; 
(5)  On medians, street barricades or on any structure located within the unimproved portions of the public right-of-way which exists beyond any face of curb or future curb line; 
(6)  Within twenty feet of any traffic-control sign or device installed by a public agency; 
(7)  Along any state or county right-of-way; or 
(8)  Within the Downtown Specific Plan overlay zone. 
9.  Property Owner Consent. 
a.  Signs may be placed on a park strip or behind the sidewalk only with the consent of the property owner and/or occupant of the parcel adjacent to the park strip or sidewalk where the sign is placed. 
b.  The property owner and/or occupant of the parcel adjacent to the park strip or sidewalk where the sign is placed may remove signs at any time. 
10.  Insurance. The applicant shall name the city as an additional insured in coverage amounts and types as required by the city risk manager. 
11.  Indemnification. The applicant shall agree to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city and its officers, officials, agents, and employees from and against any and all liability, claims, demands, actions, losses, damages, injuries arising out of or in connection with the temporary park strip signs. 
12.  Removal. The applicant shall agree to compensate the city to remove the signs if necessary for maintenance activities or to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.88.130 - Nonconforming signs. 
This section applies to all legally-established signs that do not conform to current requirements in this chapter. 
A.  Continuation. A nonconforming sign may continue its use as a sign if it was legally established in compliance with all applicable regulations in effect at the time it was established. It is the applicant's responsibility to demonstrate that the sign was legally established. 
B.  Allowed Changes. 
1.  Changes to sign copy/face and repainting of legal nonconforming signs is permitted as long as there is no alteration to the physical structure or support elements of the sign. 
2.  A legal-nonconforming sign that sustains less than fifty-percent damage to its structure may be repaired to its original pre-damaged condition, provided that such repair is completed within one hundred eighty days after the date of the damage. 
C.  Required Compliance. A legal nonconforming sign shall be removed or brought into compliance with this chapter in the following situations: 
1.  The use advertised by the sign has ceased to function for a period of 90 days or more. 
2.  The sign has sustained at least fifty-percent damage to its structure. 
3.  The sign is located on a remodeled building façade. 
4.  The sign is relocated to a different lot or building. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.88.140 - Violations and enforcement. 
A.  Illegal Signs. It is unlawful for any person to install, place, construct, repair, maintain, alter or move a sign in a manner that does not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Enforcement — General. The city shall enforce the requirements of this chapter and undertake legal action to correct violations in accordance with Chapter 18.120 (Enforcement) and Municipal Code Title 1 (General Provisions). 
C.  Removal of Hazardous and Illegal Signs. 
1.  The city may immediately remove or cause the removal of any sign that places the public in immediate peril or that is located within the public right-of-way. 
2.  For illegal signs that do not place the public in immediate peril and are located on private property, the city shall serve the business owner or person responsible for the sign a written certified notice that: 
a.  Describes the physical characteristics of the subject sign. 
b.  Explains the nature of the violation. 
c.  States that the sign shall be removed or brought into compliance with this article within thirty days after the notice is received. 
d.  States that the city may remove the sign if the business owner or person responsible for sign does not correct the violation within thirty days after the notice is received. 
e.  States that the city may destroy the illegal sign if it is not retrieved within thirty days after removal by the city. 
f.  States that the business owner shall be responsible for all costs associated with the removal, storage, and destruction of the sign. 
3.  If an illegal sign is not removed or brought into compliance within thirty days after a notice is received, the city may issue a citation to the business owner or person responsible for the sign as provided in Chapter 18.120 (Enforcement) and Municipal Code Title 1 (General Provisions) and may remove or cause the removal of the sign. 
4.  Any accessory structures, foundations, or mounting materials which are unsightly or a danger to the public health, safety, and welfare shall be removed at the time of the sign removal. 
D.  A sign removed by the city shall be stored for a minimum of thirty days. If the sign is not retrieved by the business owner or person responsible for the sign within this thirty-day period, the city may destroy the sign. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.92 - SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS 
 
18.92.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes supplemental standards that apply to specific land uses and development in all zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.92.020 - Adult businesses. 
A.  Purpose and Applicability. This section establishes standards for the location, approval, and operation of adult businesses as defined in Subsection C (Definitions) below. 
B.  Exceptions. The following types of businesses are exempt from the requirements of this section: 
1.  Therapeutic or Holistic Massage. Massage which is conducted by doctors, nurses, osteopaths or chiropractors, teachers, barbers, beauticians or by massage practitioners or employees as licensed by or otherwise exempted under Municipal Coder Chapter 5.32 (Massage Establishments). 
2.  Medical or Psychological Therapies. The medical or psychological therapeutic activities of state-licensed doctors, psychologists, psychiatrists or marital or sexual therapists are exempt. 
3.  Modeling or Theatrical Performances. Nude modeling done at infrequent intervals in connection with a college or art school, accredited by a nationally recognized accreditation organization, for students who have enrolled on a semester or quarterly basis with tuition is exempt. Occasional theatrical performances, either live or in motion picture theaters, in which nudity is incidental to the content of the presentation, are exempt. 
4.  Incidental Sale or Rental of Merchandise. Businesses which incidentally sell or rent adult merchandise, involving less than twenty percent of the floor space of the establishment or less than twenty percent of the net receipts, whichever is greater, are exempt, providing that all other laws on obscenity and indecent behavior are complied with. 
5.  Private Noncommercial Behavior. This title does not regulate the private behavior of adults, which is otherwise permitted by law, where there is no payment, gratuity, exchange of labor or goods, or other consideration of a transaction. 
C.  Definitions. 
1.  Adult Business. "Adult business" means a business which includes any of the following: 
a.  Sells or rents items related to specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities for over twenty percent of the year, and which items represent over twenty percent of the inventory or stock in trade or titles offered or floor space and/or over twenty percent of the net receipts of the business, whichever is greater. 
b.  Depicts or projects still or moving photographs related to specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities for over twenty percent of the year, which depiction or projection represents over twenty percent of the net receipts of the business. 
c.  Provides live entertainment, massage or other service to patrons, regardless of percentage of net receipts or other measurement of share of the overall business, which is related to specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
d.  "Adult businesses" include but are not limited to: adult bookstores, adult video stores, adult novelty stores, adult arcades, adult motels, adult theaters, adult entertainment enterprises, adult cabarets, escort agencies, massage parlors, nude modeling studios; or places which engage in or allow couch dancing, topless dancing, nude or semi-nude mud wrestling or similar businesses. 
2.  Specified Anatomical Areas. "Specified anatomical areas" means and includes any of the following: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae; or 
b.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
3.  Specified Sexual Activities. "Specified sexual activities" means any of the following: 
a.  The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; or 
b.  Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; or 
c.  Masturbation, actual or simulated; 
d.  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
e.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in this section. 
D.  Standards. All adult businesses shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Location. 
a.  An adult business may be located no less than five hundred feet from a sensitive use or area. 
b.  A sensitive use or area means any one the following: 
(1)  A religious institution, on land leased or owned by any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or any school or meeting hall operated by such institution. 
(2)  A public or private elementary, junior high or high school, preschool or child day care center. 
(3)  A public park on which recreation games may be played, including lawn and parking areas, but excluding natural open space on slopes exceeding twenty percent. 
(4)  A public assembly or public use civic building, including City Hall, the library and the post office, but excluding police and fire stations. 
(5)  An area developed with or shown on the general plan land use map for future residential development. 
(6)  A hospital except a veterinary hospital. 
(7)  A freeway or arterial street identified in the general plan and which residential and visitor traffic uses to access other sensitive areas. 
2.  Required Police Permit. 
a.  All adult businesses shall receive and maintain approval a police permit pursuant to municipal code Section 5.60.010 (Police Permits). 
b.  Adult businesses shall cease and desist operations within forty-eight hours of the city's denial or revocation of a police permit. 
3.  Operational Standards. Adult businesses shall comply with all standards in Municipal Code Section 5.60.020 (Operational Standards). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.92.030 - Convenience markets. 
A.  Purpose. This section establishes standards for convenience markets in order to: 
1.  Ensure the compatibility of convenience markets with neighboring commercial and residential land uses; 
2.  Minimize potential negative impacts from convenience markets on adjacent land uses; and 
3.  Require new convenience markets to incorporate crime prevention measures to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
B.  Separation Between Convenience Markets. 
1.  A new convenience market shall be located a minimum of one thousand feet from an existing or approved convenience market except as allowed by Paragraph 2 below. The distance between convenience markets shall be measured as the straight-line distance between the exterior walls of the market structures. 
2.  The city may allow exceptions to the separation requirement in Paragraph 1 above for: 
a.  One convenience market (regardless of size) on property adjacent to the interchange of Highway 101 and Dunne Avenue, Tennant Avenue, and Cochrane Road; and 
b.  Convenience markets with three hundred square feet or less of area devoted to sales and display. 
C.  Separation from Schools. A new convenience market shall be located a minimum of one thousand feet from the boundary of an existing school or a proposed school site as designated by the Morgan Hill Unified School District. 
D.  Restrooms and Automotive Services. Convenience markets which also sell automotive fuels shall provide the following additional services without charge: 
1.  One restroom for women and one restroom for men available to customers and employees. If restroom entrances open directly to the outside of the building, the restroom entrances shall be screened from public view. 
2.  Hoses conveying air and water for the service of automotive vehicles available for public uses in locations approved by the development services department. 
E.  Loiter Control. 
1.  Public pay telephones on an exterior wall of the convenience market or anywhere on the site shall not allow incoming calls. Public telephones allowing incoming calls are allowed within the building interior. 
2.  Video games may not be installed or operated on the premises of the convenience market. 
3.  The police department may require additional loiter control measures as conditions of approval for the convenience market conditional use permit. 
F.  Crime Prevention Measures. 
1.  The exterior of the convenience market shall be illuminated during all hours of darkness during which the market is open for business. Exterior illumination shall allow law enforcement personnel to easily identify persons within front entry areas, adjacent public sidewalks, parking areas, throughways, and alleys under control by the convenience market. Illumination shall be located and designed to minimize interference with the quiet enjoyment of nearby residential properties. 
2.  Commercial alarm systems and video security cameras shall be installed and maintained within the building to the specifications of the police department as required by the conditional use permit. 
3.  The police department may require additional crime prevention measures as conditions of approval for the convenience market conditional use permit. 
4.  Persons under the age of eighteen who are employed in a capacity which allows for selling of alcoholic beverages must be under the continual supervision of a person twenty-one years of age or older. 
G.  Concurrent Sale of Alcoholic Beverages and Automotive Fuels. If concurrent sale of alcoholic beverages and automotive fuels are proposed in conjunction with the convenience market use, the following additional requirements shall apply as specified in Section 23790.5 of the Business and Professions Code: 
1.  No alcoholic beverages shall be displayed within ten feet of the cash register or front door unless located within a permanently affixed cooler. 
2.  No display or sale of alcoholic beverages shall be made from an ice tub. 
3.  No alcoholic beverage advertising shall be located on fuel pump islands and no advertising for alcoholic beverages shall be located on buildings or windows. 
4.  Employees on duty between the hours of ten p.m. and two a.m. who sell beer or wine shall be at least twenty-one years of age. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.92.040 - Drive-through facilities. 
A.  Purpose. This section establishes standards for drive-through facilities to ensure adequate circulation of vehicles entering and exiting the facility and to protect pedestrian safety within the vicinity of the facility. 
B.  Drive-Through Lane Capacity. Drive-through lanes for fast food restaurants shall have a capacity for at least eight vehicles, at twenty feet per vehicle. Drive-through lane capacity for other types of drive-through establishment uses will be determined by the planning commission through the conditional use permit process based on appropriate traffic engineering criteria and addressing the following issues: 
1.  Nature of the product or services being offered; 
2.  Method by which the order is processed; 
3.  Time required to serve a typical customer; 
4.  Arrival rate of customers; and 
5.  Peak demand hours. 
C.  Drive-Through Lane Separation. Drive-through lanes shall be separate from the circulation lanes necessary for entering and exiting the property and providing access to parking. 
D.  Pedestrian Access. Pedestrian access routes shall not cross a drive-through lane within the minimum stacking space distance as provided under subsection A above. 
E.  Drive-Through Lane Setback from Intersection. Vehicular entrance or exit to a drive-through establishment shall be setback from the nearest public street intersection as shown in Table 18.92-1: 
Table 18.92-1: Drive-Through Lane Setback from Intersection 
Access Street Signed Speed 	Clear Distance from Adjacent Public Street Intersection 
	With Median Opening 	Without Median Opening 
25 	105 ft. 	55 ft. 
30 	125 ft. 	65 ft. 
35 	150 ft. 	75 ft. 
40 	185 ft. 	95 ft. 
45 	230 ft. 	115 ft. 
50 	285 ft. 	145 ft. 
55 	350 ft. 	175 ft. 
 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.92.050 - Emergency shelters. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to comply with State Government Code Section 65583(a)(4), which requires that emergency shelters be permitted by-right in at least one zone with sufficient capacity to accommodate the local need for emergency shelter. 
B.  Applicability. Standards for emergency shelters contained in this section apply to all emergency shelters where permitted by this title. 
C.  Minimum Performance Standards. 
1.  The number of beds shall be limited to thirty. 
2.  Parking requirements shall be either one space per three hundred square feet of habitable floor area, or sufficient to serve the parking demand determined in a study prepared by the applicant and approved by the development services department. 
3.  The size of outdoor waiting areas shall be sufficient to accommodate the expected number of clients without infringing upon the public right-of-way. 
4.  On-site management shall be provided during the hours that the emergency shelter is in operation. 
5.  An emergency shelter shall be located at least three hundred feet from other emergency shelters. 
6.  The length of stay at any emergency shelter shall not exceed ninety days, unless the management plan provides for longer residency by those enrolled and regularly participating in a training or rehabilitation program. 
7.  Exterior lighting of the property shall be designed to provide a minimum maintained horizontal illumination of at least one foot candle of light on parking surfaces and walkways that serve the facility. 
8.  Security shall be provided during the hours that the emergency shelter is in operation. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.92.060 - Home occupations. 
A.  Purpose. This section establishes standards for home occupations and cottage food operations to allow residents to conduct business and employment activities in their home in a manner compatible with a residential setting. 
B.  Permit Required. 
1.  A zoning clearance is required for all home occupations. 
2.  A zoning clearance for a home occupation is valid only for the original permit holder and may not be transferred to a new resident in the dwelling unit who replaces the original permit holder. 
C.  Business License. All persons conducting a home occupation shall obtain a Morgan Hill business license and pay the required license tax in accordance with Municipal Code Chapter 5.04 (Business Taxes, Licenses, and Regulations). 
D.  Standards. All home occupations shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Size. Home occupations may not occupy more than twenty-five percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit or four hundred square feet, whichever is less. 
2.  Employees. Employees of a home occupation shall be limited to the persons residing in the dwelling unit. The planning commission may allow a home occupation with up to two employees not residing in the dwelling unit with the approval of a conditional use permit. 
3.  Outdoor Storage Prohibited. Goods, equipment, and materials associated with a home occupation shall be stored within an enclosed structure or in a manner that is not visible from the property line. 
4.  Hazardous Materials Prohibited. The storage of flammable, combustible, or explosive materials is prohibited. 
5.  Performance Standards. Home occupations shall not generate dust, odors, noise, vibration, or electrical interference or fluctuation that is perceptible beyond the property line. 
6.  Residential Appearance. The appearance of the dwelling shall not be altered, nor shall the home occupation be conducted in such a manner that it may be reasonably recognized as serving a nonresidential use, either by color, materials, construction, lighting, signs, sounds, odors, or vibrations. 
7.  On-Site Client Contact. No more than one client/customer at the property at one time. Customer or client visits are limited to three per day, or six per day for personal instruction services (e.g., musical instruction or training, art lessons, academic tutoring). 
8.  Signs. Signs or displays used to identify the home occupation are prohibited. 
9.  Licenses and Registrations. Persons conducting home occupation shall obtain all applicable licenses and registrations required by local, state, and federal law. 
10.  Vehicle Traffic. Home occupations may not generate more than twenty vehicle trips per day. A round trip to and from the residence is one vehicle trip and multiple trips by the same vehicle shall count towards the maximum amount. Vehicle trips include trips by customers, vendors, delivery services or any other vehicle associated with the home occupation. A home occupation that requires marketing meetings or gatherings may exceed the maximum vehicle trips on two occasions per month. 
11.  Business Vehicles. No more than two vehicles used in the operation of the home occupation may be kept, garaged or parked on the property associated with the home occupation or any adjacent residentially zoned area. 
12.  Nonresident Employee Vehicles. Nonresident employee vehicles associated with the home occupation may not be kept, garaged or parked on the property or any adjacent residentially zoned area. 
E.  Cottage Food Operations. Cottage food operations (CFO) as defined in Assembly Bill No. 1616 - Chapter 415, Chapter 6.1 Section 51035 to Part 1 of Division 1 of Title 5 of the Government Code is a permitted home occupation subject to the following requirements: 
1.  The cottage food operation shall comply with Chapter 18.76 (Performance Standards). 
2.  The use of any commercial equipment as listed in the California Mechanical Code is prohibited. 
3.  The cottage food operation shall comply with California Department of Public Health regulations, including: 
a.  Cottage food operations overview; 
b.  Registration and permit requirements; and 
c.  Approved cottage foods list. 
4.  All cottage food operations shall be registered or permitted by Santa Clara County Department of Environmental Health before commencing business. 
a.  "Class A" cottage food operations must submit a completed self-certification checklist approved by the local environmental health agency when they submit their registration application. 
b.  "Class B" operations must submit a permit application and be inspected prior to obtaining a permit from the local environmental health agency. 
5.  The cottage food operation must provide the city with a copy of approved county registration application before a business license or zoning clearance will be issued. 
F.  Prohibited Home Occupations. The following uses are prohibited as home occupations: 
1.  Medical offices and clinics. 
2.  Schools. 
3.  Animal boarding. 
4.  Restaurants. 
5.  Retail involving on-site sales. 
6.  Vehicle-related uses, including vehicle repair and maintenance and vehicle washing 
7.  Construction and material yards. 
8.  Other similar uses as determined by the community development director. 
G.  Violations and Enforcement. The zoning clearance for a home occupation that violates any of the standards in Subsection D (Standards) above may be revoked in accordance with Chapter 18.120 (Enforcement) and the city may abate the violation according to the procedures in municipal code Chapter 1.18 (Administrative Citations and Fines). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.92.070 - Interim uses in the MU-D and MU-F zoning districts. 
A.  Purpose. This section establishes a process to allow interim non-profit uses in the Downtown Mixed Use (MU-D) and Mixed Use Flex (MU-F) zoning districts to defer on-site improvements. 
B.  Permit Required. Eligible uses which defer of on-site improvements as allowed by this section require planning commission approval of a conditional use permit. 
C.  Eligible Interim Uses. Non-profit entities that engage in uses permitted or conditionally permitted in the MU-D and MU-F zoning districts may request a deferment of on-site improvements as allowed by this section. 
D.  Improvements Eligible for Deferment. 
1.  The city may allow eligible interim uses to defer physical on-site improvements if such deferment would not adversely impact the public health, safety or welfare and would not violate any requirement of state or federal law. 
2.  Development impact fees may not be deferred or waived under this section. 
E.  Application - General. A conditional use permit application for an interim use shall be submitted and reviewed by the city in accordance with Chapter 18.104 (Common Permit Requirements) and Section 18.108.030 (Conditional Use Permits). 
F.  Application Submittal Requirements. In addition to application materials required by the development services department for the conditional use permit, applications for an interim use shall also contain the following information and materials: 
1.  A detailed list of required on-site improvements, the estimated cost of each improvement, the improvements requested to be deferred, and the impact on health and safety from the deferral of improvements. 
2.  Statement of proposed operations, including but not limited to: 
a.  A general overview of services to be provided and staffing; 
b.  The expected time for provision of such services; 
c.  Expected vehicle and pedestrian traffic generated by the operation; and 
d.  The expected use of hazardous materials, if any. 
3.  A copy of the lease and all attached documents. 
4.  A plan for exiting the site, including but not limited to: 
a.  A timeline for purchase and/or lease of a permanent site; 
b.  Relocation funding sources; and 
c.  Plans for moving operations to an alternate site, including personnel responsible for administering the move. 
5.  Other information as required by the development services department to evaluate the application. 
G.  Findings. To approve the interim use, the planning commission must make all of the findings for approval in Section 18.108.030 (Conditional Use Permits) plus the following additional findings: 
1.  The use will not adversely impact nearby property values. 
2.  The applicant has submitted a viable exist plan for future relocation to an alternative site. 
3.  The use will comply with minimum required on-site safety standards to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
4.  The use will provide a public benefit to the community. 
H.  Performance Bond. The planning commission may require the applicant to submit a performance guarantee in compliance with Section 18.104.190 (Performance Guarantees) to ensure the future restoration and cleanup of the site. 
I.  Annual Review. Within one year of approval and one year thereafter, the permit holder shall provide a written report on the status of the use and plans to relocate to an alternative permanent location. The community development director shall review each written report and verify compliance with the conditional use permit and conditions of approval. 
J.  Violations. The permit holder shall correct any violations of conditional use permit or conditions of approval within 30 days of receiving notice of violation. The city may revoke the conditional use permit in accordance with Section 18.104.240 (Permit Revocation) if the permit holder does not correct the violation. 
K.  Permit Duration. The conditional use permit for the interim use shall expire whenever the non-profit ceases operations, moves from the site, or three years after initial approval, whichever occurs first. Conditional use permits for interim uses may not be renewed or extended. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.92.080 - Intersection sight distance. 
A.  Clear Vision Triangle Required. In zoning districts which require a front and street side setback for primary structures, all corner parcels shall provide and maintain a clear vision triangle at the intersection of the streets' right-of-way for the purpose of traffic safety. 
B.  Clear Vision Triangle Defined. The intersection clear vision triangle shall be the area formed by measuring twenty feet along two intersecting streets from the point of intersection, and diagonally connecting the ends of the two lines. See Figure 18.92-1. 
Figure 18.92-1: Vision Triangle
  
C.  Maintenance of Sight Lines. 
1.  No structure, vehicle, object, or landscaping over three feet in height may be placed within a clear vision triangle, except as allowed by subsection 2 below. 
2.  Trees pruned at least eight feet above the established grade of the curb so as to provide clear view by motor vehicle drivers are permitted within a clear vision triangle. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.92.090 - Marijuana. 
Marijuana cultivation, marijuana delivery, and marijuana distribution facilities, as defined in Chapter 9.16 (Marijuana), are prohibited uses in all zoning districts in the city of Morgan Hill. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.92.100 - Mini-storage. 
A.  Purpose. This section establishes standards for mini-storage facilities that apply to all mini-storage facilities where permitted by Part 2 (Zoning Districts and Overlay Zones). 
B.  Minimum Separation 
1.  A mini-storage facility established after July 7, 2018, must be located a minimum of five thousand feet from another mini-storage facility. 
2.  The distance between two mini-storage facilities shall be measured as the shortest possible straight line connecting each facility's exterior property line. 
C.  Permitted Storage. Storage shall be limited to "dead storage" only. Dead storage means goods that are not radioactive, explosive, flammable or hazardous materials, that are not living plants or animals, that are not in use and not associated with any commercial use on the premises. 
D.  On-Site Supervision. All mini-storage facilities shall have adequate on-site supervision as determined by the review authority. 
E.  Controlled Access. All mini-storage facilities shall provide controlled access through the use of a security gate that is operated by a passcard system or by a manager. 
F.  Caretakers Units. Caretakers units may be allowed with the approval of a Conditional Use Permit. 
G.  Maximum Size — Individual Units. Individual storage unit may not exceed six hundred square feet in area. 
H.  Outdoor Vehicle Storage. Outdoor storage of vehicles including cars, boats, motor homes, travel trailers, motorcycles, all-terrain and off-road vehicles is allowed in designated areas only. Designated areas shall be adequately screened from public view, shall be fenced and secured under lock and key. 
I.  Prohibited Activities. 
1.  The servicing of equipment or vehicles and the operating of power tools is prohibited. 
2.  The use of a mini-storage facility for flea markets, commercial storage, transfer business, auctions or sales of any type is prohibited with the exception of on-site auction of unclaimed or confiscated goods from on-site storage lockers no more than three times per year, per facility. 
J.  Vehicle Circulation. 
1.  The minimum distance between the entrances of drive-up storage units on opposite sides of the same drive aisle way shall be twenty-six feet. 
2.  Walk-up indoor storage units which do not open directly onto a drive aisle shall be located within one hundred feet of a twenty-six-foot wide drive aisle. 
3.  The minimum distance between walk-up storage buildings shall be ten feet. 
4.  Vehicular access between walk-up buildings shall be prohibited except in cases where a standard twenty-six-foot wide drive aisle is provided between buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.92.110 - Natural resource and hazard setbacks. 
All development shall be setback from natural resources and hazards as shown in Table 18.92-2. 
Table 18.92-2: Setbacks from Natural Resources and Hazards 
Natural Resource/Hazard 	Minimum Setback 
Ridgeline 	80 ft. 
Category 2 Stream (water present during wet season only during normal rain years) 	35 ft. [1] 
Category 1 Stream (water present year-round during normal rain years) 	0—30% Slope: 100 ft. (inside USA) / 150 ft. (outside USA) [1] 
>30% Slope: 150 ft. (inside USA) / 200 ft. (outside USA) [1] 
	
100-year Floodplain 	Outside of floodplain unless the development is consistent with the limitations contained in Chapter 15.80 
 
Note: 
[1] See Santa Clara Valley Habitat Plan Chapter 6, Section 6.5, Condition 11. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.92.120 - Outdoor sales and displays. 
A.  Permitted Displays. A single permanent outdoor display of retail goods that complies with this section is permitted as an accessory use to a primary commercial use in the mixed use, commercial, and industrial zoning districts. 
B.  Permits Required. Approval of a zoning clearance is required for a permanent outdoor display consistent with the standards in Subsection D (Standards). 
C.  Exceptions to Standards. The planning commission may allow outdoor displays that deviate from the standards in Subsection D below for with approval of a conditional use permit. 
D.  Standards. 
1.  Height. Displayed items shall not exceed six feet in height. 
2.  Size. Display areas are limited to eight feet wide or ten percent of the width of the front building elevation. A display area may extend a maximum of three feet from the front building wall. 
3.  Goods Permitted. Displayed items shall be of the same type that are lawfully displayed and sold inside the building occupied by the primary commercial use. Only the business or entity occupying the building may sell merchandise in an outdoor display area. 
4.  Hours. Items shall be displayed only during the operating hours of the primary commercial use. Items shall be removed from display and moved into a permanently enclosed structure upon close of business. 
5.  Screening. If outdoor display areas are proposed as part of a project subject to discretionary review and approval by the City, the review authority may require that display areas be screened from view from neighboring properties with a solid wall, fence, or landscaped berm. 
6.  Design Standards. 
a.  Outdoor displays shall be self-supporting, stable, and constructed to withstand wind or contact. The display shall not be permanently affixed to any object, structure or the ground including utility poles, light poles, and trees. 
b.  Outdoor displays shall be continuously maintained in a state of order, security, safety and repair. The display surface shall be kept clean, neatly painted, and free of rust, corrosion, protruding tacks, nails and/or wires. 
7.  Location. 
a.  All outdoor display area shall be located on the same parcel as the primary commercial use. 
b.  Outdoor display areas may not be placed within any permanent landscaped area, required parking space, or loading area. 
c.  No items may be displayed within the public right-of-way, including public sidewalks. 
d.  Outdoor display areas may not be placed in a location that would cause a safety hazard, obstruct the entrance to a building, encroach upon driveways, or otherwise create hazards for pedestrian or vehicle traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.92.130 - Residential transition standards. 
A.  Purpose. This section establishes increased setback, height, and landscaping standards for non-residential land uses that abut residential properties. 
B.  Applicability. The standards in this section apply to all properties in a mixed use, commercial, or industrial zoning district that abut a residential zoning district or land use. 
C.  Standards. 
1.  Setbacks. The minimum setback from the residential property line shall be fifteen feet for interior side yards, twenty feet for rear yards, and twenty feet for any property line abutting a residential rear yard. 
2.  Daylight Plane. No structure shall extend above or beyond a daylight plane having a height of twenty-five feet at the minimum required setback from the residential property line and extending into the parcel at an angle of forty-five degrees. See Figure 18.92-2. 
3.  Landscaping. A landscaped planting area, extending a minimum of ten feet from the property line, shall be provided along all residential property lines. A tree screen shall be planted in this area with trees planted at a maximum interval of fifteen feet. The planning commission may allow a greater interval distance for tree species that will provide an adequate buffer and visual screen at maturity. 
4.  Loading. Loading and unloading shall be designed to have the least amount of impact on neighboring residential uses. When feasible, loading and unloading provided from the commercial frontage rather than from areas adjacent residential uses. 
Figure 18.90-2: Residential Transitions — Daylight Plane
  
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.92.140 - Rooftop solar energy systems. 
A.  Required Permits. Rooftop solar energy systems are a permitted use in all zoning districts. No permit or approval other than a building permit is required. 
B.  Height Exceptions. Rooftop solar energy systems may project up to four feet above the maximum permitted structure height in the applicable zoning district. 
C.  Building Permit Review and Approval — Rooftop Systems. Building permit applications for rooftop solar energy systems shall be reviewed and approved in compliance with Government Code Section 65850.5. Applications shall be submitted using the city's standard building permit application form. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.92.150 - Temporary uses and structures. 
A.  Purpose. This section establishes requirements for the establishment and operation of temporary uses and structures. These requirements allow for temporary uses and structures in Morgan Hill while limiting impacts on neighboring properties and the general public. 
B.  Temporary Uses Allowed By-Right. The following temporary uses are permitted by right. No permits or approvals from the development services department are required. 
1.  Garage Sales. Garage sales for individual residences limited to three, one- to two-day events per calendar year. One block or neighborhood sale per calendar year is allowed in addition to individual sales. 
2.  Storage Containers. Storage containers delivered to a home, loaded by residents, and delivered to another location, for a maximum of two weeks on private property. Storage containers on a residential property for more than two weeks may be approved by the community development director with a temporary use permit. 
3.  Outdoor Fund Raising Events. Outdoor fund raising events on commercial sites when sponsored by a non-profit organization directly engaged in civic or charitable efforts. Outdoor fund raising events with property owner permission are limited to two days each month for each sponsoring organization. 
4.  Construction Trailers. A trailer or modular unit on an active construction site in a non-residential zone limited to an eighteen-month period, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The trailer or modular unit may be used for security personnel, storage, office, residence of the property owner, or other similar temporary use. 
b.  The trailer or modular unit may be installed only after issuance of a Building Permit. 
c.  Trailers or modular units may not exceed a maximum size of six hundred fifty square feet and shall be placed on the site in compliance with the setback requirements of the applicable zone. 
C.  Temporary Uses Requiring a Temporary Use Permit. A temporary use permit is required for the following temporary uses. 
1.  Parking Lot/Sidewalk Sales. Parking lot/sidewalk sales limited to seven days in any one hundred eighty-day period, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The business or entity conducting a parking lot/sidewalk sale shall obtain a Morgan Hill business license at least fourteen days prior to the start of the sale. 
b.  Prior to issuance of a temporary use permit, an application for a temporary seller's permit shall be filed with the state of California Board of Equalization stating that the sales will occur in Morgan Hill. 
c.  Prior to issuance of a temporary use permit, the applicant shall provide a cash deposit to the development services department in an amount necessary to ensure the parking lot is returned to a clean and debris-free state. 
2.  Arts and Crafts Shows. Arts and crafts shows limited to seven days within any one hundred eighty-day period 
3.  Holiday Sales. Holiday sales (e.g., Christmas trees, pumpkins) for a maximum of forty-five calendar days, no more than four times per year on a single property. Seasonal sales are prohibited on residentially zoned property. 
4.  Seasonal Sale of Agricultural Goods. Seasonal sale of agricultural goods limited to ninety days per calendar year, not to exceed thirty consecutive days. 
5.  Traveling Amusements. Traveling amusements (e.g., carnivals, rodeos) limited to fifteen consecutive days or three weekends in any one hundred eighty-day period, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Traveling amusement uses shall be setback a minimum of one hundred feet from any residential zone or use. 
b.  Rest room facilities shall be provided. 
c.  All lighting shall be directed away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. 
d.  Noise attenuation for generators and carnival rides shall be provided to the satisfaction of the community development director. 
6.  Sales or Leasing Offices. Leasing offices for commercial and industrial projects for a two-year period or thirty days after the final sale or lease, whichever comes first, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The sales or leasing office shall be located in a trailer or tenant space. The sales or leasing office may be used only for sales or leasing activities for the project where the office is located. All other uses are prohibited. 
b.  Street improvements and temporary off-street parking at a rate of four spaces per office shall be installed prior to the start of sales or leasing activities. 
c.  A cash deposit of one thousand dollars shall be posted for sales or leasing offices. The office and all related improvements shall be removed within thirty days of the final sale or lease. 
d.  Flags or banners in conjunction with the sales or leasing office are prohibited. 
7.  Promotional Sales. Promotional sales and retail sales of items not typically sold from premises limited to twenty-four days per calendar year. Such uses must locate upon developed commercial property with approval of property owner. 
8.  Other Similar Activities. Similar temporary activities determined by the community development director to be compatible with the applicable zoning district and surrounding uses. 
D.  Conditions of Approval. The community development director shall attach conditions of approval to a temporary use permit in accordance with Section 18.108.G (Conditions of Approval) to ensure compatibility of the temporary use with neighboring uses and development. 
E.  Temporary Signage. Signs associated with a temporary use shall comply with Section 18.88.120 (Temporary Signs). 
F.  Events on Public Property. Temporary uses and events on public property shall conform to Chapter 12.16 (Events on Public Property). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.92.160 - Retaining existing vegetation. 
In all zoning districts, existing natural vegetation shall be retained and protected to the maximum extent feasible as part of any development project. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.96 - WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES 
 
18.96.010 - Purpose and legislative intent. 
A.  Purpose. This chapter establishes standards for the installation, modification, and operation of wireless communications facilities. These standards aim to protect public health, safety, and welfare while balancing the benefits of robust wireless services with the unique community character, aesthetics and local values of Morgan Hill. 
B.  Legislative Intent. This chapter does not intend to, and shall not be interpreted or applied to: 
1.  Prohibit or effectively prohibit personal wireless services; 
2.  Unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services; 
3.  Regulate the installation, operation, collocation, modification or removal of wireless facilities on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency (RF) emissions to the extent that such emissions comply with all applicable Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulations; 
4.  Prohibit or effectively prohibit any collocation or modification that the City may not deny under state or federal law; or 
5.  Preempt any applicable state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.96.020 - Definitions. 
A.  Terms Defined. Terms used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
1.  "Amateur radio facilities" are antennas and related equipment for the purpose of self-training, intercommunication, or technical investigations carried out by an amateur radio operator who operates without commercial interest, and who holds a written authorization from the Federal Communications Commission to operate an amateur radio facility. 
2.  "Antenna" means a device or system of wires, poles, rods, dishes, discs, or similar devices used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves. 
3.  "Applicable FCC decisions" means the same as defined by California Government Code Section 65964.1(d)(1), as may be amended, which defines that term as "In re Petition for Declaratory Ruling, 24 FCC Rcd. 13994 (2009) and In the Matter of Acceleration of Broadband Deployment by Improving Wireless Facilities Siting Policies, Report and Order, 29 FCC Rcd. 12865 (2014)." 
4.  "Array" means one or more antennas mounted at approximately the same level above ground on tower or base station. 
5.  "Base station" means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(1), as may be amended, which defines that term as a structure or equipment that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. Examples include wireless facilities mounted on a building or façade, ground-mounted equipment, facilities mounted to a utility pole or light standard, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, power supplies, and comparable equipment regardless of technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems (DAS) and small-cell networks). The term does not include "towers" or tower-mounted equipment as defined below. 
6.  "Collocation" means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(2), as may be amended, which defines that term as "[t]he mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes." As an illustration and not a limitation, the FCC's definition effectively means "to add" new equipment to an existing facility and does not necessarily refer to more than one wireless facility installed at a single site. 
7.  "Distributed Antenna System" or "DAS" means a network of one or more antennas and related fiber optic nodes typically mounted to or located on streetlight poles, utility poles, sporting venues, arenas or convention centers which provide access and signal transfer for wireless service providers. A distributed antenna system also includes the equipment location, sometimes called a "hub" or "hotel" where the DAS network is interconnected with one or more wireless service provider's facilities to provide the signal transfer services. 
8.  "Eligible facilities request." See Section 18.96.060.B (Eligible Facilities Request Defined). 
9.  "Eligible support structure" means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)4), as may be amended, which defines that term as "[a]ny tower or base station as defined in [47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001], provided that it is existing at the time the relevant application is filed with the state or local government under [47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001]." 
10.  "Existing" means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(5), as may be amended, which provides that "[a] constructed tower or base station is existing for purposes of the [FCC rules implementing Section 6409 of the Spectrum Act] if it has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process, provided that a tower that has not been reviewed and approved because it was not in a zoned area when it was built, but was lawfully constructed, is existing for purposes of this definition." 
11.  "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission or its successor agency. 
12.  "Personal wireless services" has the same meaning as provided in 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7)(C)(i), as may be amended, which defines the term as "commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services." 
13.  "Facility" means a "wireless communication facility" as defined in this chapter. 
14.  "Micro wireless facility" means a wireless communication facility that is no larger than twenty-four inches in length, fifteen inches in width, twelve inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than eleven inches. 
15.  "Monopole" means a single freestanding non-lattice, tubular tower that is not camouflaged and that is used to act as or support an antenna or antenna arrays. 
16.  "Radio Frequency (RF) Emissions" means electromagnetic radiation in the portion of the spectrum from three kilohertz to three hundred gigahertz. 
17.  "Section 6409(a)" means Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, Pub. L. No. 112-96, 126 Stat. 156, codified as 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a), as may be amended. 
18.  "Section 6409(a) Modification" means any eligible facilities request that does not cause a substantial change and submitted for approval pursuant to Section 6409(a) and the FCC's regulations at 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001 et seq. 
19.  "Service provider" means a wireless communications provider, company or organization, or the agent of a company or organization that provides wireless communications services. 
20.  "Significant gap" is a gap in the service provider's own wireless telecommunications facilities, as defined in federal case law interpretations of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
21.  "Site" means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(6), as may be amended, which provides that "[f]or towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower and any access or utility easements currently related to the site, and, for other eligible support structures, further restricted to that area in proximity to the structure and to other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground." 
22.  "Substantial change." See Section 18.96.060.C (Substantial Change Defined). 
23.  "Tower" means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(9), as may be amended, which defines that term as "[a]ny structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any [FCC]-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site." Examples include, but are not limited to, monopoles, mono-trees, and lattice towers. 
24.  "Transmission equipment" means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 140001(b)(8), as may be amended, which defines that term as "[e]quipment that facilitates transmission for any [FCC]-licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply. The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul." 
25.  "Wireless" means any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service transmitted over frequencies in the electromagnetic spectrum. 
26.  "Wireless communications facility" is a facility that sends and/or receives radio frequency signals, AM/FM, microwave, and/or electromagnetic waves for the purpose of providing voice, data, images or other information, including, but not limited to, cellular and/or digital telephone service, personal communications services, and paging services. Wireless communications facilities include antennas and all other types of equipment for the transmission or receipt of such signals; towers or similar structures built to support such equipment; equipment cabinets, base stations, and other accessory development; and screening and concealment elements. (Also referred to as "facility" and "wireless facility"). 
27.  "Wireless communications provider" is any company or organization that provides or who represents a company or organization that provides wireless communications services. (Also referred to as "service provider"). 
B.  Terms Not Defined. Terms not defined in this section shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable meaning and application. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.96.030 - Applicability and exemptions. 
A.  Applicability. This chapter applies to all new and modified wireless communication facilities unless exempted by Subsection B below. 
B.  Exemptions. This chapter does not apply to: 
1.  Amateur radio facilities; 
2.  Direct-to-home satellite dishes, TV antennas, wireless cable antennas, and other antennas covered by the over-the-air reception devices (OTARD) rule in 47 Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) Section 1.4000 et seq.; 
3.  Non-commercial wireless communications facilities owned and operated by a public agency; and 
4.  All antennas and wireless facilities identified by the FCC or the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) as exempt from local regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.96.040 - Required permits. 
A.  Conditional Use Permit. Planning commission approval of a conditional use permit is required for all new facilities and modifications outside the public right-of-way, except for facilities requiring an administrative use permit or a Section 6409(a) Permit as identified below. 
B.  Administrative Use Permit. Community development director approval of an administrative use permit is required for the following facilities: 
1.  A collocation to an existing facility that is not eligible for a Section 6409(a) permit. 
2.  A modification to an eligible support structure that is not eligible for a Section 6409(a) permit. 
3.  Building- and facade-mounted facilities in a non-residential zoning district where the facility is completely concealed from public view and architecturally integrated into the existing support structure. 
4.  A micro wireless facility in a non-residential zoning district. 
C.  Section 6409(a) Permit. Modifications to an existing facility that do not result in a substantial change as defined by FCC regulations may be eligible for a Section 6409(a) permit. See Section 18.96.060 (Section 6409(a) Modifications). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018; Ord. No. 2301, N.S., § 1, 4-17-2019)  
18.96.050 - Application submittal and review; post-approval permit requirements. 
A.  Application — General. An application for a proposed wireless communications facility shall be filed and reviewed in compliance with Chapter 18.104 (Common Permit Requirements) unless otherwise specified in this chapter. 
B.  Application Contents. The application shall include the information required by the development services department with all required application fees. The project applicant may be required to submit some or all of the following information, depending on the scope of the proposed project and as determined by the development services department. 
1.  Statement of Purpose. A written statement that includes: 
a.  A description of the technical objectives to be achieved; 
b.  An annotated topographical map that identifies the targeted service area to be benefitted; 
c.  The estimated number of potentially affected users in the targeted service area; and 
d.  A full-color signal propagation maps with objective units of signal strength measurement that show the applicant's current service coverage levels from all adjacent sites without the proposed site, predicted service coverage levels from all adjacent sites with the proposed site, and predicted service coverage levels from the proposed site without all adjacent sites. 
e.  A description of how the design may promote shared use by different carriers, if applicable. 
f.  A description of how the design may consolidate future planned facilities, if applicable. 
2.  Site Development Plans. A fully dimensioned site plan and elevation drawings prepared by a California-licensed engineer or architect showing any existing wireless facilities with all existing transmission equipment and other improvements, the proposed facility with all proposed transmission equipment and other improvements, and the legal boundaries of the leased or owned area surrounding the proposed facility and any associated access or utility easements. 
3.  Required Licenses or Approvals. Evidence that the applicant has all current licenses and registrations from the FCC, the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC), and any other applicable regulatory bodies where such licenses or registrations are necessary to provide wireless communication services utilizing the proposed facility. 
4.  Photo Simulations. Photo simulations that show the proposed facility in context of the site from reasonable line-of-sight locations from public streets or other adjacent public viewpoints, together with a map that shows the photo location of each view angle. 
5.  Alternative Sites Analysis. 
a.  The applicant must provide a list of all existing structures considered as alternatives to the proposed location, together with a general description of the site design considered at each location. 
b.  The applicant must also provide a written explanation for why the alternatives considered were unacceptable or infeasible, unavailable or not as consistent with the development standards in this chapter as the proposed location. This explanation must include a meaningful comparative analysis and such technical information and other factual justification as are necessary to document the reasons why each alternative is unacceptable, infeasible, unavailable or not as consistent with the development standards in this chapter as the proposed location. 
c.  If an existing facility is listed among the alternatives, the applicant must specifically address why the modification of such wireless communication facility is not a viable option. When an applicant proposes a site in the public right-of-way, the initial alternative sites analysis required for a complete application may evaluate other potential locations within the right-of-way. 
6.  RF Exposure Compliance Report. A radio frequency (RF) report acceptable to the city prepared and certified by an RF engineer that certifies that the proposed facility, as well as any collocated facilities, will comply with applicable federal RF exposure standards and exposure limits. 
7.  Noise Study. A noise study prepared and certified by an engineer for the proposed facility and all associated equipment including all environmental control units, sump pumps, temporary backup power generators, and permanent backup power generators demonstrating compliance with the city's noise regulations. 
8.  Deposit for Third Party Review. A cash deposit for third party peer review determined by the community development director to be necessary to ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
9.  Additional Information. Additional information determined by the development services department as necessary for processing the application for the proposed facility. 
C.  Application Processing Time. The application processing time for applications subject to this chapter shall be in conformance with the time periods and procedures established by applicable FCC decisions, adjusted for any tolling due to incomplete application notices or mutually agreed upon extensions of time. 
D.  Public Notice and Hearing. 
1.  Conditional Use Permit. The planning commission shall review and act on a conditional use permit for a proposed facility at a noticed public hearing in compliance with Chapter 18.104 (Common Permit Requirements). 
2.  Administrative Use Permit. Public notice of a pending action on an administrative use permit application shall be provided in compliance with Section 18.104.090 (Notice of Pending Action). The community development director shall hold a public hearing for an administrative use permit application only upon receiving a written request for a public hearing as provided in Section 18.104.090. 
E.  Basis for Approval. To approve a conditional use permit or administrative use permit for a proposed facility, the review authority must find that: 
1.  The facility is consistent with the requirements of this chapter; 
2.  The facility is sited and located in the most preferred manner possible, as described in Section 18.96.070 (Preferred Siting and Location), while meeting the applicant's wireless service objectives; and 
3.  All the findings required for the conditional use or administrative use permit as specified in Chapter 18.108 (Specific Permit Requirements) can be made for the proposed facility. 
F.  Appeals. 
1.  Community development director decisions on an administrative use permit may be appealed to the planning commission in accordance with Section 18.112 (Appeals). 
2.  Planning commission decisions on a conditional use permit may be appealed to the planning commission in accordance with Section 18.112 (Appeals). 
G.  Length of Approval. 
1.  All approvals for wireless communication facilities are valid for an initial maximum period of ten years. 
2.  An approval may be extended by the community development director from the initial approval date for a subsequent five years and may be extended by the director every five years thereafter upon the verification of the wireless communications provider's continued compliance with this chapter and with the findings and conditions of approval under which the application was originally approved. 
H.  Permit Revocation. 
1.  Basis for Revocation. A permit granted under this chapter may be revoked for noncompliance with any enforceable permit, permit condition or law applicable to the facility. 
2.  Revocation Procedures. 
a.  When the community development director finds reason to believe that grounds for permit revocation exist, the director shall send written notice to the permit holder that states the nature of the violation and a means to correct the violation. The permit holder shall have a reasonable time from the date of the notice to correct the violation or show that the violation has not occurred. 
b.  If the permit holder does not correct the violation or show that the violation has not occurred, the planning commission shall conduct a noticed public hearing to consider whether to revoke the permit. The planning commission may revoke the permit upon findings that the permit holder has not complied with any enforceable permit, permit condition or law applicable to the facility. 
c.  The planning commission's decision may be appealed to the city council in accordance with Chapter 18.112 (Appeals). 
I.  Cessation of Operations — New Permit Required. A new permit shall be required if a site is to be used again for the same purpose as permitted under the original permit if a consecutive period of six months have lapsed since cessation of operations. 
J.  Transfer of Ownership. In the event that the original permit holder sells its interest in a wireless communication facility, the succeeding carrier shall assume all project responsibilities and shall be held responsible for maintaining consistency with all permit requirements and conditions of approval. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.96.060 - Section 6409(a) modifications. 
A.  Purpose. This section describes the process and requirements for the approval of an "eligible facilities request" that does not cause a "substantial change" to an existing facility as defined by FCC regulations. 
B.  Eligible Facilities Request Defined. "Eligible facilities request" means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(3), as may be amended, which defines that term as a request for modification of an existing tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of the tower or base station, involving 
1.  Collocation of new transmission equipment; 
2.  Removal of transmission equipment; or 
3.  Replacement of transmission equipment. 
C.  Substantial Change Defined. "Substantial change" means the same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(7), as may be amended, defined according to the facility type and location as follows: 
1.  Towers Outside the Public Right-of-Way. For towers outside the public right-of-way, a substantial change occurs when: 
a.  The proposed collocation or modification increases the overall height more than ten percent or the height of one additional antenna array not to exceed twenty feet (whichever is greater); or 
b.  The proposed collocation or modification increases the width more than twenty feet from the edge of the wireless tower or the width of the wireless tower at the level of the appurtenance (whichever is greater); or 
c.  The proposed collocation or modification involves the installation of more than the standard number of equipment cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed four; or 
d.  The proposed collocation or modification involves excavation outside the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the wireless tower, including any access or utility easements currently related to the site. 
2.  Monopoles in the Public Right-of-Way. For monopoles in the public rights-of-way, a substantial change occurs when: 
a.  The proposed collocation or modification increases the overall height more than ten percent or ten feet (whichever is greater); or 
b.  The proposed collocation or modification increases the width more than six feet from the edge of the wireless monopoles; or 
c.  The proposed collocation or modification involves the installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground when there are no existing ground-mounted equipment cabinets; or 
d.  The proposed collocation or modification involves the installation of any new ground-mounted equipment cabinets that are ten percent (ten percent) larger in height or volume than any existing ground-mounted equipment cabinets; or 
e.  The proposed collocation or modification involves excavation outside the area in proximity to the structure and other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground. 
3.  All Towers and Base Stations. In addition, for all towers and base stations wherever located, a substantial change occurs when: 
a.  The proposed collocation or modification would defeat the existing concealment elements of the support structure as determined by the community development director; or 
b.  The proposed collocation or modification violates a prior condition of approval, provided however that the collocation need not comply with any prior condition of approval related to height, width, equipment cabinets or excavation that is inconsistent with the thresholds for a substantial change described in this section. 
4.  Interpretation of Thresholds. 
a.  The thresholds for a substantial change described above are disjunctive. The failure to meet any one or more of the applicable thresholds means that a substantial change would occur. 
b.  The thresholds for height increases are cumulative limits. For sites with horizontally separated deployments, the cumulative limit is measured from the originally-permitted support structure without regard to any increases in size due to wireless equipment not included in the original design. For sites with vertically separated deployments, the cumulative limit is measured from the permitted site dimensions as they existed on February 22, 2012—the date that Congress passed Section 6409(a). 
D.  Permit Required. Approval of an eligible facilities request as defined above requires community development director approval of a Section 6409(a) Permit. 
E.  Applications. Applications for a Section 6409(a) Permit shall contain all information and materials specified in Section 18.96.050.B (Application Contents) except as follows: 
1.  Section 6409(a) Permit applications are not required to include a statement of purpose (Section 18.96.050.B.1) or an alternative sites analysis (Section 18.96.050.B.5). 
2.  The application must include a detailed explanation as to why the applicant believes that the application qualifies as an eligible facility request subject to a Section 6409(a) Permit. 
3.  For applications involving a collocation or modification to an eligible support structure, the application must be accompanied by all prior approvals for the existing facility (including but not limited to all conditions associated with the siting approval of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure or base station equipment), as well as all permit applications with required application materials for each separate permit required by the city for the proposed facility, including but not limited to a building permit and an encroachment permit (if applicable). 
F.  Public Notice. Before the community development director may approve a Section 6409(a) Permit application, notice of the application shall be posted on site at least ten calendar days prior to the city taking action on the application and shall contain the following information: 
1.  A general explanation of the proposed modification or collocation; 
2.  A general description of the location of the real property that is the subject of the application; and 
3.  The following statement: "Federal law may require approval of this application pursuant to Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, Pub. L. No. 112-96, 126 Stat. 156, codified as 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a)." 
G.  Basis for Approval. 
1.  This subsection shall be interpreted and applied so as to be consistent with the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Section 6409(a), and the applicable FCC and court decisions and determinations relating to the same. In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction invalidates all or any portion of Section 6409(a) or a FCC rule or regulation that interprets Section 6409(a), such that federal law would not mandate approval for any eligible facilities request, then all proposed modifications to existing facilities subject to this section must be approved by an administrative use permit, or conditional use permit, as applicable, and subject to the discretion of the community development director. 
2.  The community development director shall approve a Section 6409(a) Permit upon finding that the proposed collocation or modification qualifies as an eligible facilities request and does not cause a substantial change as defined above. 
3.  In addition to any other alternative recourse permitted under federal law, the community development director may deny a Section 6409(a) permit upon finding that the proposed collocation or modification: 
a.  Violates any legally enforceable standard or permit condition reasonably related to public health and safety; 
b.  Involves a structure constructed or modified without all regulatory approvals required at the time of the construction or modification; 
c.  Involves the replacement of the entire support structure; or 
d.  Does not qualify for mandatory approval under Section 6409(a) for any lawful reason. 
4.  A denial of a Section 6409(a) permit application shall be without prejudice to the applicant, the real property owner, or the project. Subject to the application and submittal requirements in this chapter, the applicant may immediately resubmit a permit application for either a conditional use permit, administrative use permit, or Section 6409(a) permit as appropriate. 
H.  Appeals. Community development director decisions on a Section 6409(a) Permit are final and may not be appealed. 
I.  No Permit Term Extension. 
1.  The approval of a Section 6409(a) permit constitutes a federally-mandated modification to the underlying permit or approval for the subject tower or base station. 
2.  A Section 6409(a) permit does not extend the permit term for any conditional use permit, administrative use permit, or other underlying regulatory approval and its term shall be coterminous with the underlying permit for the subject tower or base station. 
J.  Applicant Notifications for Deemed Granted Remedies. 
1.  Under state and/or federal law, the city's failure to act on a wireless communications facility permit application within a reasonable period of time in accordance with the time periods and procedures established by applicable FCC decisions, accounting for tolling, may result in the permit being deemed granted by operation of law. 
2.  To the extent federal or state law provides a "deemed granted" remedy for wireless communications facility applications not timely acted upon by the city, no such application shall be deemed granted unless and until the applicant satisfies the following requirements: 
a.  Submits a complete application package consistent with the application procedures specified in this chapter and applicable federal and state laws and regulations. 
b.  Following the date by which the city must take final action on the application (as determined in accordance with the time periods and procedures established by applicable FCC decisions and accounting for tolling), the applicant must provide notice to the city that the application is deemed granted by operation of law. 
K.  Accelerated Permit Terms Due to Invalidation. 
1.  In the event that any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates any portion of Section 6409(a) or any FCC rule that interprets Section 6409(a) such that federal law would not mandate approval for any Section 6409(a) permit, the permit or permits issued in connection with such 6409(a) modification(s) shall automatically expire one year from the effective date of the judicial order. 
2.  A permit holder is not required to remove its improvements approved under the invalidated Section 6409(a) permit if the permit holder submits an application for a conditional use permit or administrative use permit for those improvements before the one-year period ends. 
L.  No Waiver of Standing. The approval of a Section 6409(a) permit shall not be construed to waive any standing by the City to challenge Section 6409(a), any FCC rules that interpret Section 6409(a) or any Section 6409(a) modification. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018; Ord. No. 2301 N.S., § 2, 4-17-2019)  
18.96.070 - Preferred siting and location. 
The following siting and location preferences apply to all proposed new facilities and substantial changes to existing facilities. The community development director may require the applicant to submit an alternative sites analysis and evidence to demonstrate that a proposed facility could not be feasibly installed in a preferred site or location. 
A.  Preferred Siting. To the extent possible, all proposed facilities should be sited according to the following preferences, ordered from most preferred to least preferred: 
1.  Collocations on existing base stations outside the rights-of-way; then 
2.  Collocations on towers outside the rights-of-way; then 
3.  New building-mounted facilities outside the rights-of-way; then 
4.  New towers outside the rights-of-way. 
B.  Preferred Locations — General. All applicants should, to the extent possible, propose new facilities and substantial changes to existing facilities in non-residential zones. 
C.  Preferred Locations — Non-Residential Zones. To the extent possible, all proposed facilities in non-residential zones should be located according to the following preferences, ordered from most preferred to least preferred: 
1.  City owned or controlled parcels; then 
2.  Parcels in the public facilities (PF) zone; then 
3.  Parcels in the industrial (CI, IO, IC, IL, IG) zones; then 
4.  Parcels in the commercial (CN, CG, CH, CS) zones; 
5.  Parcels in the sports recreation leisure (SRL) zone. 
6.  Parcels in the mixed use (MU-D, MU-N, MUF) zones. 
D.  Preferred Locations -Residential and Open Space Zones. If a facility is proposed in a residential (RE, RDL, RDH, RAL, RAM, RAH)), a residential Planned Development, or open space (OS) zone, all facilities should be located according to the following preferences, ordered from most preferred to least preferred: 
1.  City owned or controlled parcels; then 
2.  Parcels that contain non-residential uses and do not contain residential uses; then 
3.  Parcels that contain non-residential conditional uses and do contain residential uses; then 
4.  Parcels that do not contain single-family homes; then 
5.  All other parcels. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018; Ord. No. 2301 N.S., § 3, 4-17-2019)  
18.96.080 - Development standards. 
A.  General Design Standards. All facilities must conform to the following design standards. 
1.  Concealment. All new facilities and substantial changes to existing facilities must incorporate concealment measures and/or techniques appropriate for the proposed location and design. All ground-mounted equipment on private property must be completely concealed to the extent feasible according to the following preferences, ordered from most preferred to least preferred: 
a.  Within an existing structure including, but not limited to, an interior equipment room, mechanical penthouse, or dumpster corral; then 
b.  Within a new structure designed to integrate with or mimic the adjacent existing structure; then 
c.  Within an underground equipment vault if no other feasible above-ground design that complies with subsections (a) or (b) exists. 
2.  Height. 
a.  All new facilities and substantial changes to existing facilities must not exceed the height limit in the applicable zone except as allowed in Paragraph b below. 
b.  The review authority may approve a height exception up to 8 feet above the height limit when a proposed facility is (1) mounted on the rooftop of an existing building; (2) completely concealed; and (3) architecturally integrated into the underlying building. This exception does not apply to any towers or utility poles. 
3.  Setbacks. All facilities must comply with all setback requirements in the applicable zone. 
4.  Collocation. Applicants shall design their facilities to accommodate future collocated facilities to the extent feasible. 
5.  Landscaping. In addition to any landscaping required by the city for concealment or screening purposes, the applicant shall install and maintain additional landscaping to replace any existing landscaping displaced during the construction or installation of the facility. 
6.  Backup or Standby Power Sources and Generators. The city may not approve any fossil fuel-powered backup power sources or generators unless the applicant demonstrates that the facility cannot feasibly achieve its power needs with batteries, fuel cells or other similarly non-polluting, low noise-level means. 
7.  Lights. 
a.  Unless otherwise required under FAA or FCC regulations, applicants may install only timed or motion-sensitive light controllers and lights and must install such lights so as to avoid illumination impacts to adjacent properties to the maximum extent feasible. The city may exempt an applicant from this requirement when the applicant demonstrates a substantial public safety need. 
b.  All aircraft warning lighting must use lighting enclosures that avoid illumination impacts to properties in the city to the maximum extent feasible. 
8.  Noise. All transmission equipment and other equipment (including without limitation air conditioners and sump pumps) associated with the facility must not emit sound that exceeds the applicable limit established in municipal code Chapter 8.28 (Noise). 
9.  Signage. 
a.  A facility may not display any signage or advertisements unless expressly allowed by the city in a written approval, recommended under FCC regulations or required by law or permit condition. 
b.  Every facility shall at all times display signage that accurately identifies the facility owner and provides the facility owner's unique site number, and also provides a local or toll-free telephone number to contact the facility owner's operations center. 
10.  Code Compliance. A permit holder shall design and maintain all facilities in compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, codes, regulations, ordinances, or other rules. 
B.  Tower-Mounted Facilities. 
1.  General Design Preferences. To the extent feasible and appropriate for the proposed location, all new towers applications should be designed according to the following preferences, ordered from most preferred to least preferred: 
a.  Faux architectural features (examples include, but are not limited to, bell towers, clock towers, lighthouses, obelisks, and water tanks); then 
b.  Faux trees; then 
c.  Monopoles that do not conceal the antennas within a concealment device. 
2.  Tower-mounted Equipment. All tower-mounted equipment shall be mounted as close to the vertical support structure as possible to reduce its visual profile. Applicants should mount non-antenna, tower-mounted equipment (including, but not limited to, remote radio units/heads, surge suppressors, and utility demarcation boxes) directly behind the antennas to the maximum extent feasible. 
3.  Ground-mounted Equipment. Ground-mounted equipment shall be concealed with opaque fences or other opaque enclosures. The city may require, as a condition of approval, design and/or landscape features in addition to other concealment when necessary to blend the equipment or enclosure into the surrounding environment. 
4.  Concealment Standards for Faux Trees. All faux tree facilities shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  The canopy shall completely envelop all tower-mounted equipment and extend beyond the tower-mounted equipment at least eighteen inches. 
b.  The canopy shall be naturally tapered to mimic the particular tree species. 
c.  All tower-mounted equipment, including antennas, equipment cabinets, cables, mounts, and brackets, shall be painted flat natural colors to mimic the particular tree species. 
d.  All antennas and other tower-mounted equipment cabinets shall be covered with broadleaf or pine needle "socks" to blend in with the faux foliage. 
e.  The entire vertical structure shall be covered with permanently-affixed three-dimensional faux bark cladding to mimic the particular tree species. 
C.  Building- and Facade-Mounted Facilities. 
1.  General Design Preferences. To the extent feasible and appropriate for the proposed location, all new building and facade mounted facilities should be designed according to the following preferences, ordered from most preferred to least preferred: 
a.  Completely concealed and architecturally integrated facade- or rooftop-mounted base stations which are not visible from any publicly accessible areas at ground level (examples include, but are not limited to, antennas behind existing parapet walls or facades replaced with RF-transparent material and finished to mimic the replaced materials); then 
b.  Completely concealed new structures or appurtenances designed to mimic the support structure's original architecture and proportions (examples include, but are not limited to, cupolas, steeples, chimneys, and water tanks); then 
c.  Facade-mounted facilities incorporated into "pop-out" screen boxes designed to be architecturally consistent with the original support structure; then 
d.  Exposed facade-mounted and rooftop antennas. 
2.  Ground-mounted Equipment. Outdoor ground-mounted equipment associated with base stations must be avoided whenever feasible. In locations visible or accessible to the public, outdoor ground-mounted equipment shall be concealed with opaque fences or landscape features that mimic the adjacent structures (including, but not limited to, dumpster corrals and other accessory structures). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018; Ord. No. 2301 N.S., § 4, 4-17-2019)  
18.96.090 - Operation and maintenance requirements. 
A.  Inspections and Emergencies. The city or its designee may enter onto the facility area to inspect the facility upon reasonable notice to the permit holder. The permit holder shall cooperate with all inspections. The city or its designee may enter the facility and support, repair, disable or remove any elements of the facility in emergencies or when the facility threatens imminent harm to persons or property. 
B.  Contact Information for Responsible Parties. The permit holder shall at all times maintain accurate contact information for all parties responsible for the facility, which shall include a phone number, street mailing address and email address for at least one natural person. All such contact information for responsible parties shall be provided to the community development director upon the community development director's written or verbal request. 
C.  General Maintenance. The site and the facility, including but not limited to all landscaping, fencing and related transmission equipment, shall be maintained in a neat and clean manner and in accordance with all approved permits and conditions of approval. 
D.  Removal of Discontinued Equipment. All equipment and improvements associated with a wireless communications facility shall be removed within 30 days of the discontinuation of the use, and the site shall be restored to its original pre-construction condition. If a permit holder fails to remove a discontinued facility, the city may remove or cause to remove the facility at the permit holder's sole expense. 
E.  Change in Federal or State Regulations. All facilities shall meet the current standards and regulations of the FCC, the California Public Utilities Commission, and any other agency of the federal or state government with the authority to regulate wireless communications providers. If such standards and/or regulations are changed, the wireless communications provider shall bring its facilities into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within ninety days of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal or state agency. Failure to a bring wireless communications facility into compliance with revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the immediate removal of the facility at the wireless communications provider's expense. 
F.  RF Exposure Compliance. All facilities shall comply with all standards and regulations of the FCC and any other state or federal government agency with the authority to regulate radio frequency (RF) exposure standards. Under the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, the city may not deny an application for a wireless telecommunications facility due to perceived health risks if the proposed facility complies with Federal RF exposure standards. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.96.100 - Limited waivers. 
A.  Request for Exemption. An applicant may request a waiver from one or more requirements in this chapter on the basis that a permit denial would effectively prohibit personal wireless services in Morgan Hill. 
B.  Basis for Approval. For the city to approve such an exemption, the applicant must demonstrate with clear and convincing evidence all of the following: 
1.  A significant gap in the applicant's service coverage exists; 
2.  All alternative sites identified in the application review process are either technically infeasible or not potentially available; and 
3.  Permit denial would effectively prohibit personal wireless services in Morgan Hill. 
C.  Applicant Must Demonstrate Basis for Approval. The applicant always bears the burden to demonstrate why an exemption should be granted. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.96.110 - Severability. 
If any section or portion of this chapter is found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such finding shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the chapter, which shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Part 4 - PERMITS AND ADMINISTRATION  
Chapter 18.100 - ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITY 
 
18.100.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter describes the authority and responsibilities of the city council, planning commission, and the community development director in the administration of the zoning code. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.100.020 - Planning agency. 
The City council, planning commission, and community development director function as the planning agency and as the advisory agency in compliance with Government Code Section 65100. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.100.030 - Review and decision-making authority. 
Table 18.100-1 shows the review and decision-making authority of the city council, planning commission, and community development director in the administration of the zoning code. 
Table 18.100-1: Review and Decision-Making Authority 
Type of Action 	Code Location 	Role of Authority [1] 
		Community 
Development 
Director 	Planning 
Commission 	City 
Council 
Legislative Actions 
Development Agreements 	18.116 	Recommend 	Recommend 	Decision 
Zoning Code Text and Map Amendments [2] 	18.114 	Recommend 	Recommend 	Decision 
Permits 
Administrative Use Permits 	18.108.020 	Decision 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Conditional Use Permits 	18.108.030 	Recommend 	Decision 	Appeal 
Design Permits 	18.108.040 	Decision 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Historic Alteration Permits 	18.108.050 	Decision 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Historic Demolition or Relocation Permit 	18.108.060 	Recommend 	Decision 	Appeal 
Sign Permits 	18.88.030 	Decision 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Temporary Use Permit 	18.108.090 	Decision 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Other Approvals 
Minor Exceptions 	18.108.070 	Decision 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Planned Development (PD) Master Plan 	18.30.050 	Recommend 	Recommend 	Decision 
Reasonable Accommodations 	18.118 	Decision 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Variances 	18.108.100 	Recommend 	Decision 	Appeal 
Zoning Clearance 	18.108.110 	Decision 	Appeal 	Appeal 
 
Notes: 
[1] "Recommend" means that the review authority makes a recommendation to a higher decision-making body; "decision" means that the review authority makes the final decision on the matter; "appeal" means that the review authority shall consider and decide appeals of decisions of an earlier decision-making body, in compliance with Chapter 18.112 (Appeals). 
[2] Includes the application of a planned development (PD) combining district designation to a property. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.104 - COMMON PERMIT REQUIREMENTS 
 
18.104.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes procedures for the preparation, filing, and processing of permits required by the zoning code. The term "permit" when used in this chapter refers to any action, permit, or approval listed in Table 18.100-1 (Review and Decision-Making Authority). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.104.020 - Application preparation and filing. 
A.  Pre-Application Conference. 
1.  The city encourages prospective applicants to request a pre-application conference with the development services department before completing and filing a permit application. 
2.  The purpose of this conference is to: 
a.  Inform the applicant of city requirements as they apply to the proposed project; 
b.  Inform the applicant of the city's review process; 
c.  Identify information and materials the city will require with the application, and any necessary technical studies and information relating to the environmental review of the project; and 
d.  Provide guidance to the applicant of possible project alternatives or modifications. 
3.  The pre-application conference and any information provided to prospective applicants by city staff shall not be construed as a recommendation for approval or denial of an application. 
4.  Failure by city staff to identify all permit requirements shall not constitute a waiver of those requirements. 
B.  Application Contents. 
1.  All permit applications shall be filed with the development services department on an official city application form. 
2.  Applications shall be filed with all required fees, information, and materials as specified by the development services department. 
C.  Eligibility for Filing. 
1.  An application may only be filed by the property owner or the property owner's authorized agent. 
2.  The application shall be signed by the property owner or the property owner's authorized agent if written authorization from the owner is filed concurrently with the application. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.104.030 - Application fees. 
A.  Fee Schedule. Fees required to process permit applications are identified in the planning division fee schedule approved by the city council. 
B.  Requirement of Payment. 
1.  The City may deem an application complete and begin processing the application only after all required fees have been paid. 
2.  Failure to pay any required supplemental application fees is a basis for denial or revocation of a permit application. 
C.  Refunds and Withdrawals. 
1.  Application fees cover city costs for public hearings, mailings, staff and consultant time, and the other activities involved in processing applications. Consequently, the city will not refund fees for a denied application. 
2.  In the case of an application withdrawal, the community development director may authorize a partial refund of a deposit account based upon the pro-rated costs to date and the status of the application at the time of withdrawal. 
3.  Flat fees submitted in conjunction with a permit application are non-refundable. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.104.040 - Application review. 
A.  Review for Completeness. 
1.  Initial Review. The development services department shall review each application for completeness and accuracy before it is accepted as being complete and officially filed. 
2.  Basis for Determination. The development services department's determination of completeness shall be based on the city's list of required application contents and any additional written instructions provided to the applicant in a pre-application conference and during the initial application review period. 
3.  Notification of Applicant. Within thirty days of application filing, the development services department shall inform the applicant in writing that the application is complete and has been accepted for processing, or that the application is incomplete and that additional information is required. 
4.  Appeal of Determination. When the development services department has determined that an application is incomplete, and the applicant believes that the application is complete or that the information requested by the development services department is not required, the applicant may appeal the development services department's determination in compliance with Chapter 18.112 (Appeals). 
5.  Submittal of Additional Information. 
a.  When the development services department determines that an application is incomplete, additional required information shall be submitted in writing. 
b.  Resubmitted information shall be subject to a new thirty-day period of review for completeness. 
6.  Environmental Information. After the development services department has accepted an application as complete, the department may require the applicant to submit additional information for the environmental review of the project in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.104.050 - Multiple permit applications. 
A.  Concurrent Filing. An applicant for a development project that requires the filing of more than one application (e.g., zoning map amendment and a conditional use permit) shall file all related applications concurrently unless the concurrent filing requirements are waived by the community development director. 
B.  Concurrent Processing. The development services department shall process multiple applications for the same project concurrently. Projects requiring multiple permit applications shall be reviewed and acted upon by the highest review authority designated by the zoning code for any of the applications (e.g., a project requiring a zoning map amendment and a conditional use permit shall have both applications decided by the city council, instead of the planning commission acting on the conditional use permit). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.104.060 - Project evaluation and staff reports. 
A.  Staff Evaluation. The development services department shall review all permit applications to determine if they comply with the zoning code, the general plan, and other applicable city policies and regulations. 
B.  Staff Report. For all permit applications requiring review by the planning commission or city council, the development services department shall prepare a staff report describing the proposed project and including, where appropriate, a recommendation to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. 
C.  Report Distribution. Staff reports shall be furnished to the applicant at the same time as they are provided to the review authority before action on the application. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.104.070 - Environmental review. 
A.  CEQA Review. After acceptance of a complete application, the development services department shall review the project in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) to determine whether: 
1.  The proposed project is exempt from the requirements of CEQA; 
2.  The proposed project is not a project as defined by CEQA; 
3.  A Negative declaration (ND) may be issued; 
4.  A Mitigated negative declaration (MND) may be issued; 
5.  An Environmental impact report (EIR) is required; or 
6.  A previously prepared ND/MND or EIR may be used. 
B.  Compliance with CEQA. These determinations and, where required, the preparation of appropriate environmental documents shall be in compliance with CEQA and any adopted City CEQA Guidelines. 
C.  Special Studies Required. Special studies, paid for in advance by the applicant, may be required to supplement the city's CEQA compliance review. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.104.080 - Applications deemed withdrawn. 
A.  Response Required. If an applicant does not pay required supplemental fees or provide information requested in writing by the development services department within nine months following the date of the letter, the application shall expire and be deemed withdrawn without any further action by the city. 
B.  Resubmittal. After the expiration of an application, future city consideration shall require the submittal of a new complete application and associated filing fees. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.104.090 - Notice of hearing. 
When the zoning code requires a noticed public hearing, the city shall provide notice of the hearing in conformance with Government Code Section 65090 et. seq. and as described in this section. 
A.  Content of Notice. Notice of a public hearing shall include all of the following information, as applicable. 
1.  Hearing Information. The date, time, and place of the hearing; the name of the hearing body; and the phone number, email address, and street address of the development services department where an interested person could call or visit to obtain additional information. 
2.  Project Information. The name of the applicant, the city's file number assigned to the application, a general explanation of the matter to be considered, and a general description of the location of the subject property. 
3.  Statement on Environmental Document. A statement that the proposed project is determined to be exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), or that a negative declaration, mitigated negative declaration, or environmental impact report has been prepared for the project. The hearing notice shall state if the hearing body will consider approval of the CEQA determination or document prepared for the proposed project. 
4.  Zoning Map Amendments. On-site public notices posted for proposed zoning map amendments shall consist of the words "notice of proposed change of zone" printed in plain type with letters not less than one and one-half inches in height. 
B.  Method of Notice Distribution. Notice of a public hearing shall be given at least ten days before the hearing date using the methods required by Government Code Section 65091. 
1.  Mailing. Where required, notice shall be mailed or delivered at least ten days before the scheduled hearing to the following recipients: 
a.  Project Site Owners and the Applicant. The owners of the subject property or the owner's authorized agent, and the applicant. 
b.  Adjacent Property Owners. The owners of the real property located within a radius of three hundred feet from the exterior boundaries of the subject property. 
c.  Local Agencies. Each local agency expected to provide roads, schools, sewerage, streets, water, or other essential facilities or services to the subject property, whose ability to provide those facilities and services may be significantly affected. 
d.  Persons Requesting Notice. Any person who has filed a written request for notice with the development services department. 
e.  Other Persons. Any other person, whose property, in the judgment of the development services department, might be affected by the proposed project. 
2.  Alternative to Mailing. If the number of property owners to whom notice would be mailed in compliance with Paragraph 1 above is more than one thousand, the development services department may provide notice by placing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth page in one or more local newspapers of general circulation at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
3.  Additional Notice. In addition to the types of notice required above, the development services department may require additional notice as determined necessary or desirable by the community development director. 
4.  Failure to Receive Notice. The validity of the hearing shall not be affected by the failure of any resident, property owner, or community member to receive a mailed notice. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.104.100 - Notice of pending action. 
A.  For administrative use permit and minor exception applications reviewed by the community development director, public notice shall state that the city is considering the application and that the community development director will hold a public hearing for the application only upon receiving written request for a hearing by a specified date. 
B.  If the city receives a request for a public hearing by a specified date, the community development director shall hold a noticed public hearing on the application consistent with this chapter. 
C.  If no request for a public hearing is received by the specified date, the community development director shall act on the application without a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.104.110 - Scheduling of hearing. 
After the completion of any environmental document required by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), and a development services department staff report, a matter requiring a public hearing shall be scheduled on the next available agenda reserved for public hearings, but no sooner than any minimum time period established by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.104.120 - Hearing procedure. 
A.  General. Hearings shall be conducted in a manner consistent with the procedures adopted or endorsed by the hearing body. 
B.  Time and Place of Hearing. A hearing shall be held at the date, time, and place for which notice was given, unless the required quorum of hearing body members is not present. 
C.  Continued Hearing. Any hearing may be continued from time to time without further notice, provided that the chair of the hearing body announces the date, time, and place to which the hearing will be continued before the adjournment or recess of the hearing. 
D.  Motion of Intent. The hearing body may announce a tentative decision, and defer action on a final decision until appropriate findings and conditions of approval have been prepared. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.104.130 - Recommendations. 
After a public hearing resulting in a recommendation to another hearing body, the recommendation shall be forwarded to the other hearing body. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.104.140 - Decision and notice. 
A.  Date of Action. With the exception of appeals to the city council, the hearing body shall take action on the matter being considered following the close of the public hearing. The hearing body shall also take action on projects within the following timeframe as required by the California Environment Quality Act (CEQA): 
1.  Within sixty days of the date a negative declaration or mitigated negative declaration has been adopted for project approval, the city shall take action on the accompanying discretionary project. 
2.  Within one hundred eighty days from the date the decision-making authority certifies a final environmental impact report (EIR), the city shall take action on the accompanying discretionary project. 
B.  Decision. 
1.  The hearing body may announce and record its decision on the matter being considered at the conclusion of a scheduled hearing, or make a motion of intent and continue the matter to a later meeting agenda. 
2.  At the conclusion of a hearing conducted by the community development director, the community development director may choose to refer the matter to the planning commission for review and final decision. Referral to the planning commission may be chosen in cases of unusual public sensitivity, controversy, or complexity relating to the requested approval. 
C.  Notice of Decision. 
1.  Following a final decision, the development services department shall provide notice of the final action to the applicant and to any person who specifically requested notice of the final action. 
2.  Notice of a final action shall contain applicable findings, conditions of approval, reporting and monitoring requirements, and the procedure for appeal of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.104.150 - Conditions of approval. 
The review authority may attach conditions of approval to a permit application to achieve consistency with the general plan, zoning code, and any applicable specific plan or area plan adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.104.160 - Effective date of decision. 
A.  City Council Decision. A decision of the city council is final and shall be effective on the date the decision is rendered. 
B.  Other Decisions. The decision of the community development director or planning commission is final and effective after five p.m. on the tenth day following the date the decision is rendered, when no appeal to the decision has been filed in compliance with Chapter 18.122 (Appeals). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.104.170 - Issuance of permits. 
Permits shall not be issued until the effective date, provided that no appeal of the review authority's decision has been filed in compliance with Chapter 18.112 (Appeals). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.104.180 - Conformance to approved plans. 
A.  Compliance. All work performed under an approved permit shall be in compliance with the approved drawings and plans and any conditions of approval imposed by the review authority. 
B.  Changes. Changes to an approved project shall be submitted and processed in compliance with Section 18.104.200 (Changes to an Approved Project) below. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.104.190 - Performance guarantees. 
A.  Security Required. The community development director may require an applicant to provide adequate security to guarantee the proper completion of any approved work or compliance with any conditions of approval. 
B.  Form of Security. The security shall be in the form of cash, a certified or cashier's check, or a performance bond executed by the applicant and a corporate surety authorized to do business in California and approved by the city. 
C.  Amount of Security. The community development director shall determine the amount of the security necessary to ensure proper completion of the approved work or compliance with any conditions of approval. 
D.  Duration of Security. The security shall remain in effect until all work has been completed and conditions fulfilled to the satisfaction of the community development director or until a specified warranty period has elapsed. 
E.  Release of Security. The security deposit shall be released upon completion of the approved work or compliance with any conditions of approval. 
F.  Failure to Comply. 
1.  Upon failure to complete any work or comply with conditions, the city may complete the work or fulfill the condition, and may collect from the applicant or surety all costs incurred, including administrative, engineering, legal, and inspection costs. 
2.  Any unused portion of the security shall be refunded to the funding source. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.104.200 - Changes to an approved project. 
An approved project shall be established only as approved by the review authority, except when changes to the project are approved in compliance with this section. 
A.  Request for a Change. An applicant shall request desired changes in writing, and shall submit appropriate supporting materials and an explanation for the request. 
B.  Notice and Hearing. If the original approval required a noticed public hearing, a noticed public hearing is required for the requested change, except as allowed by Subsection C (Minor Changes). 
C.  Minor Changes. The community development director may authorize minor changes to an approved project if the changes comply with all of the following criteria: 
1.  The requested changes are consistent with the zoning code. 
2.  The requested changes are consistent with the spirit and intent of the original approval. 
3.  The requested changes do not involve a feature of the project that was a basis for findings in a negative declaration, mitigated negative declaration, or environmental impact report for the project. 
4.  The requested changes do not involve a feature of the project that was a basis for conditions of approval for the project. 
5.  The requested changes do not involve a feature of the project that was a specific consideration by the review authority in granting the approval. 
6.  The requested changes do not involve any expansion, intensification, or increase in size of the land use or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.104.210 - Time limits and extensions. 
A.  Expiration of Permit. 
1.  A permit not exercised within two years shall expire and become void, except where an extension of time is approved as allowed by Subsection C (Extension of Time) below. 
2.  A permit shall expire and become void if the permitted land use ceases for one year or longer. 
B.  Exercised Defined. A permit or approval shall be considered exercised when: 
1.  A building permit is issued and construction has commenced; 
2.  A certificate of occupancy is issued; or 
3.  The land use is established. 
C.  Extension of Time. The community development director may approve extensions to a permit in the following manner: 
1.  The community development director may approve up to two two-year extensions (four years total) to a permit. 
2.  The applicant shall submit to the development services department a written request for an extension of time no later than ten days before the expiration of the permit. 
3.  The community development director may extend the permit if the applicant has proceeded in good faith and has exercised due diligence in efforts to exercise the permit in a timely manner. 
4.  The burden of proof is on the applicant to demonstrate that the permit should be extended. 
5.  The community development director may choose to refer any extension of time requests to the planning commission for review and final decision. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.104.220 - Resubmittals. 
A.  Resubmittals Prohibited. For a period of twelve months following the denial or revocation of a permit, the city shall not accept an application for the same or substantially similar permit for the same site, unless the denial or revocation was made without prejudice, and so stated in the record. 
B.  Determination. The community development director shall determine whether the new application is for a permit which is the same or substantially similar to the previously denied or revoked permit. 
C.  Appeal. The determination of the community development director may be appealed to the planning commission, in compliance with Chapter 18.112 (Appeals). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.104.230 - Permits to run with the land. 
Permits issued in compliance with the zoning code remain valid upon change of ownership of the site, structure, or land use that was the subject of the permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.104.240 - Permit revocation. 
Any discretionary permit may be revoked as provided for in this section. 
A.  Review Authority. 
1.  A permit may be revoked by the review authority which originally approved the permit. 
2.  In instances where the community development director was the approval authority, the community development director may choose to refer any action to revoke a permit to the planning commission for review and final decision. 
B.  Property Owner Notification. Prior to initiating proceedings to revoke a permit, the community development director shall notify the property owner of the permit violations, identify necessary corrections, and establish a reasonable period within which the property owner shall correct the violations. If the property owner has not corrected the violation within the specified period of time, the city may proceed with the process to revoke the permit. 
C.  Public Notice and Hearing. Public notice and hearing for any action to revoke a permit shall be provided in compliance with Section 18.104.090 (Notice of Hearing). 
D.  Findings. The review authority may revoke a permit only if one or more of the following findings can be made: 
1.  The applicant or property owner has altered the circumstances under which the permit was granted to a degree that one or more of the findings required to grant the original permit can no longer be made. 
2.  Permit issuance was based on misrepresentation by the applicant, either through the omission of a material statement in the application, or in public hearing testimony. 
3.  One or more conditions of approval have been violated, or have not been complied with or fulfilled. 
4.  The use or structure for which the permit was granted no longer exists or ceases for a continuous period of at least twelve months. 
5.  The applicant or property owner has failed or refused to allow inspections for compliance. 
6.  Improvements authorized by the permit are in violation of the zoning code or any law, ordinance, regulation, or statute. 
7.  The use or structure is being operated or maintained in a manner which constitutes a nuisance. 
E.  Effect of Revocation. The revocation of a permit shall have the effect of terminating the approval and denying the privileges granted by the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.108 - SPECIFIC PERMIT REQUIREMENTS 
 
18.108.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter identifies procedures for specific types of permits and approvals required by the zoning code. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.108.020 - Administrative use permits. 
A.  Purpose. An Administrative Use Permit is required for land uses that are generally appropriate within a district, but potentially undesirable on a particular parcel or in large numbers. An administrative use permit is a discretionary action that enables the community development director to ensure that a proposed use is consistent with the general plan and will not create negative impacts to adjacent properties or the general public. 
B.  When Required. Land uses that require an administrative use permit are shown in the land use regulation tables for each zoning district found in Part 2 (Zoning District Standards). 
C.  Review Authority. The community development director takes action on Administrative Use Permit applications. The community development director may refer any administrative use permit application to the planning commission for review and final decision. 
D.  Public Notice and Hearing. Public notice of a pending action on an administrative use permit application shall be provided in compliance with Section 18.104.100 (Notice of Pending Action). The community development director shall hold a public hearing for a minor use permit application only upon receiving a written request for a public hearing as provided in Section 18.104.090. 
E.  Findings for Approval. To approve an administrative use permit, the review authority shall make all of the following findings: 
1.  The proposed use is allowed in the applicable district. 
2.  The proposed use is consistent with the general plan, zoning code, and any applicable specific plan or area plan adopted by the city council. 
3.  The site is suitable and adequate for the proposed use. 
4.  The location, size, design, and operating characteristics of the proposed use will be compatible with the existing and future land uses in the vicinity of the property. 
5.  The proposed use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
6.  The proposed use would not have a substantial adverse effect in traffic circulation and on the planned capacity of the street system. 
7.  The proposed use is properly located within the city and adequately served by existing or planned services and infrastructure. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.108.030 - Conditional use permits. 
A.  Purpose. A conditional use permit is required for land uses that are generally appropriate within a district, but potentially undesirable on a particular parcel or in large numbers. A conditional use permit is a discretionary action that enables the planning commission to ensure that a proposed use is consistent with the general plan and will not create negative impacts to adjacent properties or the general public. 
B.  Review Authority. The planning commission shall review and act on all conditional use permit applications. 
C.  When Required. Land uses that require a conditional use permit are shown in the land use regulation tables for each zoning district found in Part 2 (Zoning Districts and Overlay Zones). 
D.  Public Notice and Hearing. The planning commission shall review and act on a conditional use permit application at a noticed public hearing in compliance with Chapter 18.104 (Common Permit Requirements). 
E.  Findings for Approval. To approve a conditional use permit, the planning commission shall make all of the following findings: 
1.  The proposed use is allowed in the applicable district. 
2.  The proposed use is consistent with the general plan, zoning code, and any applicable specific plan or area plan adopted by the city council. 
3.  The site is suitable and adequate for the proposed use. 
4.  The location, size, design, and operating characteristics of the proposed use will be compatible with the existing and future land uses in the vicinity of the property. 
5.  The proposed use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
6.  The proposed use would not have a substantial adverse effect in traffic circulation and on the planned capacity of the street system. 
7.  The proposed use is properly located within the city and adequately served by existing or planned services and infrastructure. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.108.040 - Design permit. 
A.  Purpose. A design permit is a discretionary action that enables the City to ensure that proposed development exhibits high quality design consistent with the general plan and any other applicable specific plan or area plan adopted by the city council. The design permit process is also intended to ensure that new development and uses are compatible with their surroundings and minimize negative impacts on neighboring properties. 
B.  Review Authority. 
1.  The community development director shall review and act on all design permit applications. 
2.  The community development director may refer any design permit application to the planning commission for review and final decision. 
3.  The city council shall review and act on all design permit applications for new city projects (e.g., new municipal buildings, parks) determined by the community development director to be significant in accordance with Subsection D below. 
C.  When Required. The following types of projects require a design review permit: 
1.  Three or more new residential units. 
2.  One or more new residential unit on a sensitive site as defined in Subsection E (Sensitive Sites) below. 
3.  New non-residential buildings, structures physical site improvements determined to be significant in accordance with Subsection D (Significant Projects) below. 
4.  Additions to existing buildings, structures, or other physical site improvements visible from a public right-of-way and determined to be significant in accordance with Subsection D (Significant Projects) below. Single-family homes are exempt unless the home is on a sensitive site as defined in Subsection E below. 
5.  Additions to existing residences located on a sensitive site as defined in Subsection E below. 
6.  Site alterations that change the topography of the currently developed site area on a sensitive site as defined in Subsection E below. 
7.  Relocation of existing buildings, structures or other physical site improvements. 
8.  Exterior changes to existing buildings, structures or other site improvements determined to be significant in accordance with Subsection D (Significant Projects) below. Single-family homes are exempt unless the home is on a sensitive site as defined in Subsection E below. 
9.  Grading of more than fifty cubic yards on slopes greater than ten percent. 
10.  New accessory structures including secondary dwelling units or guest homes on a sensitive site as defined in Subsection E below. 
11.  City projects, including but not limited to municipal buildings, parks and open spaces, landscaping within the right-of-way, and street furniture. 
12.  Other projects determined by the community development director to be significant or which may adversely affect the environment or adjacent development. 
D.  Significant Projects. 
1.  The community development director shall determine whether a project in Subsection C above is significant and thus requires a design review permit. When determining if a project is significant, the community development director shall consider: 
a.  The visual prominence of the project when viewed from the public right-of-way and/or private property; 
b.  The project height, mass, and area of site disturbance; 
c.  The type, character, and proximity of adjacent development; and 
d.  The potential of the project to create adverse impacts on adjacent uses or the community at large. 
2.  The community development director's determination that a project is significant may be appealed to the planning commission in accordance with Chapter 18.112 (Appeals). 
E.  Sensitive Sites. 
1.  The community development director may require a design permit for a project located on a sensitive site where a design permit may not otherwise be required. 
2.  The community development director's determination that a site is sensitive and that a design permit is required may be appealed to the planning commission in accordance with Chapter 18.112 (Appeals). 
3.  The city shall consider a site to be sensitive if the site: 
a.  Contains a notable natural feature such as a hillside, ridgeline, watercourse, major drainage way or floodplain; 
b.  Contains or is immediately adjacent to a mapped riparian habitat area or a mapped critical habitat for federally listed endangered species; 
c.  Is within an official earthquake fault zone as defined in Section 18.30.060 (Active Fault Surface Rupture Overlay Zone); 
d.  Contains slopes in excess of ten percent or within the Hillside Combining District; 
e.  Is within a seismic hazard zone as defined in Chapter 18.70 (Geologic Hazards); 
f.  Is within two hundred feet of a lake or shore; 
g.  Is within fifty feet of a stream or watercourse; or 
h.  Contains known, mapped, potentially significant or listed cultural or historic resources as defined in Chapter 18.60 (Historical Resources). 
F.  Exempt Projects. In all cases the following projects shall be exempt from the requirement to obtain a design permit: 
1.  Building additions less than five hundred square feet which will not be visible from a public right-of-way. 
2.  Exterior modifications to existing buildings that are not visible from any public right-of-way. 
3.  Parking lot resurfacing and re-striping, or minor alterations to parking lots, provided the number of spaces is not reduced or the property provides the minimum number of on-site parking spaces as required by Chapter 18.72 (Parking and Loading). 
4.  Replacement or addition of existing windows, doors, or roofing materials. 
5.  Repainting or retexturing exterior building walls with similar or higher quality materials. 
6.  Addition of plant material and/or planter areas that occupy less than 20 percent of the site or removal or modification of a minor amount of existing landscape area. 
7.  Replacement of existing awnings or trellises, or the addition of an awnings or trellises less than five feet in width. 
8.  Replacement of existing walls and fencing. 
9.  Addition, relocation, or replacement of trash enclosures, mechanical screens, and light fixtures. 
10.  Remodel or addition of ramps, pathways or parking to accommodate the requirements of federal, state or local accessibility laws. 
11.  Murals with or without signage that comply with Chapter 18.76 (Signs) and any applicable specific plan or area plan. 
12.  Other projects determined by the community development director to be a minor or incidental modification to an existing building, structure, or site feature. 
G.  Public Notice and Hearing. 
1.  Public notice of a pending action on a design permit application reviewed by the community development director shall be provided in compliance with Section 18.104.100 (Notice of Pending Action). The community development director shall hold a public hearing for a design permit application only upon receiving a written request for a public hearing as provided in Section 18.104.10. 
2.  The planning commission and city council shall review and act on a Design Permit application at a noticed public hearing in compliance with Chapter 18.104 (Common Permit Requirements). 
H.  Design Review Criteria. When considering design permit applications, the city shall evaluate applications to ensure that they satisfy the following criteria, comply with the development standards of the zoning district, conform to policies of the general plan and any applicable specific plan, and are consistent with any other policies or guidelines the city council may adopt for this purpose. To obtain design permit approval, projects must satisfy these criteria to the extent they apply. 
1.  Community Character. The overall project design including site plan, height, massing, architectural style, materials, and landscaping contribute to Morgan Hill's unique small-town character and distinctive sense of place. 
2.  Neighborhood Compatibility. The project is designed to respect and complement adjacent properties. The project height, massing, and intensity is compatible with the scale of nearby buildings. The project design incorporates measures to minimize traffic, parking, noise, and odor impacts on nearby residential properties. 
3.  Pedestrian Environment. Buildings incorporate design features that support an active public realm and an inviting pedestrian environment. 
4.  Privacy. The orientation and location of buildings, entrances, windows, doors, decks, and other building features minimizes privacy impacts on adjacent properties and provides adequate privacy for project occupants. 
5.  Safety. The project promotes public safety and minimizes opportunities for crime through design features such as property access controls (e.g., placement of entrances, fences), increased visibility and features that promote a sense of ownership of outdoor space. 
6.  Massing and Scale. The massing and scale of buildings complement and respect neighboring structures and correspond to the scale of the human form. Large volumes are divided into small components through varying wall planes, heights, and setbacks. Building placement and massing avoids impacts to public views and solar access. 
7.  Architectural Style. Buildings feature an architectural style that is compatible with the surrounding built and natural environment, is an authentic implementation of appropriate established architectural styles, and reflects Morgan Hill's unique small-town character. 
8.  Articulation and Visual Interest. Building facades are well articulated to add visual interest, distinctiveness, and human scale. Building elements such as roofs, doors, windows, and porches are part of an integrated design and relate to the human scale. Architectural details such as trim, eaves, window boxes, and brackets contribute to the visual interest of the building. 
9.  Materials. Building facades include a mix of natural, high-quality, and durable materials that are appropriate to the architectural style, enhance building articulation, and are compatible with surrounding development. 
10.  Parking and Access. Parking areas are located and designed to minimize visual impacts and support a pedestrian-friendly environment. Safe and convenient connections are provided for pedestrians and bicyclists. 
11.  Landscaping. Landscaping is an integral part of the overall project design, is appropriate to the site and structures, and enhances the surrounding area. 
12.  Open Space and Public Places. Single-family dwellings feature inviting front yards that enhance Morgan Hill's residential neighborhoods. Multi-family residential projects include public and private open space that is attractive, accessible, and functional. Non-residential development provides semi-public outdoor spaces, such as plazas and courtyards, which help support pedestrian activity within an active and engaging public realm. 
13.  Signs. The number, location, size, and design of signs complement the project design and are compatible with the surrounding context. 
14.  Lighting. Exterior lighting is an integral part of the project design with light fixtures designed, located, and positioned to minimize illumination of the sky and adjacent properties. 
15.  Accessory Structures. The design of detached garages, sheds, fences, walls, and other accessory structures relate to the primary structure and are compatible with adjacent properties. 
16.  Mechanical Equipment, Trash Receptacles, and Utilities. Mechanical equipment, trash receptacles, and utilities are contained within architectural enclosures or fencing, sited in unobtrusive locations, and/or screened by landscaping. 
I.  Residential Design Criteria. In addition to the criteria in Subsection H above, new residential development that requires a design permit shall also comply with the design criteria in Chapter 18.36 (Residential Design Criteria). 
J.  Findings for Approval. To approve a design permit, the review authority shall make all of the following findings: 
1.  The proposed project is consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan, area plan, or other design policies and regulations adopted by the city council. 
2.  The proposed project complies with all applicable provisions of the zoning code and municipal code. 
3.  The proposed project substantially complies with all applicable design standards and guidelines contained in the design review handbook. 
4.  The proposed project has been reviewed in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
5.  The proposed development will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or materially injurious to the properties or improvements in the vicinity. 
6.  The proposed project complies with all applicable design review criteria in Subsection H above. 
7.  For new residential development, the project complies with commitments made through the residential development control system (RDCS). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.108.050 - Historic alteration permit. 
See Section 18.60.080 (Historic Alteration Permits). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.108.060 - Historic demolition or relocation permit. 
See Section 18.60.090 (Historic Demolition or Relocation Permits). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.108.070 - Minor Exceptions 
A.  Purpose. A minor exception allows for small deviations from development standards to accommodate projects which meet the needs of property owners, are consistent with the purpose of the zoning code and general plan, and do not negatively impact neighboring properties or the community at large. 
B.  When Allowed. 
1.  Permitted Exceptions. The city may approve a minor exception to allow for the following physical development standards: 
a.  Maximum fence and wall height as allowed by Section 18.52.050 (Exceptions to Height Limits) 
b.  Minimum setbacks as allowed by Section 18.56.030 (Setback Exceptions) 
c.  Maximum lot coverage as allowed by Section 18.56.040 (Lot Coverage Exceptions) 
d.  Up to ten percent of the minimum lot width in the applicable zoning district to facilitate the subdivision of an existing infill lot of record from one to two lots. 
e.  Maximum building height as allowed by Section 18.56.020 (Height Exceptions) 
f.  Number of required on-site parking spaces and dimensional standards for parking spaces, driveways, parking lots, and loading areas as allowed by Section 18.72.060.K (Adjustments to Parking Design and Development Standards). 
g.  Other similar dimensional standards up to ten percent of the required standard with planning commission approval. 
2.  Excluded Modifications. The city may not approve minor exception for: 
a.  Lot area or depth; 
b.  Minimum number of off-street parking spaces; 
c.  Maximum residential density; and 
d.  Maximum floor area ratio (FAR). 
C.  Review Authority. 
1.  The community development director shall review and take action on minor modifications applications listed in Paragraph B.1(a) through B.1(e) above. 
2.  Planning commission shall review and take action on all other requested exceptions as allowed by Paragraph B.1(f) above. 
D.  Public Notice and Hearing. 
1.  Public notice of a pending action on a minor exception application reviewed by the community development director shall be provided in compliance with Section 18.104.100 (Notice of Pending Action). The community development director shall hold a public hearing for a minor exception application only upon receiving a written request for a public hearing as provided in Section 18.104.100. 
2.  The planning commission shall review and act on a minor exception application at a noticed public hearing in compliance with Chapter 18.104 (Common Permit Requirements). 
E.  Findings for Approval. To approve a minor exception application, the review authority shall make all of the following findings: 
1.  The exception will be compatible with adjacent structures and uses and is consistent with the character of the neighborhood or district where it is located. 
2.  The exception will not adversely impact neighboring properties or the community at large. 
3.  The exception is necessary due to unique characteristics of the subject property, structure, or use. 
4.  The modification is consistent with the purpose of the zoning district, the general plan, and any applicable specific plan or area plan adopted by the city council. 
5.  The exception will not establish an undesirable precedent. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.108.080 - Sign permits. 
See Section 18.88.030.A (Sign Permits). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.108.090 - Temporary use permits. 
A.  Purpose. A temporary use permit is a discretionary permit to allow short term activities that are compatible with surrounding uses and when conducted in compliance with this section and Section 18.92.150 (Temporary Uses and Structures). 
B.  When Required. Types of temporary uses requiring a temporary use permit are identified in Section 18.92.150.C (Temporary Uses Requiring a Use Permit). 
C.  Timing of Application. Applications for a temporary use permit shall be submitted a minimum of thirty days prior to the establishment of the temporary use. 
D.  Review Authority. The community development director shall review and act on all temporary use permit applications. 
E.  Public Notice and Hearing. Public notice and hearing is not required for the community development director's decision on a temporary use permit application. 
F.  Findings for Approval. To approve a temporary use permit, the community development director shall make all of the following findings: 
1.  The proposed temporary use is consistent with the general plan, zoning code, and any applicable specific plan or area plan adopted by the city council. 
2.  The location, size, design, and operating characteristics of the proposed temporary use will be compatible with the land uses in the vicinity of the property. 
3.  The proposed temporary use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
4.  The site for the proposed temporary use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the temporary use without negatively impacting properties adjacent and near to the site. 
5.  The site for the proposed temporary use is adequately served by streets and parking areas to accommodate 
G.  Conditions of Approval. The community development director may impose conditions on the approval of a temporary use permit to ensure consistency with this section and the zoning code. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to the following: 
1.  Provision for temporary parking facilities, including vehicle ingress and egress. 
2.  Measures to prevent or reduce nuisance factors such as glare, excessive illumination, noise, vibration, smoke, dust, dirt, odors, gases, and heat. 
3.  Regulation of placement, height, size, and location of structures, facilities, landscaping and equipment, including provision for buffering and separation. 
4.  Provision for sanitary facilities and for waste collection and disposal. 
5.  Measures to promote safety and security. 
6.  Regulation of signs and other attention-gaining devices. 
7.  Regulation of operating hours and duration of the temporary use. 
8.  Regulation of the hours and duration of set-up and dismantling activities. 
9.  Any other conditions that will ensure the operation of the proposed temporary use is conducted in an orderly, efficient manner and in accordance with the intent and purpose of the zoning code. 
H.  Hold Harmless Agreement. As a condition of approval for a temporary use permit, the applicant shall agree in writing to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the city, its officers, officials, agents, and employees from any liability or claims for damages due to the granting of the temporary use permit or on account of injury to any person, loss of life, or damage to property caused by, or arising out of, activities authorized by the temporary use permit. 
I.  Cash Deposit. 
1.  For temporary uses that physically changes, alters and/or improves a site, the applicant shall submit to the city a minimum five hundred dollars cash deposit prior to the issuance of the temporary use permit. The cash deposit is intended to defray the cost of cleaning the site if the applicant fails to leave the property in a presentable and satisfactory condition and to guarantee removal of any temporary uses or structures. 
2.  After completion of the temporary use, the city shall inspect the site and determine if it has been returned to a presentable and satisfactory condition. The city shall return the cash deposit to the applicant upon finding that the deposit is not needed to clean the site or remove any temporary use of structures. 
3.  If an applicant does not return the site to a presentable and satisfactory condition, the city may use all or some of the cash deposit to clean the site or remove any temporary use of structures. 
4.  The community development director may waive this cash deposit requirement upon finding that the requirement would be an unnecessary hardship for the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.108.100 - Variances. 
A.  Purpose. A Variance is a discretionary permit that allows for deviation from physical development standards in the zoning code. The city may grant a variance only when the strict application of development standards creates a unique hardship due to unusual circumstances associated with the property. 
B.  When Allowed. 
1.  Allowable Variances. The city may grant a variance to allow for deviation from any physical development standard that applies to the subject property. Examples of physical development standards include height, setbacks, open space, floor area ratio (FAR), and off-street parking requirements. 
2.  Variances Not Allowed. A variance may not be granted to: 
a.  Permit a use other than a use permitted in the zoning district as specified in Part 2 (Zoning District Standards). 
b.  Reduce the minimum lot size for single-family dwellings or minimum site area per dwelling unit requirements for multi-family developments. 
c.  Allow deviation from a requirement of the general plan. 
C.  Review Authority. The planning commission shall review and take action on all variance applications. 
D.  Public Notice and Hearing. The planning commission shall review and act on a variance application at a noticed public hearing in compliance with Chapter 18.104 (Common Permit Requirements). 
E.  Findings for Approval. To approve a variance, the planning commission shall make all of the following findings: 
1.  There are unique circumstances applicable to the subject property, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, that do not generally apply to other properties in the vicinity or in the same zone as the subject property. 
2.  The strict application of the zoning code requirements would deprive the subject property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity or in the same zone as the subject property. 
3.  The variance is necessary to preserve a substantial property right possessed by other property in the vicinity or in the same zone as the subject property. 
4.  The variance will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or be injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity or in the same zone as the subject property. 
5.  The variance does not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity or in the same zone as the subject property. 
F.  Precedent. The approval of a variance shall not set the precedent for the granting of any future variance. Each application shall be considered only on its individual merits. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.108.110 - Zoning clearance. 
A.  Purpose. A zoning clearance is a ministerial procedure used by the development services department to verify that a proposed use, structure, or business complies with the zoning code. Zoning clearances are processed as part of a building permit, grading permit, or business license application and do not require the submittal of a separate permit application. 
B.  When Required. A zoning clearance is required prior to the issuance of any building permit, grading permit, or businesses license. 
C.  Review Authority. The development services department shall take action on all zoning clearances. 
D.  Public Notice and Hearing. No public notice or hearing is required for a zoning clearance. 
E.  Review and Action. The development services department shall review building permit, grading permit, and business license applications to verify compliance with the zoning code. If the project complies with the zoning code, the department shall approve the zoning clearance. Department staff shall attach a record of the approved zoning clearance to the approved building permit, grading permit, or business license application. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.112 - APPEALS 
 
18.112.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes procedures for the appeal of actions and decisions made by the planning commission and the community development director. This chapter supplements general procedures for appeals to the city council in municipal code Chapter 1.20 (Appellate Procedure). In the case of any conflict between this chapter and Chapter 1.20, this chapter governs. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.112.020 - Appeal subjects and jurisdiction. 
A.  Community Development Director Decisions. Any decision or interpretation of the community development director may be appealed to the planning commission. 
B.  Planning Commission Decisions. Any decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.112.030 - Filing and processing of appeals. 
A.  Eligibility. Any person may submit an appeal of a decision by the community development director or the planning commission. City officials and employees may appeal decisions as affected residents. 
B.  Timing of Appeal. An appeal shall be filed within ten calendar days following the date the decision was rendered, unless a longer appeal period is specified as part of the project approval. 
C.  Form of Appeal. 
1.  An appeal shall be submitted in writing on an official city application form together with all required application fees. 
2.  The appeal application shall state the pertinent facts and the basis for the appeal. 
3.  The whole decision or part of the decision may be appealed. If an appellant chooses, an appeal may be taken solely from any finding, action, or condition. 
D.  Effect of Appeal. Once an appeal is filed, any action on the associated project is suspended until the appeal is processed and a final decision is rendered by the review authority. 
E.  Report and Scheduling of Hearing. 
1.  When an appeal has been filed, the development services department shall prepare a report on the matter, including all of the application materials in question, and schedule the matter for a public hearing by the appropriate review authority within ninety days of receiving the appeal. 
2.  Notice of the hearing shall be provided and the hearing shall be conducted in compliance with Section 18.104.090 (Notice of Hearings). 
3.  Any interested person may appear and be heard regarding the appeal. 
4.  All appeals on a single project shall be considered together at the same hearing. 
F.  Hearing and Decision. 
1.  During the appeal hearing, the review authority may take action on the subject of the appeal or any aspect of the appealed project (de novo review). The review authority shall make its own decision supported by findings. 
2.  The review authority's decision may: 
a.  Affirm, affirm in part, or reverse the action that is the subject of the appeal; 
b.  Adopt additional conditions of approval that address the matter appealed; or 
c.  Remand the appeal for further review, recommendation, or action to the previous review authority. 
3.  The review authority's action shall be based upon findings of fact about the particular case. The findings shall identify the reasons for the action on the appeal and verify the compliance of the subject of the appeal with the zoning code. 
4.  A matter being heard on appeal may be continued for good cause (e.g., additional California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) review is required). 
5.  If the hearing body is unable to reach a decision on the matter appealed, the appeal and the decision of the previous review authority shall remain in effect. 
G.  Effective Date of Appeal Decision. 
1.  City Council's Decision. A decision of the city council on an appeal is final and shall be effective on the date the decision is rendered. 
2.  Other Decisions. A decision of the planning commission is final and effective after five p.m. on the tenth calendar day following the date the decision is rendered, when no appeal to the decision or call for review has been filed in compliance with this chapter. In the event the completion of the appeal period falls on a weekend or holiday, the decision shall become effective after five p.m. on the first business day following the completion of the appeal period. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.112.040 - Calls for review. 
A.  City Council Review. City Council may call for a review of any decision of the Community Development Director or Planning Commission. 
B.  Initiation. One or more members of the city council may initiate a call for review by filing a written request with the development services department within ten days following the date of the decision. The applicant of the matter called for review shall be notified within ten days of the initiation of a call for review. 
C.  Effect of Calls for Review. 
1.  Once a call for review is initiated, any action on the associated project is suspended until a final decision is rendered by the city council. 
2.  The filing of a call for review does not extend the time in which an appeal of a decision may be filed; the normal appeal period will continue to run. 
3.  Where a call for review only applies to a limited issue, an individual may still appeal all or another part of a decision. 
D.  Report and Scheduling of Hearing. 
1.  When a call for review has been initiated, the development services department shall prepare a report on the matter, including all of the application materials in question. The department shall schedule the matter for a public hearing by the city council within ninety days of receiving the call for review. 
2.  Notice of the hearing shall be provided, and the hearing shall be conducted in compliance with Section 18.104.090 (Notice of Hearings). 
3.  Any interested person may appear and be heard regarding the call for review. 
E.  Hearing and Decision. 
1.  During the public hearing, the city council may consider any issue involving the matter called for review, in addition to the specific grounds for the call for review. The city council may: 
a.  Affirm, affirm in part, or reverse the action that is the subject of the call for review; or 
b.  Adopt additional conditions of approval that may address issues or concerns. 
2.  The city council's action shall be based upon findings of fact about the particular case. The findings shall identify the reasons for the action on the matter called for review, and verify the compliance of the matter with the zoning code. 
3.  Within sixty days of the initial public hearing on the call for review, the city council shall render its decision on the matter, unless it is continued for good cause (e.g., additional CEQA review is required). 
4.  If the city council is unable to reach a decision on the matter under review, the decision of the previous review authority shall remain in effect. 
F.  Effective Date of Review Decision. A decision of the city council is final and shall be effective on the date the decision is rendered. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.112.050 - Judicial review. 
No person may seek judicial review of a city decision on a permit or other matter in compliance with the zoning code until all appeals to the planning commission and city council have been exhausted. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.114 - ZONING CODE AMENDMENTS 
 
18.114.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes procedures for amending the zoning code and zoning map. All amendments to the zoning code shall be processed as set forth in Government Code Section 65853 et seq. and as specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.114.020 - Initiation. 
A.  Zoning Map Amendment. A request for an amendment to the Zoning Map may be initiated by: 
1.  The city council; 
2.  The planning commission; 
3.  The community development director; or 
4.  One or more owners of the property for which the amendment is sought. 
B.  Zoning Code Text Amendment. A request for an amendment to the text of the zoning code may be initiated by the following: 
1.  The city council; 
2.  The planning commission; 
3.  The community development director; or 
4.  Any resident, property owner, or business owner in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.114.030 - Application. 
An application for a zoning code amendment shall be filed and reviewed in compliance with Chapter 18.104 (Common Permit Requirements). The application shall include the information and materials required by the development services department, together with all required application fees. For amendments submitted by a resident, property owner, or business owner, it is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the findings required by Section 18.114.060 (Findings for Approval). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.114.040 - Planning commission hearing and action. 
A.  General. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on a proposed zoning map amendment and zoning code amendment in compliance with Section 18.104.090 (Notice of Hearings). 
B.  Recommendation of Approval. The planning commission may recommend to the city council the approval or conditional approval of the proposed zoning map amendment or zoning code amendment, based upon the findings specified in Section 18.114.060 (Findings for Approval). The planning commission shall forward a written recommendation, and the reasons for the recommendation, to the city council within 90 days after the date the hearing was closed to the public. A recommendation for approval shall be made by a majority vote of the total membership of the planning commission. 
C.  Denial. The planning commission may deny the proposed zoning code amendment based upon the findings specified in Section 18.114.060 (Findings for Approval). For a zoning map amendment, if the action of the planning commission is to recommend denial, the city council is not required to take further action on the proposed amendment unless an interested party requests a hearing in writing with the city clerk within ten days after the planning commission recommendation is filed with the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.114.050 - City council hearing and action. 
A.  General. After receipt of the planning commission's recommendation to approve a proposed zoning code amendment or zoning map amendment, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposal in compliance with Section 18.104.090 (Notice of Hearing). 
B.  Approval or Denial. The city council may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the proposed zoning code amendment or zoning map amendment based upon the findings specified in Section 18.114.060 (Findings for Approval). 
C.  Finality of Action. The action by the city council shall be made by a majority vote of the total membership of the city council and shall be final and conclusive. 
D.  Referral to Planning Commission. If the city council proposes to adopt a substantial modification to the zoning code amendment not previously considered by the planning commission, the proposed modification shall be first referred to the planning commission for its recommendation. 
E.  Failure to Report. The failure of the planning commission to report back to the city council within forty days after the reference, or within the time set by the city council, shall be deemed a recommendation of approval. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.114.060 - Findings for approval. 
The city council may approve a zoning code amendment or zoning map amendment only if all of the following findings are made: 
A.  Findings for all Zoning Code and Zoning Map Amendments. 
1.  The proposed amendment is consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan as provided by Government Code Section 65860. 
2.  The proposed amendment will not be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience, or welfare of the city. 
B.  Additional Finding for Zoning Code Text Amendments. The proposed amendment is internally consistent with other applicable provisions of the zoning code. 
C.  Additional Finding for Zoning Map Amendments. The affected site is physically suitable in terms of design, location, shape, size, and other characteristics to ensure that the permitted land uses and development will comply with the zoning code and general plan and contribute to the health, safety, and welfare of the property, surrounding properties, and the community at large. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.114.070 - Effective date. 
A Zoning Code Amendment becomes effective thirty days following the adoption of the ordinance by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.114.080 - Limitations on resubmittals after denial. 
If the city denies a zoning code or zoning map amendment, the city may not accept an application for the same or substantially similar zoning code or zoning map amendment except in the following cases: 
A.  Upon initiation by the city council or planning commission; 
B.  The application requests a rezoning to a different zoning district than that previously requested; or 
C.  When the previous application was denied because the proposed amendment would not conform with the general plan, and the general plan has subsequently been amended in a manner which will allow the proposed amendment. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.116 - DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS 
 
18.116.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes procedures for the processing of Development Agreements in compliance with the Government Code Sections 65864 through 65869.5. Development agreements are intended to: 
A.  Strengthen the public planning process, encourage private participation and comprehensive planning, and reduce the economic costs of development; 
B.  Facilitate the development of large multi-phase developments, low income housing developments, and developments involving public service and facilities installations which may require several years to complete; and 
C.  Promote orderly growth and development, economic welfare, and adequate circulation, utilities and services. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.116.020 - Applications. 
An applicant for a development project may request that the city review a development agreement application in accordance with the following procedures. As used in this chapter, "applicant" means a person who has a legal or equitable interest in real property, and who applies for a development agreement for a project on that property in accordance with this chapter, and who executes and is bound by the terms of the development agreement. "Applicant" also includes a successor in interest to the rights and duties of the original applicant for a development agreement. 
A.  Forms and Information. The applicant shall submit a development agreement application on a form prescribed by the community development director. The director shall identify submittal requirements for development agreement applications, and may require an applicant to submit additional information and supporting data to process the application. 
B.  Fees. At the time of initial filing of the application, the applicant shall pay fees and charges required to file and process the development agreement applications and to administer the approved development agreements, including annual reviews, in such amounts as established by resolution of the city council. 
C.  Authority to File Application. An applicant shall have a legal or equitable interest in the real property which is the subject of the proposed development agreement. The community development director shall require an applicant to submit proof of his or her interest in the real property and/or of the authority of any agent to act for the applicant. Such proof may include a title report, policy or guarantee, issued by a title company licensed to do business in the state, which demonstrates the required interest of the applicant in the real property. 
D.  Initial Review of Application. 
1.  The community development director, or his or her designee, shall review each application to determine whether it is complete. If the application is found to be incomplete, the community development director shall reject the application and, within forty-five days after submittal of the application, shall inform the applicant of the items or steps necessary to complete the application. 
2.  Following completion of the application, the community development director shall determine whether a project is consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan, including the precise development plan and guidelines of a planned unit development (PUD) district, or if the applicant has submitted an application for any necessary amendments to the general plan, PUD, or specific plan. 
3.  In addition, the community development director shall determine whether the project meets one of the following criteria: 
a.  The project is a residential development awarded a building allotment pursuant to Chapter 18.78 (Residential Development Control System) of Municipal Code Title 18 (Development Code); or 
b.  The project is a commercial or industrial development and these three criteria are met: 
(1)  The project site is three acres or more in area, and 
(2)  The project proposes to construct or rehabilitate multiple structures on the site, and the total floor area to be constructed or rehabilitated is at least one hundred thousand square feet, and 
(3)  The project envisions a long-term or phased build-out such that, at the time of application, designs of all buildings and improvements cannot be reasonably specified in the manner required of use permit applications; or the project is a commercial or industrial development and there are other unique or compelling reasons why the project or the potential benefits to the community would warrant consideration in the form of a development agreement. 
4.  The community development director shall also determine whether the proposed project comports with regulations of the zoning district in which the property lies, including identification of any aspects of the project which would require a variance were the application subject to review and action under the zoning code. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.116.030 - Contents of development agreements. 
Following completion of the application and determination by the community development director that the application meets the criteria described above, the city manager, or his or her designee, shall provide the applicant with the city's standard development agreement. The city manager, or his or her designee, shall negotiate specific components and provisions of the development agreement with the applicant. The negotiated development agreement shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  A development agreement shall specify its duration; the permitted uses of the subject property; the general location and density or intensity of uses; the general location, maximum height and size of proposed buildings; the relation of the project to adjacent properties; and provisions for reservation or dedication of land for public purposes. It shall contain provisions concerning its transferability to any successor owners of the property. 
B.  A development agreement shall contain an indemnity clause requiring the applicant to indemnify, defend, and hold the city, its officers, officials, agents, and employees harmless against claims arising out of or related to the actions of applicant in connection with the application or the development process, including all legal fees and costs. 
C.  A development agreement should clearly outline the benefits provided to the city from entering into the development agreement. Such benefits may include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Construction of public facilities beyond those required as a condition of approval; 
2.  Covenants to operate and maintain the private project at higher levels than would otherwise be required; 
3.  Proposals to achieve general plan goals not directly associated with the private project; and 
4.  Other proposals which, in the judgment of the planning commission and city council, provide public benefits sufficient to justify a development agreement. 
D.  A development agreement should include requirements for construction and maintenance of onsite and off-site improvements or payment of fees in lieu of such dedications or improvements. 
E.  A development agreement should include any conditions and restrictions imposed by the city with respect to the project, including conditions and restrictions proposed in the environmental review document prepared under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), in order to eliminate or mitigate potential adverse environmental impacts of the project. 
F.  A development agreement may provide that the project be constructed in specified phases, and may state construction shall commence within a specified time, and that the project or any phase thereof shall be completed within a specified time. 
G.  A development agreement shall be a contract that is negotiated and voluntarily entered into by city and applicant and may contain any additional or modified conditions, terms or provisions agreed upon by the parties. 
H.  A development agreement may also include conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions but does not eliminate the applicant's responsibility to obtain all required land use approvals. 
I.  If a development agreement requires applicant financing of necessary public facilities, it may include terms relating to subsequent reimbursement over time for such financing. 
J.  A development agreement may include any other provisions necessary to guarantee performance of obligations stated in the agreement. 
K.  A developments agreement, or any part of a development agreement, may be subject to subsequent condemnation proceedings by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.116.040 - Consideration of proposed development agreements. 
A.  Negotiations. The city manager shall negotiate the specific components and provisions of the development agreement on behalf of the city. 
B.  Planning Commission Consideration. Following negotiation of the development agreement, the planning commission shall consider the development agreement for recommendation to the city council. Prior to making a recommendation for City Council action on a proposed development agreement, the planning commission shall hold a noticed public hearing to consider comments on the development agreement from other advisory bodies and from members of the public. The planning commission public hearing may, but need not, be held concurrently with the public hearing(s) on other land use approvals for the project. 
C.  Recommendation by Planning Commission. Within thirty days after closing its public hearing, the planning commission shall make its recommendation in writing to the city council. The recommendation shall include the planning commission's determination and supporting reasoning as to whether or not the proposed development agreement: 
1.  Is consistent with the goals, objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the general plan and any applicable specific plan; 
2.  Is compatible with the uses authorized in the zoning district in which the property is located; 
3.  Duly considers city mitigation programs in effect at the time of execution of the agreement; 
4.  Will be non-detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood and to property and improvements in the neighborhood; 
5.  Complies with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act; and 
6.  Will not adversely affect the orderly development of property or the preservation of property values. 
D.  City Council Public Hearing. The city council shall hold a noticed public hearing prior to adoption of a development agreement. The city council public hearing may, but need not, be held concurrently with the public hearing(s) on other land use approvals for the project. 
E.  Decision by City Council. 
1.  After the city council completes the public hearing, it may accept, reject or conditionally accept the recommendation of the planning commission, or in the event the planning commission has failed to make a recommendation, the city council shall approve, disapprove or conditionally approve the development agreement. The city council may, but need not, refer matters not previously considered by the planning commission during its hearing back to the planning commission for report and recommendation. The planning commission may, but need not, hold a public hearing on matters referred back to it by the city council. 
2.  The city council shall not approve a proposed development agreement unless it finds that its provisions are consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan. This requirement may be satisfied by a finding that the provisions of a proposed development agreement are consistent with proposed general plan or specific plan amendments which are to be adopted concurrently with the approval of the proposed development agreement. A finding of consistency may be made if, considering the general plan and/or specific plan as a whole and balancing competing provisions as appropriate, the city determines that the proposed development agreement does not conflict with the provisions of the general plan and/or specific plan. 
3.  A proposed development agreement shall be executed by the applicant before it is placed before the city council for consideration at a public hearing. 
F.  Approval of Development Agreement. The city council has the exclusive authority to approve the development agreement. Approval of a development agreement shall be by ordinance. 
G.  Failure to Receive Notice. The failure of any person to receive notice required by law or this chapter shall not affect the authority of the city to enter into, modify or terminate a development agreement, nor invalidate a development agreement entered into by the city under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.116.050 - Execution and recordation of development agreement. 
A.  Within ten days after the ordinance approving the development agreement takes effect, the city manager shall execute the development agreement on behalf of the city, and the city clerk shall record the development agreement with the Santa Clara County Recorder. 
B.  If the parties to the agreement or their successors in interest amend or cancel the development agreement, or if the city terminates or modifies the development agreement for failure of the applicant to fully comply with the provisions of the development agreement, the city clerk shall record notice of such action with the Santa Clara County Recorder. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.116.060 - Annual review. 
A.  Time for and Initiation of Review. 
1.  The city manager shall review each approved development agreement at least once a year, at which time the applicant shall demonstrate compliance with the provisions of the development agreement. 
2.  The applicant shall initiate the required annual review by submitting a written request at least sixty days prior to the review date specified in the development agreement. The applicant shall also provide evidence as determined necessary by the city manager to demonstrate compliance with the development agreement. The burden of proof by substantial evidence of compliance is upon the applicant. 
B.  Finding of Compliance. If the city manager, on the basis of substantial evidence, finds compliance by the applicant with the development agreement, the city manager shall issue a finding of compliance, which shall be in recordable form and may be recorded with the county recorder after conclusion of the review. 
C.  Finding of Noncompliance. 
1.  If the city manager finds the applicant has not complied with the provisions of the development agreement, the city manager may issue a finding of noncompliance which may be recorded by the city with the county recorder after it becomes final. The city manager shall specify in writing to the applicant the respects in which applicant has failed to comply, and shall set forth terms of compliance and specify a reasonable time for the applicant to meet the terms of compliance. 
2.  If applicant does not comply with any terms of compliance within the prescribed time limits, the development agreement shall be subject to termination or modification pursuant to Section 18.116.070.B of this chapter. 
D.  Appeal of Determination. Within ten days after issuance of a finding of compliance or a finding of noncompliance, any interested person may file a written appeal of the finding with the city council. The appellant shall pay fees and charges for the filing and processing of the appeal in amounts established by the city council. The appellant shall specify the reasons for the appeal. The issuance of a finding of compliance or finding of noncompliance by the city manager and the expiration of the appeal period without appeal, or the confirmation by the city council of the issuance of the finding on such appeal, shall conclude the review for the applicable period and such determination shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.116.070 - Cancellation or modification. 
A.  Cancellation or Modification by Mutual Consent. Any development agreement may be canceled or modified by mutual consent of the parties following compliance with the procedures specified in Section 18.116.040 of this chapter. A development agreement may also specify procedures for administrative approval of minor amendments by mutual consent of the applicant and the city manager. 
B.  Termination or Modification after Finding of Noncompliance. If a finding of noncompliance does not include terms of compliance, or if applicant does not comply with the terms of compliance within the prescribed time limits, the city manager may refer the development agreement to the city council for termination or modification. The city council shall conduct a public hearing. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to establish at the public hearing that the development agreement has been complied with. After the public hearing, the city council may terminate the development agreement, modify the finding of noncompliance, or rescind the finding of noncompliance, and issue a finding of compliance. 
C.  Rights of the Parties after Cancellation or Termination. In the event that a development agreement is canceled or terminated, all rights of the applicant, property owner or successors in interest under the development agreement shall terminate. If a development agreement is terminated following a finding of noncompliance, the city may, in its sole discretion, determine to return any and all benefits, including reservations or dedications of land, and payments of fees, received by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.116.080 - Miscellaneous provisions. 
A.  Effect of Development Agreement. 
1.  Unless otherwise specified in the development agreement, the city's rules, regulations and official policies governing permitted uses of the property, density and design, and improvement standards and specifications applicable to development of the property shall be those city rules, regulations and official policies in force on the effective date of the development agreement. The applicant shall not be exempt from otherwise applicable city ordinances or regulations pertaining to persons contracting with the city. 
2.  A Development Agreement shall not prevent the city, in subsequent actions applicable to the property, from applying new rules, regulations and policies which do not conflict with those rules, regulations and policies applicable to the property as set forth in the development agreement. A development agreement shall not prevent the city from denying or conditionally approving any subsequent land use permit or authorization for the project on the basis of such existing or new rules, regulations, and policies. 
3.  Unless otherwise specified in the development agreement, a development agreement shall not exempt the applicant from obtaining future discretionary land use approvals. 
B.  Rules Affecting Development Agreement. In the event that any regulation or law of the state of California or the United States, enacted or interpreted after a development agreement has been entered into, prevents or precludes compliance with one or more provisions of the development agreement, then the development agreement may be modified or suspended in the manner and pursuant to the procedures specified in the development agreement as may be necessary to comply with such regulation or law. 
C.  Enforcement of a Development Agreement. The procedures for enforcement, amendment, modification, cancellation or termination of a development agreement specified in this section and in California Government Code Section 65865.4 are non-exclusive. A development agreement may be enforced, amended, modified, canceled or terminated by any manner otherwise provided by law or by the provisions of the development agreement. 
D.  Public Hearings — Generally. Any public hearing held pursuant to this chapter shall be conducted as nearly as possible in accordance with the procedural standards prescribed in Chapter 18.104 (Common Permit Procedures) and the Government Code. Each person interested in the matters shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The applicant has the burden of proof at the public hearing on the proposed development agreement. No action, inaction or recommendation regarding a development agreement shall be set aside due to any error, irregularity, informality, neglect or omission ("error") as to any matter pertaining to the development agreement unless the error is prejudicial and the complaining party sustained and suffered actual substantial injury, and that a different result would have been probable if the error had not occurred or existed. There is no presumption that an error is prejudicial or that injury was done if error is proven. 
E.  Judicial Review — Time Limitation. 
1.  Any judicial review of an ordinance approving or amending a development agreement shall be by writ of mandate pursuant to Section 1085 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. Judicial review of any city action taken pursuant to this chapter, other than approval or amendment of a development agreement, shall be by writ of mandate pursuant to Section 1094.5 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. 
2.  Any action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void or annul any decision of the city taken pursuant to this chapter shall not be maintained by any person unless the action or proceeding is commenced within ninety days after the effective date of the decision. 
F.  Irregularity in Proceedings. No action, inaction or recommendation regarding a proposed development agreement shall be held void or invalid or be set aside by a court by reason of any error, irregularity, informality, neglect or omission ("error") as to any matter pertaining to the petition, application, notice, finding, record, hearing, report, recommendation or any matter of procedure whatever, unless the error complained of was prejudicial and that by reason of the error, the complaining party sustained and suffered substantial injury, and that a different result would have been probable if the error had not occurred or existed. There is not a presumption that an error is prejudicial or that injury was done if an error is shown. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.118 - REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS 
 
18.118.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes a procedure for requesting reasonable accommodation in land use, zoning and building regulations, to provide persons with disabilities equal access to housing consistent with the Federal Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. Section 3601 et seq.) and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (Government Code Section 12955 et seq.). A reasonable accommodation is typically an adjustment to physical design standards to accommodate the placement of wheelchair ramps or other exterior modifications to a dwelling in response to the needs of a disabled resident. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.118.020 - When allowed. 
A.  Eligible Applicants. A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any person with a disability, their representative, or any entity, when the application of the zoning code or other land use or building regulation, policy, or practice acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities. 
B.  Definition. A person with a disability is a person who has a physical or mental impairment that limits or substantially limits one or more major life activities, anyone who is regarded as having this type of impairment, or anyone who has a record of this type of impairment. 
C.  Eligible Request. A request for reasonable accommodation may include a request for a modification or exception to the rules, standards, and practices for the siting, development, and use of housing or housing-related facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.118.030 - Review authority. 
A.  Community Development Director. The community development director shall take action on reasonable accommodation applications unless the application is filed for concurrent review with an application for discretionary review by the planning commission or city council. 
B.  Other Review Authority. If a reasonable accommodation application is submitted concurrently with a permit application that will be reviewed by the planning commission or city council, the reasonable accommodation application shall be reviewed by the planning commission or city council. 
C.  Referral to Planning Commission. The community development director may refer any reasonable accommodation application to the planning commission for review and final decision. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.118.040 - Public notice of process availability. 
Notice of the availability of the reasonable accommodation process shall be publicly displayed at City Hall. Forms for requesting reasonable accommodation shall be available to the public at the development services department at City Hall. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.118.050 - Application requirements. 
A.  Application. A request for reasonable accommodation shall be submitted on an application form provided by the development services department together with applicable fees required by the planning fee schedule. The application must include the following: 
1.  The name and address of the individual(s) requesting reasonable accommodation; 
2.  The name and address of the property owner(s); 
3.  The address of the property for which the accommodation is requested; 
4.  Description of the requested accommodation and the regulations, policy or procedures for which accommodation is sought; and 
5.  Reason that the requested accommodation may be necessary to enable the individual(s) with the disability to use the dwelling. 
B.  Review with Other Land Use Applications. If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is being made also requires some other discretionary approval (e.g., conditional use permit, design permit), then the applicant shall file the reasonable accommodation application materials together for concurrent review with the application for discretionary approval. 
C.  Application Timing. A request for reasonable accommodation may be filed at any time that the accommodation is necessary to ensure equal access to housing. A reasonable accommodation does not affect an individual's obligation to comply with other applicable regulations not at issue in the requested accommodation. 
D.  Application Assistance. If an individual needs assistance in making the request for reasonable accommodation, the city will provide assistance to ensure that the process is accessible to the individual. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.118.060 - Review procedure. 
A.  Director Review. 
1.  The community development director shall make a written determination within forty-five days and either grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation. 
2.  If necessary to reach a determination on the request for reasonable accommodation, the community development director may request further information from the applicant consistent with fair housing laws. In the event that a request for additional information is made, the forty-five-day period to issue a decision is stayed until the applicant submits the requested information. 
B.  Other Review Authority. The determination on whether to grant or deny the request for reasonable accommodation submitted concurrently with a discretionary permit application shall be made by the planning commission or city council in compliance with the review procedure for the discretionary review. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.118.070 - Criteria for decision. 
The community development director or the reviewing authority, as applicable, shall make a written determination and either approve, approve with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation based on consideration of all of the following factors: 
A.  Whether the housing which is the subject of the request will be used by an individual with disabilities protected under fair housing law. 
B.  Whether the request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make housing available to an individual with disabilities protected under fair housing law. 
C.  Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the City. 
D.  Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of a City program or law, including but not limited to land use and zoning. 
E.  Potential impacts on surrounding uses. 
F.  Physical attributes of the property and structures. 
G.  Availability of other reasonable accommodations that may provide an equivalent level of benefit. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.118.080 - Conditions of approval. 
In approving a request for reasonable accommodation, the reviewing authority may impose conditions of approval to ensure that the reasonable accommodation will comply with the criteria required by Section 18.118.070 (Criteria for Decision). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.118.090 - Appeals. 
Reasonable accommodation decisions may be appealed consistent with Chapter 18.112 (Appeals). If an applicant needs assistance in filing an appeal on an adverse decision, the city will provide assistance to ensure that the appeals process is accessible. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.120 - ENFORCEMENT 
 
18.120.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter establishes procedures to ensure compliance with the zoning code, obtain corrections for violation of the zoning code, and impose penalties for violations. These procedures supplement code enforcement provisions in municipal code Title 1 (General Provisions). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.120.020 - Violations. 
Any use, structure, or activity that is established or maintained contrary to the requirements of the zoning code shall be unlawful and a violation of the zoning code, shall constitute a public nuisance, and shall be subject to the remedies and penalties provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.120.030 - Permits and approvals. 
All departments, officials, and public employees of the city assigned the authority to issue permits or other forms of authorization shall comply with the zoning code. 
A.  Permits in Conflict with the Zoning Code. Permits and other forms of authorizations that would be in conflict with the zoning code shall not be issued. 
B.  Permits Deemed Void. Any permits or other form of authorizations issued in conflict with the zoning code shall be void and of no effect. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.120.040 - Enforcement responsibility. 
A.  Building Official. The building official shall have primary responsibility for enforcing provisions of the zoning code pertaining to the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, conversion, or alteration of any structure. 
B.  Community Development Director. The community development director shall have primary responsibility for enforcing all other provisions of this code not listed in subsection A above. Other officers of the city as authorized by the community development director shall share responsibility for enforcing provisions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.120.050 - Remedies. 
The city may choose to undertake any one or all of the following legal actions, in addition to all other remedies available, to correct and/or abate a violation of the zoning code. 
A.  Revoke Permit. The city may revoke a permit or other form of authorization consistent with Section 18.104.240 (Permit Revocation). 
B.  Withhold Permit. The city may deny or withhold permits or other forms of authorization. 
C.  Approve Permit with Conditions. The city may approve a permit or other form of authorization subject to the condition that the violation be corrected. 
D.  Stop Work. With or without revoking permits, the city may stop work in whole or in part on any building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.120.060 - Remedies are cumulative. 
The remedies and enforcement powers established in this chapter shall be cumulative, and the city may exercise them in any order or combination, at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Part 5 - GLOSSARY  
Chapter 18.124 - LAND USE DEFINITIONS 
 
18.124.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter defines the land uses permitted and conditionally permitted in within each zoning district as specified in Part 2 (Zoning Districts) of the zoning code. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.124.020 - Residential land uses. 
A.  Accessory Dwelling Units. A self-contained living unit, either attached to or detached from, and in addition to, the primary residential unit on the parcel. 
B.  Agricultural Labor Accommodations. Housing for transient labor, such as labor cabins or camps, where incidental to a permitted agricultural use. 
C.  Caretaker Quarters. A residence that is accessory to a nonresidential primary use of the site, where needed for security, or twenty-four-hour care or supervision. 
D.  Duets. A residential structure that contains two independent dwelling units, each with its own entrance that are separated by a property line along a shared building wall with each unit located on a separate lot. 
E.  Duplexes. A single residential structure on one lot that contains two independent dwelling units, each with its own entrance. 
F.  Group Housing. Shared living quarters without separate kitchen or bathroom facilities for each room or unit, offered for rent for permanent or semi-transient residents on a weekly or longer basis. Includes rooming and boarding houses, single-room occupancy housing, dormitories, and other types of organizational housing, and extended stay hotels intended for long-term occupancy (thirty days or more). Excludes "hotels and motels" and "residential care facilities." 
G.  Live/Work Units. A building or space within a building that is used jointly for commercial and residential purposes. 
H.  Mixed Use Residential. A development project with both residential and commercial/office uses which are either 1) located together in a single building; or 2) in separate buildings on a single site of one or more contiguous properties. 
I.  Multi-Family Dwellings. A building that contains three or more dwelling units, with each unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. Includes multi-family senior housing limited to occupancy by persons fifty-five years of age or older for residents who are independent and do not require assistance with everyday living ("independent living"). 
J.  Nursing Homes and Long-Term Care. Establishments that provide twenty-four-hour medical, convalescent or chronic care to individuals who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves, and is licensed as a skilled nursing facility by the state of California. Excludes "residential care facilities" and "senior housing." 
K.  Residential Care Facilities. 
1.  A state licensed facility providing twenty-four-hour-a-day nonmedical residential living accommodations pursuant to the uniform building, housing and fire codes. Care and supervision shall include, but not be limited to, any one or more of the following activities provided by a person or facility to meet the needs of the residents: 
a.  Assistance in dressing, grooming, bathing and other personal hygiene; 
b.  Assistance with taking medication and central storing and distribution of medications; 
c.  Arrangement of and assistance with medical and dental care; 
d.  Maintenance of house rules for the protection of residents; 
e.  Supervision of resident schedules and activities; 
f.  Maintenance and supervision of resident monies or property; 
g.  Monitoring food intake and special diets. 
2.  Individual sleeping quarters with no more than half kitchens, a common dining facility which provides a sit down dining service at two distinct times per day and recreational features such as a lounge or recreation room shall be provided. Safety features designed for the needs of the elderly, such as emergency call systems which are linked to on-site staff which are available twenty-four hours per day, grab bars and handrails, special door hardware, cabinets, appliances and doorways designed to accommodate wheel chairs, and social services for residents which must also include at least three of the following: transportation services provided by the facility, housekeeping, facility provided linen/laundry, and organized social and recreational activities. Such facilities may have up to two manager's units which contain full kitchen facilities. Residential care facility includes, but is not limited to, health facilities as defined in California Health and Safety Code (H&SC) Section 1250 et seq., Community Care Facilities (H&SC Section 1500 et seq.), Residential Care Facilities for the Elderly (H&SC Section 1569 et seq.), or Facilities for the Mentally Disordered or otherwise handicapped defined in California Welfare and Institutions Code (W&I Code Section 5000 et seq.), alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment facilities (H&SC Section 11834.02), and other similar care facilities. 
3.  Supportive or transitional housing that provides medical care or services patients whose need for care or supervision exceeds a certain threshold (Section 1505 of the Health and Safety Code) shall obtain a license to operate from the state or the facility will be considered an apartment requiring participation in the city's residential development control system (RDCS). 
L.  Residential Care Facilities, Small. Any state-authorized, certified or licensed family-care home, foster home, or group home serving six or fewer mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped persons, or dependent and neglected children or the elderly, when such homes provide care on a twenty-four-hour a day basis. 
M.  Single-Family Dwellings. A residential structure designed for occupancy by one household. A single-family dwelling provides complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. Includes all construction types, including prefabricated and manufactured homes. 
N.  Single-Family Attached Dwellings. Three or more single-family dwelling units connected by common walls along the side property lines, sometimes called a townhouse or row house. Excludes "duplexes" and "duets." 
O.  Single-Family Detached Dwellings. A detached building that contain one single-family dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.124.030 - Public and quasi-public uses. 
A.  Cemeteries. Establishments primarily engaged in operating sites or structures reserved for the interment of human or animal remains, including crematories, mausoleums, burial places, columbariums, and memorial gardens. 
B.  Colleges and Trade Schools. Institutions of higher education providing curricula of a general, religious or professional nature, typically granting recognized degrees. Includes junior colleges, business and computer schools, management training, vocational education, and technical and trade schools. 
C.  Community Assembly. Facilities that provides space for public or private meetings or gatherings. Includes places of worship, community centers, meeting space for clubs and other membership organizations, social halls, union halls, banquet centers, and other similar facilities. 
D.  Cultural Institutions. Public or nonprofit institutions that engages in cultural, scientific, and/or educational enrichment. Includes libraries, museums, performing art centers, aquariums, environmental education centers, non-profit art centers and galleries, botanical gardens, and other similar uses. 
E.  Day Care Centers. Facilities that provides non-medical care and supervision of minors or adults for periods of less than twenty-four hours. Includes nursery schools, day nurseries, child care centers, infant day care centers, cooperative day care centers, adult day programs, and similar uses. 
F.  Emergency Shelters. Housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay. 
G.  Government Offices. Places of employment occupied by governmental agencies and their employees. Includes offices for administrative, clerical, and public contact functions but excludes corporation yards, equipment service centers, and similar facilities that primarily provide maintenance and repair services and storage facilities for vehicles and equipment 
H.  Home Day Care. Facilities providing daytime supervision and care for children where the provider permanently resides. 
1.  Home Day Care, Large. A home day care facility supervising nine to fourteen children. 
2.  Home Day Care, Small. A home day care facility supervising eight children or less. 
I.  Hospitals. Facilities providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical services for sick or injured persons primarily on an in-patient basis, and including ancillary facilities for outpatient and emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, research, administration, and services to patients, employees, or visitors. 
J.  Instructional Services. Establishments that offer specialized programs in personal growth and development. Includes music studios, drama schools, dance academies, art schools, tutoring schools, and instruction in other cultural and academic pursuits. 
K.  Medical Offices and Clinics. Facilities where medical, mental, dental, or other personal health services are provided on an outpatient basis using specialized equipment. Includes offices for physicians, dentists, and optometrists, diagnostic centers, blood banks and plaza centers, and emergency medical clinics offered exclusively on an out-patient basis. May include educational aspects such as medical instruction and/or training as well as house a laboratory, radiology/imaging, pharmacy, rehabilitation and other similar services as accessory uses. Excludes "hospitals." 
L.  Parks and Recreational Facilities. Non-commercial facilities that provide open space and/or recreational opportunities to the public. Includes parks, community gardens, community centers, passive and active open space, wildlife preserves, playing fields, tennis courts, swimming pools, gymnasiums, and other similar facilities. 
M.  Public Safety Facilities. Facilities operated by a governmental agency for the purpose of protecting public safety. Includes fire stations and other fire-fighting facilities, police stations, public ambulance dispatch facilities, and other similar uses. 
N.  Schools. Educational institutions providing instruction to minors as required by the California Education Code. Includes elementary, junior high, and high schools. 
1.  School, Public. A school operated or under control of the Morgan Hill Unified School District or Santa Clara County Board of Education. Includes public charter schools. 
2.  School, Private. A school operated or under control of an entity other than the Morgan Hill Unified School District or Santa Clara County Board of Education. 
O.  Social Services. Establishments providing assistance and aid to those persons requiring counseling and/or treatment for psychological problems, addictions, learning disabilities, and physical disabilities or to those persons in need of jobs, food, or clothing. Excludes residential care on an overnight, short-term, or long-term basis. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.124.040 - Commercial uses. 
A.  Adult Businesses. See Section 18.92.020 (Adult Businesses) for definitions related to adult businesses. 
B.  Animal-Related Uses. 
1.  Animal Boarding. A facility for keeping, boarding, training, breeding or maintaining four or more dogs, cats, or other household pets not owned by the facility owner or operator. Includes kennels, pet day care, and animal shelters. Excludes "veterinarian clinics and hospitals" and pet shops that provide grooming services. 
2.  Equestrian Centers. A commercial or private facility created and maintained for accommodating, training or competing horses. May includes barn or stables, riding halls, and riding academies. 
3.  Veterinarian Clinics and Hospitals. Office and medical treatment facilities used by veterinarians where animals receive medical and surgical treatment, including large and small animal veterinary clinics and animal hospitals. Grooming and temporary boarding of animals for thirty days is included if incidental to the hospital use. Excludes "animal boarding" and pet stores ("retail sales"). 
C.  Banks and Financial Institutions. A financial institution providing retail banking services. Includes only those institutions serving walk-in customers or clients, including federally-chartered banks, savings associations, industrial loan companies, and credit unions providing retail banking services to individuals and businesses. This classification expressly excludes payday lending businesses or check cashing businesses, and as a result, the establishment, expansion, or relocation of such businesses is prohibited. The term "payday lending business" means retail businesses owned or operated by a "licensee" as that term is defined in California Financial Code section 23001(d). The term "check cashing business" means a retail business owned or operated by a "check casher" as that term is defined in California Civil Code section 1789.31. 
D.  Business Support Services. An establishment entirely within a building, providing other businesses and residents with goods and services including maintenance, repair and service, testing, and rental. Includes businesses providing services related to advertising and mailing; building maintenance; equipment rental and leasing; catering; party rentals; janitorial supplies and services; property management; messenger, courier, postal and delivery services; taxicab and limousine operations; ambulance services; nonemergency medical transport; office supply; packaging and labeling; photofinishing; photocopying, printing and blueprinting; security services; and knowledge-based computer software development and technical support. 
E.  Cinemas and Theaters. Facilities for indoor display of films and for live dramatic, musical, and artistic performances. Excludes theatres associated with "adult businesses." 
F.  Commercial Recreation. A facility providing recreation, amusement, and entertainment services for a fee or admission charge. 
1.  Commercial Recreation, Indoor. A commercial recreation facility primarily located indoors. Includes gymnasiums, health clubs, bowling alleys, indoor tennis and racquet courts, indoor swimming pools, laser tag and other similar games, indoor batting cages, electronic arcade games, pool halls, and other similar uses. Excludes "instructional services." 
2.  Commercial Recreation, Outdoor. A commercial recreation facility primarily located outdoors. Includes batting cages, swimming pools, driving ranges, tennis courts, golf courses, miniature golf, and other similar uses. 
G.  Drive-Through and Drive-in Facilities. A facility where a customer, either by the design of physical facilities or by the service procedures offered, is served while remaining seated within a vehicle. Includes drive-through restaurants, coffee shops, pharmacies, banks, automatic car washes, and other similar land uses. Drive-through and drive-in facilities must be associated with a permitted use that has received all required permits and approvals (e.g., a conditional use permit for a fast food restaurant use). 
H.  Eating and Drinking Uses. 
1.  Bars and Nightclubs. Businesses devoted to serving alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. Includes cocktail lounges, lounges, taverns, and other similar uses. 
2.  Restaurants, Fast Food. An establishment whose principal business is the sale of prepared or quickly prepared foods, frozen desserts, or beverages in disposable containers and wrappers to the customer for consumption either within the restaurant building or for carryout. Customers pay before food is consumed. The fast food restaurant may include a drive-thru window and may allow consumption of foods, frozen desserts, or beverages within a motor vehicle parked upon the premises, at other facilities on the premises outside the restaurant building or at ancillary seating areas provided within the restaurant building. Fast food restaurants may include, but are not limited to, bakeries, ice cream parlors, coffee and juice shops, pizza parlors, sandwich shops, and delicatessens. 
3.  Restaurants, Sit-Down. 
a.  An establishment with kitchen facilities whose principal business is the sale of foods, desserts, or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose design or principal method of operation includes one or both of the following characteristics: 
(1)  Customers, normally provided with an individual menu, are served their food, desserts, or beverages on reusable tableware by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter at which said items are consumed. 
(2)  A cafeteria-type operation where food, desserts, or beverages generally are consumed within the restaurant building. 
b.  A facility shall be classified as a sit-down restaurant only if it receives at least fifty percent of its gross revenues from serving food. A sit-down restaurant may include a bar serving alcoholic beverages and may have a "take-out" component which does not include a drive through component (unless a conditional use permit has been obtained), provided that the restaurant's on-site food sales account for more than fifty percent of its gross revenues. 
4.  Tasting Rooms. A facility allowing public tasting of wine, beer, and/or other alcoholic beverages with on-site and off-site retail sales directly to the public. The tasting facility must by directly affiliated with at least one commercial winery, brewery, or distillery located within Santa Clara County and licensed by the Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC). 
I.  Farmers Market. A permanent or temporary market facility in which the primary activity is the sale of fresh agricultural goods on a year-round or seasonal basis and the sale of agricultural goods constitutes at least two-thirds of the gross sales for the use. 
J.  Funeral Parlors and Mortuaries. An establishment primarily engaged in the provision of services involving the care, preparation, or disposition of the human dead. Includes areas for assembly services and living quarters for the funeral parlor manager. 
K.  Lodging Facilities. 
1.  Bed and Breakfast. A residential structure that is in residential use with one or more bedrooms rented for overnight lodging and where meals may be provided. 
2.  Hotels and Motels. A facility with guest rooms or suites, provided with or without meals and no more than half kitchen facilities, rented to the general public for overnight or other temporary lodging (less than thirty days). Includes hotels, motels, motor lodges, extended-stay hotels, and tourist courts. Lodging facilities may typically include services in addition to lodging, including restaurants, meeting facilities, personal services, and other accessory guest facilities including swimming pools, tennis courts, indoor athletic facilities, accessory retail uses, and parking. 
L.  Mini-Storage. One or more building in a controlled access and fully enclosed compound which contain separate storage spaces of varying size for the storage of customer's goods and possessions. 
M.  Personal Services. An establishment that provides services to individuals and that may provide accessory retail sales of products related to the services provided. Includes barber shops and beauty salons, tanning salons, nail salons, tattoo parlors, state-licensed massage and health spa establishments, shoe repair, jewelry repair, travel agents, small-item repair services, picture framing, video/DVD rental, decorating and design services, pet grooming, self-service laundry and cleaning services, laundry and cleaning pick-up stations (where bulk cleaning and servicing is done elsewhere), dry cleaners that directly serve individual customers, and other similar uses. 
N.  Plant Nurseries. An establishment where plants and other agricultural products are grown for transplanting, for use of stock for building and grafting, or for sale on the premises 
O.  Professional Offices. A place of employment occupied by businesses providing professional, executive, management, or administrative services. Includes offices for accountants, architects, advertising agencies, insurance agents, attorneys, commercial art and design services, non-retail financial institutions, real estate agents, news services, photographers, engineers, employment agencies, real-estate agents, and other similar professions. Excludes "medical offices and clinics." 
P.  Retail. 
1.  Building Materials. An establishment engaged in the retail sale of lumber and other building materials primarily to contractors and home builders. 
2.  Convenience Markets. A retail establishment which contains less than five thousand square feet of gross floor area allocated for the sale of groceries, staples, dairy products, sundry items, tobacco products and/or alcoholic beverages. Includes liquor stores where all or the majority of the floor area for retail sales is allocated for the sale of alcoholic beverages. Excludes full-service grocery stores containing less than five thousand square feet of gross floor area where at least ten percent of the floor area is allocated for the sale of fresh meat, seafood and fresh produce products. 
3.  General Retail. Stores and shops selling merchandise to the general public. Includes grocery stores, specialty food markets, drug stores, general merchandise stores, department stores, clothing stores, pet stores, small hardware stores, cellular phone sales and service, florists, arts and crafts galleries, and other similar retail establishments. Excludes "building materials," "convenience markets," "home improvement centers," and "large commodity retail." 
4.  Goods Produced On-Site. A retail establishment selling goods produced by a related on-site manufacturing use. 
5.  Home Improvement Centers. A retail establishment which carries a full line of building materials, appurtenances and decorator items primarily for homeowners (not contractors) to improve and maintain individual dwellings. Excludes building supply yards and lumberyards for contractors and home builders (see "building materials"). 
6.  Large Commodity Retail. A retail use where more than seventy-five percent of the gross floor area is used for display, sales, and related storage of bulky commodities, and which typically generate a demand for fewer parking spaces than do other types of retail uses. Includes retail sail of carpeting and floor covering; catalog and mail order sales; construction equipment and machinery; garden and farm equipment; heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and other mechanical equipment and supplies; kitchen, bathroom and plumbing appliances, equipment and supplies; lumber and building materials; office furniture, equipment and machinery, including computers; and household furniture. 
Q.  Vehicle-Related Uses. 
1.  Fuel and Service Stations. A retail business establishment supplying fuels and oil and minor accessories for automobiles. Includes establishments supplying gasoline, hydrogen, and electric vehicle charging as a primary land use. Includes incidental food and beverage sales, car wash facilities, minor automotive repair and service, and towing service with up to two trucks. Excludes body and fender work, painting, and other major automotive repairs. 
2.  Towing and Impound. Establishments primarily engaged in towing light or heavy motor vehicles, both local and long distance. May provide incidental services, such as vehicle storage and emergency road repair services. 
3.  Vehicle Rentals. The rental of automobiles and other similar light vehicles. 
4.  Vehicle Repair and Maintenance, Major. An establishment providing not provided for under "vehicle repair and maintenance, minor," including, but not limited to, general repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of: major vehicle components, such as engines, transmissions and differentials; non-passenger vehicles, motor homes or trailers and trucks exceeding one and one-half ton capacity; or body, frame or fender components, including collisions service, upholstery or painting. 
5.  Vehicle Repair and Maintenance, Minor. An establishment providing general service and maintenance of passenger cars and trucks not exceeding one and one-half ton capacity. Service may include the repair or replacement of worn or defective parts and gaskets external to the basic engine block, such as intake and exhaust manifolds, carburetors and water pumps; engine replacement; the repair or replacement of worn or defective brake parts, clutch parts, mufflers, exhaust system parts, wheel bearings, shock absorbers, tires, batteries, spark plugs and other accessible minor parts; and maintenance work such as the changing or supplementing of vehicle fluids and the adjustment of mechanical components while on the vehicle. 
6.  Vehicle Sales and Leasing. The retail sales or rental of new or used vehicles. Includes the sale of vehicle parts and vehicle repair, provided that these activities are incidental to the sale of vehicles. 
7.  Vehicle Washing. The washing, waxing, or cleaning of automobiles or similar light vehicles, including self-serve washing facilities. 
R.  Wholesaling. The sale of goods for resale, or the sale of goods produced or processed from raw or primary materials on the premises, or the sale of construction materials which require bulk delivery of the product. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.124.050 - Industrial uses. 
A.  Construction and Material Yards. Storage of construction materials and/or heavy equipment on a site other than a construction site. 
B.  Food and Beverage Production. A manufacturing establishment producing or processing food products or beverages for off-site consumption and wholesale distribution where the processing of food is primarily from previously prepared or farmed ingredients. 
C.  Manufacturing, Light. The manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial processing and custom manufacturing. Includes manufacture of electric and electronic instruments and devices. Excludes saw and planing mills and manufacturing uses involving primary production of wood, metal or chemical products from raw materials. 
D.  Manufacturing, General. Manufacturing of products from extracted or raw materials or recycled or secondary materials, or bulk storage and handling of such products and materials. Includes operations such as agriculture processing, apparel manufacturing; photographic processing plants; leather and allied product manufacturing; wood product manufacturing; paper manufacturing; chemical manufacturing; plastics and rubber products manufacturing; nonmetallic mineral product manufacturing; primary metal manufacturing; fabricated metal product manufacturing; and automotive and heavy equipment manufacturing. 
E.  Research and Development. A facility for scientific research and the design, development, and testing of electrical, electronic, magnetic, optical, pharmaceutical, chemical, and biotechnology components and products in advance of product manufacturing. Includes assembly of related products from parts produced off site where the manufacturing activity is secondary to the research and development activities. 
F.  Salvage and Wrecking. Storage and dismantling of vehicles and equipment for sale of parts, as well as their collection, storage, exchange or sale of goods including, but not limited to, any used building materials, used containers or steel drums, used tires, and similar or related articles or property. 
G.  Warehousing and Distribution. A use engaged in storage, wholesale and distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, farm, or professional business users; or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers in buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or companies. Includes merchant wholesalers; agents, merchandise or commodity brokers, and commission merchants; assemblers, buyers and associations engaged in the cooperative marketing of farm products; and bottling works. 
1.  Warehousing and Distribution, Large. A warehousing distribution facility seventy-five thousand square feet or more in building area. 
2.  Warehousing and Distribution, Small. A warehousing distribution facility less than seventy-five thousand square feet in building area. 
3.  Outdoor Storage. Storage of commercial goods in open lots. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.124.060 - Transportation, communication, and utility uses. 
A.  Freight Terminals and Transfer. Facilities for transfer and movement of freight, courier, and postal services by truck or rail. Excludes "light fleet-based services." 
B.  Light Fleet-Based Services. Passenger transportation services, local delivery services, medical transport, and other businesses that rely on fleets of three or more vehicles with rated capacities less than ten thousand pounds. Includes parking, dispatching, and offices for taxicab and limousine operations, ambulance services, nonemergency medical transport, local messenger and document delivery services, and similar businesses. Excludes towing operations (see "towing and impound") or delivery services with two or fewer fleet vehicles on site (see "business support services"). 
C.  Parking Lots and Structures. Surface lots and structures for use of occupants, employees, or patrons on the subject site or offering parking to the public for a fee when such use is not incidental to another on-site activity. 
D.  Recycling Facilities. 
1.  Reverse Vending Machine. An automated mechanical device that accepts, sorts and processes recyclable materials and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip. 
2.  Recycling Collection Facility. An incidental use that serves as a neighborhood drop-off point for the temporary storage of recyclable materials but where the processing and sorting of such items is not conducted on site. 
3.  Recycling Processing Facility. A facility that receives and processes recyclable materials. Processing means preparation of material for efficient shipment, or to an end-user's specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning, and remanufacturing. 
E.  Transportation Terminals. Facilities for passenger transportation operations. Includes rail stations and bus terminals but does not include terminals serving airports or heliports. 
F.  Utilities, Major. A permanent structure or facility providing a utility service to the general public. Includes generating plants, electric substations, solid waste collection, solid waste treatment and disposal, water or wastewater treatment plants, and similar facilities. Excludes utilities that are necessary to serve development within the immediate vicinity such as electrical distribution lines and underground water and sewer lines 
G.  Wireless Communication Facilities. See Chapter 18.96 (Wireless Communication Facilities). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.124.070 - Agriculture and natural resource uses. 
A.  Animal Raising and Production. The keeping of cattle, sheep, goats, hogs, poultry, or other livestock on farms, rangeland, or pasture. Excludes slaughterhouses and animal product processing uses. 
B.  Animal Raising and Production, Intensive. An animal raising and production operation that does not qualify as "animal rising and production, limited." 
C.  Animal Raising and Production, Limited. An animal raising and production operation with no more than two livestock animals per acre up to a maximum of five animals; and no more than fifteen chickens, turkeys, ducks or other poultry. Excludes dairies, hog farms, feedlots, aquaculture, confined animal feeding operations, and other similar intensive animal raising and production operations. 
D.  Crop Cultivation. The growing and harvesting of agricultural produce for food and fiber. Includes farms, orchards, groves, greenhouses, lath houses, horticultural nurseries, and wholesale nurseries primarily engaged in growing crops, plants, vines, or trees and their seeds. May include accessory uses for packing, processing, treating, and storing crops grown on site provided such accessory uses are secondary to crop production activities. Excludes growing of marijuana. 
E.  Hunting Preserves. A private or public area for hunting captive-bred game birds and other wildlife. 
F.  Urban Agriculture. "Urban agriculture" means activities involving the raising, cultivation, processing, marketing, and distribution of food in urban areas. 
1.  "Home garden" means the property of a single-family or multifamily residence used for the cultivation of fruits, vegetables, plants, flowers, or herbs by the residents of the property, guests of the property owner, or a gardening business hired by the property owner. 
2.  "Community garden" means privately or publicly owned land used for the cultivation of fruits, vegetables, plants, flowers, or herbs by multiple users. Community gardens may be divided into separate plots for cultivation by one or more individuals or may be farmed collectively by members of the group and may include common areas maintained or used by group members. 
3.  "Urban farm" means privately or publicly owned land used for the cultivation of fruits, vegetables, plants, flowers, or herbs by an individual, organization, or business with the primary purpose of growing food for sale. 
G.  Wildlife Refuges. An area designated for the protection of wild animals, within which hunting and fishing are either prohibited or strictly regulated. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.128 - GENERAL TERMS 
 
18.128.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter provides definitions of terms and phrases used in the zoning code that are technical or specialized, or which may not reflect common usage. If any of the definitions in this chapter conflict with others in the municipal code, these definitions shall control for only the provisions of this zoning code. If a word is not defined in this chapter or in other chapters of the zoning code, the community development director shall determine the appropriate definition. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.128.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "A" Terms. 
1.  Abutting. Land having a common property line or district line, or separated only by a private street, alley, or easement. 
2.  Accessory Structure. A structure subordinate to the principal structure on the same lot. 
3.  Adventure Sports Facility. 
4.  Agent of Owner. Any person with written authorization to act on behalf of the property owner. 
5.  Agriculture. The use of the land for "crop production" and/or "animal raising and production." 
6.  Alley. A public or private way not more than thirty feet wide, providing only secondary means of access to abutting property. 
7.  Alteration. A change any of the supporting members of buildings, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
8.  Ancillary Use. A use subordinate to the principal use on the same lot and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the principal use. 
9.  Attic. The space within a building between the ceiling beams at the top story and the roof rafters 
B.  "B" Terms. 
1.  Balcony. A platform that projects from the wall of a building that is surrounded by a railing or balustrade and does not require separate understructure for support. 
2.  Basement. A story whose floor is more than twelve inches, but not more than one-half of its story height, below the average level of the adjoining ground (as distinguished from a "cellar," which is a story more than one-half below such level). See Figure 18.128-1. 
Figure 18.128-1: Basement Definition
  
3.  Building. Any structure having a solid roof supported by columns or walls, used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or property. When such a structure is divided into separate parts by one or more unpierced walls extending from the ground up, each part is deemed a separate building, except as regards minimum side-yard requirements in the applicable district. 
4.  Building Coverage. The ratio of all principal and accessory buildings on a lot to the total lot area. 
5.  Building Envelope. The volume of space for the principal building as defined by the minimum setbacks and the maximum allowable building height in the applicable district. See Figure 18.128-2. 
Figure 18.128-2: Building Envelope Definition
  
6.  Building, Height. The vertical distance from the average contact ground level at the front wall of the building to the highest point of the building. See Figure 18.128-3. 
Figure 18.128-3: Building Height
  
C.  "C" Terms. 
1.  California Room. A room or space in a building where one or more sides is open and exposed (without a wall or windows) to adjacent outdoor space. 
2.  Cessation of Use. The discontinuation of a use, either temporarily or permanently, whether with the intent to abandon such use or not. 
3.  City Geologist. A registered professional geologist certified by the state of California in the specialty of engineering geology (C.E.G.) who is either a city staff member or a consultant retained by the city. 
4.  Clear Triangle. A triangular area bounded by the street right-of-way lines of a corner lot and a line joining points along said street lines 20 feet from the point of intersection. 
5.  Commercial. Any activity on or use of land which involves the buying, selling, processing or improving of things not produced on the land, and having financial gain as the primary aim of the activity or use, whether or not such activity or use is for hire or on account of the buyer, seller, processor or improver. 
6.  Conditional Use. A use that requires approval of a conditional use permit or an administrative use permit. 
7.  Condominium. Individual ownership of a dwelling unit within a multiple-unit structure exclusive of the land underlying such structure. 
8.  Condominium Development. A structure and appurtenant premises divided in ownership by the existence of the condominiums as defined in Section 783 of the California Civil Code. Includes instances where ownership is divided following prior single ownership of the entire structure and premises, as well as new structures divided in ownership. 
D.  "D" Terms. 
1.  Deck. A platform, either freestanding or attached to a building, that is supported by piers, pillars or posts. 
2.  Driveway. A permanently surfaced area on a lot designed and required to provide direct access for vehicles between a street and a private garage, carport or other parking space, parking area, or loading area. 
3.  Driveway Aisle, Major. A driveway providing principal access to the parking area or the driveway providing principal circulation throughout the parking areas or premises. 
4.  Driveway Apron. A paved area providing principal access from a drive aisle or street right-of-way to a garage or other covered parking space. 
5.  Dwelling. A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively as the residence or sleeping place of one or more persons. Excludes tents, cabins, trailers and trailer coaches. 
6.  Dwelling Unit. A room or group of rooms including living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation facilities, constituting a separate and independent housekeeping unit, occupied or intended for occupancy by one family on a non-transient (less than thirty-day stay) basis and having not more than one kitchen. 
7.  Density. The number of dwelling units permitted per net lot area. 
E.  "E" Terms 
F.  "F" Terms. 
1.  Family. An individual or group of individuals living together who constitute a bona fide single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit. "Family" does not include a group of individuals occupying a hotel or lodging house of any kind. 
2.  Fence. A structure made of wire, wood, metal, masonry or other material used as a screen or enclosure for a field, yard or lot. 
3.  Fence Height. The vertical distance from the bottom to the top of the fence. Fences placed on top of a retaining wall do not include the height of retaining wall. 
4.  Floodplain. The portion of land adjacent to a creek channel which is covered by water during a one hundred-year flood event. 
5.  Floodway. A body or channel of a stream, and those portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel, that are required to carry and discharge the floodwater or flood flows of any river or stream, including but not limited to flood flows associated with the regulatory one hundred-year flood. 
6.  Floor Area Ratio (FAR). A ratio of the gross floor area of a building to the net area of the parcel on which the building is located. Building floor area is measured from the exterior faces of the walls. For residential uses, the gross floor area includes areas for covered parking and staircases on all levels. Basement area is not included in the gross floor area. Accessory structures are not included in the FAR calculation. 
7.  Freeway. A highway where owners of abutting lands have no right or easement of access to or from their abutting lands, or have only limited or restricted right or easement of access. "Freeway" has the same meaning as the term "freeway" as defined in the California Streets and Highways Code. 
8.  Funeral Facility and Services. An establishment where deceased are prepared for burial or cremation, and funeral services may be conducted. Includes funeral homes, funeral parlors, and crematoriums. 
G.  "G" Terms. 
1.  Garage, Private. An attached or detached accessory dwelling on a lot developed with a residential dwelling used by residents for the storage of passenger vehicles, and other vehicles and equipment permitted on the lot. 
2.  Garage, Public. A structure other than a private garage used for the storage, sale, hire, or care of motor vehicles. 
3.  General Plan. The general plan of the city of Morgan Hill, California. 
4.  Guest House. A building containing living space that is heated/cooled, with a full bath, without kitchen facilities, and used to house occasional visitors or nonpaying guests of the occupant of the primary dwelling unit. A guest house with a kitchen facility is considered a secondary dwelling unit. 
H.  "H" Terms. 
1.  Home Occupation. A business within a dwelling unit or residential site, with the business activity being subordinate to the residential use of the property. 
I.  "I" Terms. 
1.  Impervious Coverage. "Impervious coverage" means the areas of the lot covered by buildings, structures, paving and other non-permeable surfacing. 
2.  Industrial Park/Business Park. A combination of industrial and/or commercial uses of contiguous lots specifically planned for industry, having continuity of design and function and uniform or integrated standards of development established by contract, covenant or deed restriction. 
J.  "J" Terms 
K.  "K" Terms. 
1.  Kennel. A building or other enclosure to confine, feed, exercise, show or provide shelter for more than five cats or dogs, ten weeks of age or older. May include pet care supplies may be sold as an ancillary activity to the primary shelter use. 
2.  Kitchen. An area in a building primarily designed, constructed, or used for the preparation of food with complete cooking facilities including a stove or separate cook top and oven, refrigerator, and kitchen sink. 
3.  Kitchen, Half. A limited kitchen facility with a small counter space, a refrigerator, a small single compartment sink, a microwave and a small (two burner maximum) cook-top. Half kitchens may not contain any type of oven other than the microwave oven, but may contain a dishwasher. 
L.  "L" Terms. 
1.  Landscaping. The planting and maintenance of living plant material, including the installation, use, and maintenance of any irrigation system for the plant material, as well as nonliving landscape material (such as rocks, pebbles, sand, mulch, walls, fences, or decorative paving materials). 
2.  Lot. A piece or parcel of land owned as a single unit in common ownership, occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building or a group of buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for a principal use and accessory uses. Lots have frontage on and access to an approved and accepted city street, approved private street, or major driveway aisle for properties in the residential and mixed use districts. 
3.  Lot Area. The net site area of a lot, expressed in terms of acres or square feet. Lot area does not include: 
a.  Land within the limits of a street (public or private) upon which the lot abuts, even if fee title to such street is held by the owner. 
b.  Public easements or private easements other than streets which are in excess of fifteen percent of the net site area of the lot. 
4.  Lot, Corner. A lot abutting either a) two streets at their intersections; or b) a curvature of a single street with an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five degrees. The point of intersection of the street lot lines, extending, is the "corner." A corner lot may have more than one corner and may also abut upon one or more streets which do not form the corner or corners of the lot. See Figure 18.128-4. 
Figure 18.128-4: Lot Types
  
5.  Lot Coverage or Building Coverage. The portion of a lot covered by a building. 
6.  Lot Depth. The horizontal distance from the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line, or to the most distant point on any other lot line where there is no rear lot line. See Figure 18.128-5. 
Figure 18.128-5: Lot Depth and Width
  
7.  Lot, Interior. A lot with only one front lot line. 
8.  Lot, Flag. A lot where the main portion of the lot area does not have access to a street other than by means of a corridor less than twenty feet wide. See Figure 18.128-4. 
9.  Lot, Key. An interior lot adjoining the rear lot line of a reversed corner lot. See Figure 18.128-4. 
10.  Lot, Substandard. A lot that doesn't comply with the minimum dimension standards of the applicable district. 
11.  Lot, Through. A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets. 
12.  Lot Line, Interior Side. A lot line not a front line or a rear line shared with another parcel. See Figure 18.128-6. 
Figure 18.128-6: Lot Lines
  
13.  Lot Line, Front. 
a.  Any of the following (See Figure 18.128-6): 
(1)  Each street lot line of an interior or through lot. 
(2)  On a corner lot, the shorter lot line abutting a street or the line designated as the front lot line. 
(3)  Any street lot line not forming a corner of a corner lot. 
b.  If the side yard setback facing the street on a corner is at least as deep as the front yard setback requirement, the community development director may designate the front lot line of corner lots for setback purposes. 
14.  Lot Line, Rear. The lot line opposite and most distant from the front line, where such lot line is not also a street lot line. See Figure 18.128-6. 
15.  Lot Line, Street Side. A lot line other than a front lot line on a corner lot abutting a street. 
16.  Lot, Through. A lot which has two or more front lot lines which do not intersect to form a corner lot. 
17.  Lot Width. The distance measured along a straight line between the midpoints of the side property lines. 
M.  "M" Terms. 
1.  Massage Establishment. Means the definition of "massage establishment" as found in municipal code Section 5.32.010(D). 
2.  Manufactured Housing. Single-family detached housing that is built to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. Includes structures known as manufactured homes or modular homes. 
3.  Mixed Use. A development project where residential and commercial/office uses are combined in an integrated development project with significant functional interrelationships and a coherent physical design for both residential and non-residential uses. 
4.  Mobile Home. A vehicle designed and equipped for human habitation, and for being drawn by motor vehicle. A mobile home is a type of "trailer" or "trailer coach" or "semi-trailer" as defined in the California Vehicle Code, and has the same meaning as "mobile home," as defined in the California Health and Safety Code. Excludes modular or manufactured dwellings intended for assembly on-site on permanent foundations and not designed for subsequent or repeated relocation. 
N.  "N" Terms. 
1.  Nonconforming Lot. A legally established lot that does not meet the current minimum depth, width, or area standards of the zone in which the lot is located. 
2.  Nonconforming Structure. A legally established structure which does not meet the current development standards for the zone in which the structure is located. Development standards include but are not limited to setbacks, height or lot coverage regulations of the zone, but do not include standards contained in the uniform codes, such as the building code. 
3.  Nonconforming Use. A legally established use which does not meet the use regulations of the zone in which it is located. 
4.  Nonconforming Use of Land. The use of either unimproved land or land containing minor structures such as fences and buildings less than four hundred square feet in area that does not conform to the regulations of the zone in which it is located. 
O.  "O" Terms. 
1.  Outdoor Display Area. Any area, either permanent or temporary, used for the display of a product or services which is external to a building. 
2.  Overlay Zone. An area established by the zoning code within which requirements apply in addition to requirements of the underlying base zone. 
P.  "P" Term 
1.  Patio. A level surfaced area which has an elevation of not more than eighteen inches, and without walls or a roof. A patio may be constructed of any materials. 
2.  Primary Building. The building that accommodates the primary use of the site. 
3.  Pool House. A building within the immediate vicinity of a swimming pool which may contain changing rooms, restrooms, shower facilities, kitchen and recreation room. A pool house with a kitchen and full bath facilities is considered a secondary dwelling unit. 
4.  Porch. A covered but unenclosed projecting platform which extends from the main wall of a building that may or may not use columns for other ground supports for structural purposes. 
5.  Permitted Use. A use for which no conditional use permit or administrative use permit is required, but which may require a design permit or other approvals as specified in the zoning code. 
Q.  "Q" Terms. 
1.  Quasi-public Use. A use operated by a private nonprofit organization or institution primarily intended to of serve the general public, including but not limited to religious facilities, private schools, and universities, community, youth and senior citizen recreational facilities, and hospitals. 
R.  "R" Terms. 
1.  Recreational Vehicle (RV) Parks. An establishment designed, established, or used for exclusive occupancy by two or more recreational vehicles. RV parks are owned by a single owner or organizations where RV spaces are temporarily rented or leased to a person occupying an RV. 
S.  "S" Terms. 
1.  Setback. The distance between a structure and any lot line, public or private street easements, or drive-aisles. 
2.  Stable. A structure used to confine, feed, exercise, show or provide shelter for horses, cows or other hoofed animals, whether for private, public or commercial use. Includes stalls, corrals, paddocks, barns, and exercise areas and arenas. 
3.  Story. The portion of a building included between the surface of the floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there is no floor above it, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
4.  Street. A public or private thoroughfare, including road, highway, drive, lane, avenue, place, boulevard, and any other thoroughfare that affords the principal means of access to five or more lots. 
5.  Street, Private. A paved vehicular access to five or more lots or units over a common parcel or consecutive easements, primarily used by the owners or occupants of the common parcel or consecutive easements and from which the public may be excluded and which are not maintained by a public agency. 
6.  Structure. Anything constructed or erected that requires attachment to the ground, or attachment to something located on the ground. Excludes objects temporarily attached to the ground, or which are easily moved, including but not limited to dog houses, picnic tables, patio furniture, and children's play structures . 
7.  Supportive Housing. Housing with no limit on length of stay that is occupied by the targeted population and that is linked to an on-site or off-site service that assists the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. Supportive housing is permitted in all zones allowing residential uses and is not subject to any restrictions (e.g., occupancy limits) not imposed on similar dwellings (e.g., single-family homes, apartments) in the same zone in which the supportive housing is located. 
T.  "T" Terms. 
1.  Temporary Use. A use established on private property, that exists for a specified length of time, and which is discontinued within that time period. 
2.  Transitional Housing. A building configured as a rental housing development, but operated under program requirements that require the termination of assistance and recirculating of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at a predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than six months from the beginning of the assistance. Transitional housing is permitted in all zones allowing residential uses and is not subject to any restrictions (e.g., occupancy limits) not imposed on similar dwellings (e.g., single-family homes, apartments) in the same zone in which the transitional housing is located. 
U.  "U" Terms. 
V.  "V" Terms. 
1.  Vehicle Sales Area. An outdoor open area, other than a street, used for the display, sale or rental of new or used passenger vehicles or other motor vehicles, including recreational vehicles and trailers, campers, and boats in operable condition. Excludes repair work and the mounting of campers on vehicles in the sales area. 
2.  Vehicle Wrecking. The dismantling or disassembling of used vehicles or trailers, the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts, and the towing of such vehicles or parts in connection with such activity. 
W.  "W" Terms. 
X.  "X" Terms 
Y.  "Y" Terms. 
1.  Yard, Front. An open space extending the full width of the lot between a building and the front lot line. 
2.  Yard, Rear. An open space extending the full width of the lot between a building and the rear lot line. 
3.  Yard, Side. An open space extending the full width of the lot between a building and the side lot line. 
Z.  "Z" Terms. 
1.  Zoning District. A defined area within the city of Morgan Hill where uniform land use and development standards apply in accordance with the zoning code. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Division II. - Development and Conservation  
Chapter 18.132 - HABITAT CONSERVATION 
 
18.132.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this Chapter 18.132 is to implement the Santa Clara Valley Habitat Conservation Plan/Natural Community Conservation Plan ("HCP/NCCP") and the associated implementing agreement and take permits in order to provide a regulatory framework for promoting the protection and recovery of natural resources, including covered species, while streamlining the permitting process for both publicly funded and privately funded planned development in the City of Morgan Hill. The HCP/NCCP was developed by the county of Santa Clara, the cities of Gilroy and Morgan Hill, the Santa Clara Valley Water District, and the Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority (collectively the "local partners") under the guidance of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the California Department of Fish and Game, and in consultation with stakeholder groups and the general public. 
B.  As a result of the adoption of the HCP/NCCP by the city, the city (among the other local partners) is the recipient of long-term endangered species permits/authorized take coverage from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the California Department of Fish and Game for the city's own activities. In addition to coverage of its own public projects, the county will be able to extend authorized Take coverage to private project applicants under its jurisdiction. 
C.  Rather than separately permitting and mitigating individual projects, the HCP/NCCP evaluates natural resource impacts and mitigation requirements comprehensively in a manner that is more efficient and effective for at-risk species and their essential habitats. This approach allows the city to streamline mitigation requirements into one comprehensive program. The take coverage authorized by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service ("USFWS") and the California Department of Fish and Game ("CDFG") also provides assurances that no further commitments of funds, land, or water will be required to address impacts on covered species beyond that described in the HCP/NCCP to address changed circumstances as long as the HCP/NCCP is properly implemented. 
D.  In addition to strengthening local control over land use and species protection, the HCP/NCCP provides a more efficient process for protecting natural resources by creating new habitat reserves that will be larger in scale, more ecologically valuable, and easier to manage than the individual mitigation sites created under the current approach. This more efficient and streamlined approach to obtaining authorized take coverage for both public and private projects will significantly reduce the time and resources previously required to obtain Take coverage on an individual project-by-project basis. All covered activities that occur within the local plan area will be subject to applicable conditions and fees described in the HCP/NCCP unless the CDFG and USFWS have determined that the activity is not subject to, has already received the necessary take authorizations pursuant to, or has otherwise complied with federal and state endangered species laws, as verified by the implementing entity and described in Chapter 6.2 of the HCP/NCCP. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.132.020 - Adoption of habitat conservation plan/natural community conservation plan by reference. 
The HCP/NCCP is incorporated by reference as though fully set forth herein. Complete copies of the HCP/NCCP are available for inspection at the city of Morgan Hill community development agency. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.132.030 - Definitions. 
The definitions set forth in this section shall govern the application and interpretation of this chapter. Words and phrases not defined in this section shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
A.  "Building permit" means a building permit for a building or structure, including a partial permit such as a foundation-only permit, or any other ministerial permit or approval for a project that authorizes a ground-disturbing activity for a covered activity. 
B.  "Covered activity" means any activity defined in Section 2.3 of Chapter 2 of the HCP/NCCP as a covered activity and not otherwise exempted from the requirements of the HCP/NCCP as provided in the HCP/NCCP. 
C.  "Covered species" means the species, listed and non-listed, whose conservation and management are provided for in the HCP/NCCP and for which incidental take is authorized by the wildlife agencies pursuant to the take permits. Covered species are also listed in Exhibit A to the implementing agreement. 
D.  "Habitat conservation plan/natural community conservation plan" or "HCP/NCCP" means the Santa Clara Valley Habitat Conservation Plan/Natural Community Conservation Plan adopted by the board of supervisors on October 17, 2012, and any amendments thereto. 
E.  "Implementing agreement" means that agreement made and entered into by and among the United States Fish and Wildlife Service ("USFWS") of the United States Department of the Interior, the California Department of Fish and Game ("CDFG") of the state of California Natural Resources Agency, the Santa Clara Valley Habitat Agency (the "implementing entity"), the county of Santa Clara ("county"), the city of San Jose ("San Jose"), the city of Gilroy ("Gilroy"), the city of Morgan Hill ("Morgan Hill"), the Santa Clara Valley Water District ("water district"), and the Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority ("VTA") that defines the parties' respective roles and responsibilities and provides a common understanding of actions that will be undertaken to implement the HCP/NCCP. 
F.  "Implementing entity" means the Santa Clara Valley Habitat Agency formed by and among the county of Santa Clara and the cities of Gilroy, Morgan Hill, and San Jose pursuant to the Joint Powers Act, Government Code § 6500 et seq. 
G.  "Local plan area" means that portion of the geographic study area defined in the HCP/NCCP that lies within the city of Morgan Hill. 
H.  "Mitigation fees" or "fees" means any habitat plan fee(s) that applies to covered activities in the local plan area as adopted by the implementing entity in accordance with Chapter 9 of the HCP/NCCP and the fee studies in support thereof, and any amendments to those fees, unless otherwise exempted from the fee requirements of the HCP/NCCP by the implementing entity. 
I.  "Planning permit" means any discretionary permit or approval that authorizes a ground-disturbing activity for a covered activity including, but not limited to, a tentative subdivision map, parcel map, conditional use permit, architecture and site approval, building site approval, grading permit or any other discretionary permit, excluding general plan amendments, zoning and rezoning, annexation, specific plans, and area development policies. 
J.  "Project applicant" means any person or entity applying for a planning permit or building permit for a project authorizing a ground-disturbing activity for a covered activity, including any person or entity opting in to the HCP/NCCP pursuant to Chapter 6.2 of the HCP/NCCP. 
K.  "Take" and "taking" have the same meaning provided by the Federal Endangered Species Act ("ESA") (16 U.S.C. §§ 1531-1544) and its implementing regulations with regard to activities subject to the ESA, and also have the same meaning provided in Section 86 of the California Fish and Game Code with regard to activities subject to the California Endangered Species Act ("CESA") (Fish and Game Code § 2050 et seq.), and the California Natural Community Conservation Planning Act ("NCCPA") (Fish and Game Code §§ 2800-2835). 
L.  "Take permits" means the federal incidental take permit issued by USFWS to the implementing entity, the county, San Jose, Gilroy, Morgan Hill, the water district, and VTA (collectively, "permittees") based on the HCP/NCCP pursuant to Section 10(a)(1)(B) of the ESA, and the state incidental take permit issued by CDFG to the permittees based on the HCP/NCCP pursuant to Section 2835 of the California Fish and Game Code. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.132.040 - Application to covered activities. 
All project applicants for covered activities within the local plan area shall comply with the conditions on covered activities listed in Chapter 6 of the HCP/NCCP. Each planning permit application (or building permit application where no planning permit is required) for a covered activity in the local plan area shall include details of the methods and timing in which the project will comply with the HCP/NCCP in the form and manner required by the director of community and economic development (or any successor officer). Applicable conditions on covered activities from Chapter 6 of the HCP/NCCP as well as other measures required to implement the conservation strategy of the HCP/NCCP shall be included in each planning permit (or building permit where no planning permit is required) approval for a covered activity. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.132.050 - Mitigation fees. 
A.  As a condition of each planning permit (or building permit where no planning permit is required) for a covered activity in the local plan area, the mitigation fees shall be paid in full by the private project applicant to the city no later than the date of issuance by the city of a building permit. The mitigation fees shall be paid to the city at the time of issuance of the first building permit if more than one building permit is required for the project. These mitigation fees are in addition to any fees that may be charged by the city for processing building permits and planning permits. 
B.  If the implementing entity authorizes another manner of compensation in lieu of the mitigation fees (such as a land donation in lieu of payment of the mitigation fees), the project applicant shall provide the city with written documentation from the implementing entity of compliance with such alternative manner of payment and the dollar equivalent amount of such alternative manner of compensation. 
C.  In the event the city determines the project subject to the planning permit or building permit to be exempt from payment of the mitigation fees, for reasons specified in Section 9.4.1 of the HCP/NCCP, no mitigation fees shall be required for the project. 
D.  The city shall transmit the mitigation fees to the implementing entity pursuant to the schedule established by the implementing entity. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.132.060 - Authorized take coverage. 
Upon payment in full of the mitigation fees and approval of planning or building permits incorporating all applicable HCP/NCCP conditions of approval, the project applicant shall receive authorized take coverage for the covered activity in accordance with the terms of the HCP/NCCP, the implementing agreement, and the take permits. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.132.070 - Guidelines. 
The director of community and economic development (or any successor officer) may adopt guidelines to assist in the implementation and administration of all aspects of this chapter with respect to project applicants. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.132.080 - Interpretation. 
In the event of a conflict between any term or requirement of this chapter, the HCP/NCCP, the implementing agreement or the take permits, the term or requirement of the take permits shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.132.090 - Operative date. 
This chapter shall be operative upon adoption by the implementing entity of the mitigation fees and the issuance of the take permits by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the California Department of Fish and Game. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.136 - CEQA Guidelines 
 
18.136.010 - Guidelines document—Created—Title. 
There is created a document known as the "City of Morgan Hill Guidelines for Evaluating Environmental Impacts and Reviewing Projects." 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.136.020 - Guidelines document—Administrative uses. 
The document referred to in Section 18.136.010 of this chapter shall be used by the city in administering its responsibilities under the California Environmental Quality Act. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.136.030 - Guidelines document—General contents 
The document referred to in Section 18.136.010 of this chapter shall include: 
A.  The ordinance codified in this chapter and any amendments to it; and 
B.  All documents incorporated by reference into this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.136.040 - Guidelines document—Regulations adopted by reference. 
The document referred to in Section 18.136.010 of this chapter shall include the state CEQA Guidelines prescribed by the Secretary of Resources, state of California, on January 1, 1993, and found in Sections 15000 et seq. of the California Administrative Code (hereinafter "Guidelines"), and these guidelines are adopted and by this reference incorporated into this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.136.050 - Delegation of responsibility. 
The following delegation of responsibility is made pursuant to Section 15025 of the guidelines. The director of the community development department shall be responsible for the following functions: 
A.  Determining whether a project is exempt, ministerial or of no environmental effect; 
B.  Conducting an initial study and deciding whether to prepare a draft EIR or negative declaration; 
C.  Preparing a negative declaration or EIR; 
D.  Determining that a negative declaration or other environmental document has been completed within a period of as specified in the California Environmental Quality Act or its guidelines; 
E.  Preparing responses to comments on environmental documents; 
F.  Filing of notices; 
G.  Approval of negative declarations for administrative project approvals that are not categorically exempt. 
H.  Preparation of mitigations to negative declarations and the mitigation monitoring programs; and reviewing compliance with adopted mitigation monitoring programs after adoption of negative declarations; 
I.  Determination that a project is "de minimis" in its effect on fish and game resources of the state, and therefore that payment to the state Department of Fish and Game of fees for review of negative declarations or EIR's is unnecessary, where based upon evidence on file with the city pursuant to law; 
J.  Identification of bibliographic sources on which the findings of an initial study can be based, relative to geology, biology, traffic engineering and similar disciplines, to substantiate determinations of impacts or nonimpacts. 
K.  Reviewing the work of consultants used in expanded initial studies and EIR's and making determinations that the work is adequate for submittal to the planning commission, and that such studies reflect the independent judgment of the city once modified with the director's final comments. 
L.  Pursuant to Section 15106 of the CEQA Guidelines, sending a draft environmental impact report to the state clearinghouse for a period of forty-five days, unless the clearinghouse allows a shorter review period. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.136.060 - Appeal—From necessity to file EIR. 
Any person may appeal to the city council the community development director's final determination that a project requires an environmental impact report. The appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk not later than the tenth day following the date upon which the notice of preparation was first posted or mailed to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.136.070 - Appeal—Decisions on negative declarations. 
A.  Reconsideration. Any person may request reconsideration of the community development director's decision to prepare a negative declaration. The request shall be in writing and shall be filed with the community development director not later than the tenth day following the date upon which the notice of negative declaration was first posted or mailed to the applicant. The community development director shall schedule a hearing within twenty-one days after the date of filing of the request for reconsideration. The director shall cause notice of time, date and place of the hearing to be given not less than five days prior to the subject hearing to the requestor and applicant, and to any other person who requests such in writing. The director shall advise the requestor and the applicant in writing of his decision. The decision reached by the director upon reconsideration shall be final. 
B.  Appeal Following Reconsideration. Any person may appeal to the city council the community development director's final decision that a project requires a negative declaration. The appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk not later than the tenth day following the date upon which the requestor and applicant are notified of the community development director's final decision on a request for reconsideration. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.136.080 - Appeal—Filing stays director's determination. 
The filing of the appeal pursuant to Section 18.136.060 or subsection B of Section 18.136.070 shall stay the community development director's determination until a final decision is rendered by the city council, and the decision shall be rendered within forty-five days after the filing of the appeal with the city clerk. The city clerk shall cause notice of the time, date and place of the hearing to be given not less than five days prior to subject hearing to the appellant and applicant, if he is not the appellant, and to any other person who requests such in writing. In making its determination, the council shall be guided by the same criteria as the community development director must use in making his determination. The city clerk shall advise the appellant and the applicant, if he is not the appellant, in writing of the council's decision. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.136.090 - Length of review period. 
The public review period referred to in Section 15087(c) of the Guidelines shall be forty-five days from the date of the notice, unless a shorter period of time is authorized by the state clearinghouse. A period of up to an additional sixty days may be allowed when it is determined that the draft EIR is unusually complex or lengthy, and that the additional time is necessary to allow the public adequate time to review and comment upon the draft EIR. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.136.100 - Public agencies with special expertise or jurisdiction by law. 
The following public agencies have jurisdiction by law and/or special expertise with respect to various projects and project locations (Section 15087(f), Guidelines). Depending upon the specific project, some or all of the following agencies must be given the opportunity to review and comment upon the draft EIR: 
A.  Santa Clara County, planning and public works; 
B.  Local agency formation commission of Santa Clara County; 
C.  California Department of Transportation (CalTrans); 
D.  City of San Jose; 
E.  Santa Clara Valley Water District; 
F.  California State Regional Water Quality Control Board; 
G.  California State Resources Agency (for projects of statewide concern). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.136.110 - Forms. 
In furtherance of the duties delegated to him in Section 18.136.050 of this chapter, the community development director shall develop and utilize forms substantially similar to those found in the appendices of the Guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.136.120 - Guidelines document—Compilation. 
The community development director shall compile the elements of the document referred to in Section 18.136.010 of this chapter, and shall make the document available for sale to the general public for a reasonable fee. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.136.130 - Guidelines document—Available to public. 
A copy of the document referred to in Section 18.136.010 of this chapter shall be maintained in the city clerk's office at all times, and shall be made available to the public upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.136.140 - Mitigation monitoring. 
A.  The city shall maintain a program to monitor and implement mitigations of negative declarations, and environmental impact reports administered by the community development director. Such mitigations may be included in any of the following: 
1.  Separate lists of mitigations in a negative declaration; 
2.  Conditions of any subdivision, use permit, variance, site review or other similar entitlement, which address environmental concerns; 
3.  Amendments to plot plans, subdivision maps or other visual exhibits, which eliminate any significant impact identified by the city through integration of mitigations into the design of the project as finally approved. 
B.  The monitoring program shall consist of the customary reviews by city departments for conformity of final plans and specifications with adopted requirements and mitigations. In exceptional circumstances, such as the approval of a unique and complex land use which produces measurable pollutants or other materials in need of mitigation, additional steps may be taken by the city to monitor mitigation of such impacts on an ongoing basis. 
C.  In the public interest, the community development director may accept reports and other forms of monitoring submitted by interested third parties, at no cost to the city, regarding the effectiveness of the mitigation measures which have been adopted. The community development director shall decide whether the reports or other monitoring submitted are accurate and provide a necessary supplement to the monitoring performed by the city, and may apply the submitted information to the monitoring program. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.140 - POST CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION 
 
18.140.010 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in watersheds in compliance with applicable provisions of the Federal Clean Water Act and any National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) storm water discharge permits issued to the city of Morgan Hill, through the following objectives: 
A.  Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from any development in order to reduce flooding, siltation and streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream channels; 
B.  Increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater runoff from development which would otherwise degrade local water quality 
C.  Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff which flows from any specific site during and following development to not exceed the pre-development hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable. 
D.  Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management controls and to ensure that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety. 
The above objectives shall be met through adoption and implementation of best management practices (BMPs) in design, construction and maintenance. These BMPs shall be incorporated into permanent site design features, which shall remain functioning throughout the life of the development. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.140.020 - Definitions. 
The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "One hundred thousand square foot commercial development" means any commercial development that creates at least one hundred thousand square feet of impermeable surface, including parking areas. 
B.  "Automotive repair shop" means a facility that is categorized in any one of the following Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes: 5013, 5014, 5541, 7532-7534, or 7536-7539. 
C.  "Authorized enforcement officer" means the city of Morgan Hill chief engineer and those individuals designated by the chief engineer to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including the code enforcement officer(s) of the city of Morgan Hill's community development department. 
D.  "Best management practices" or "BMP" means activities, practices, and procedures as specified in Section 18.140.040 to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to the municipal storm drain system and waters of the United States. Best management practices (BMPs) include but are not limited to: treatment facilities and methods to remove pollutants from storm water; operating and maintenance procedures; facility management practices to control runoff, spillage or leaks of non-storm water, waste disposal, and drainage from materials storage; erosion and sediment control practices; and the prohibition of specific activities, practices, and procedures and such other provisions as the city determines appropriate for the control of pollutants. 
E.  "Clean Water Act" means the federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
F.  "Commercial development" means any development on private land that is not heavy industrial or residential. The category includes, but is not limited to: hospitals, laboratories and other medical facilities, educational institutions, recreational facilities, plant nurseries, multi-apartment buildings, car wash facilities, mini-malls and other business complexes, shopping malls, hotels, office buildings, public warehouses and other light industrial complexes. 
G.  "Development" means land disturbing activities; structural development, including construction or installation of a building or structure, creation of impervious surfaces; and improvements related to land subdivision; any activity that moves soils or substantially alters the pre-existing vegetated or man-made cover of any land. This includes, but is not limited to, grading, digging, cutting, scraping, stockpiling or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving, pavement removal, exterior construction, substantial removal of vegetation where soils are disturbed including but not limited to removal by clearing or grubbing, or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves streambed alterations or the diversion or piping of any watercourse. Development does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or the original purpose of the facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities (i.e., land disturbances) required to protect public health and safety. 
H.  "Authorized enforcement officer" means the chief engineer and his or her designee, including authorized enforcement officer. 
I.  "Hillside" means property located in an area with known erosive soil conditions, where the development contemplates grading on any natural slope that is twenty-five percent or greater. 
J.  "Impervious surface" means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
K.  "Industrial general permit" means a NPDES permit issued by the state water resources control board for the discharge of storm water associated with industrial activity. 
L.  "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) storm water discharge permits" means general, group, and individual storm water discharge permits which regulate facilities defined in federal NPDES regulations pursuant to the Clean Water Act. The California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Central Coast Region (hereinafter, regional board) and the state Water Resources Control Board have adopted general storm water discharge permits, including but not limited to the general construction activity and general industrial activity permits. 
M.  "Operation and maintenance agreement" means a written agreement entered into pursuant to Section 18.140.090, providing for the long-term operation and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
N.  "Owner" means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
O.  "Parking lot" means land area or facility for the temporary parking or storage of motor vehicles used personally, for business or for commerce with a lot size of five thousand square feet or more, or with twenty-five or more parking spaces. 
P.  "Receiving waters" means any natural stream, river, creek, ditch, channel, canal, waterway, gully, ravine or wash, in and including any adjacent area that is subject to inundation from overflow or flood water. 
Q.  "Redevelopment" means, on an already developed site, the creation or addition of at least five thousand square feet of impervious surface, or the expansion of a building footprint or addition of a structure; structural development including an increase in gross floor area and/ or exterior construction or remodeling; and land disturbing activities related with structural or impervious surfaces that results in an increase of fifty percent of the impervious surface of a previously existing development. 
R.  "Restaurant" means a stand-alone facility that sells prepared foods and drinks for consumption, including stationary lunch counters and refreshment stands selling prepared foods and drinks for immediate consumption. (SIC code 5812). 
S.  "Retail gasoline outlet" means any facility engaged in selling gasoline and lubricating oils. 
T.  "Site" means any tract, lot or parcel of land or combination of tracts, lots, or parcels of land, which are in one ownership, or are contiguous and in diverse ownership where a development is to be performed as part of a unit, subdivision, or project. 
U.  "Storm drain" means any pipe, conduit or sewer of the city designed or used for the disposal of storm and surface waters and drainage including unpolluted cooling water and unpolluted industrial process water, but excluding any community sanitary sewer system. 
V.  "Stormwater management" means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
W.  "Stormwater runoff management plan" means a document required pursuant to Section 18.140.070, describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this ordinance. 
X.  "Stormwater runoff" means water from rain, landscape irrigation, or other sources that flows over the land surface without entering the soil. 
Y.  "Treatment control BMP" means any engineered system designed to remove pollutants by simple gravity settling of particulate pollutants, filtration, biological uptake, media adsorption or any other physical, biological, or chemical process. 
Z.  "Watercourse" means any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, ditch, channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash, in and including any adjacent area that is subject to inundation from overflow or flood water. 
AA.  "Water quality impact" means any deleterious effect on waters or wetlands, including their quality, quantity, surface area, species composition, aesthetics or usefulness for human or natural uses that are or may potentially be harmful or injurious to human health, welfare, safety or property, to biological productivity, diversity, or stability or which unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property, including outdoor recreation. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.140.030 - Applicability: Permanent storm water pollution prevention measures required. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to development or redevelopment of the following: 
1.  One hundred thousand square feet commercial development. 
2.  Automotive repair shops. 
3.  Retail gasoline outlets. 
4.  Restaurants. 
5.  Hillside residential. 
6.  Parking lots residential with ten or more units or greater than five thousand square feet of impervious area. 
7.  Projects requiring a general NPDES permit for stormwater discharges associated with industrial activities. 
8.  Impervious surfaces ten thousand or more square feet. 
9.  Impervious surfaces within one hundred feet of receiving waters. 
10.  Vehicle or equipment fueling, washing, or maintenance area. 
11.  Commercial or industrial waste handling or storage, excluding typical office or household waste. 
12.  Development or redevelopment projects disturbing greater than or equal to one acre. 
B.  No final building or occupancy permit shall be issued without the written certification of the chief engineer or designee that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.140.040 - Design standards and selection of best management practices. 
Projects meeting the criteria of Section 18.140.030A, must meet the requirements of the following design standards and selection of best management practices: 
A.  Stormwater best management practices shall be selected and designed to the satisfaction of the chief engineer or designee in accordance with the requirements contained in the most recent versions of the following documents: 
1.  City of Morgan Hill stormwater post construction best management practices development standards for new development and redevelopment; 
2.  California Storm Water Quality Association Best Management Practice Handbooks; 
3.  City of Gilroy, city of Morgan Hill and county of Santa Clara Regional Stormwater Management Plan (SWMP), as approved by the Central Coast Regional Water Quality Control Board; 
4.  City of Morgan Hill Hydro-modification Management Plan, as approved by the Central Coast Regional Water Quality Control Board; 
Any conflict of BMPs from the above documents shall be approved by the chief engineer. 
B.  Other references which can be used for selection of design BMPs to the satisfaction of the chief engineer or designee are: 
1.  Santa Clara Valley Urban Runoff Pollution Prevention Program (SCVURPPP) "Guidance for Implementing Stormwater Regulations for New and Redevelopment Projects;" 
2.  "Start at the Source Design Guidance Manual developed by the Bay Area Storm Water Management Agencies Association (BASMAA); 
3.  Bay Area Stormwater Management Agencies Association "Using Site Design Standards to Meet Development Standards for Stormwater Quality - A Companion Document to Start at the Source". 
C.  Design Standards for Structural or Treatment Control BMPs. The post-construction treatment control BMPs shall incorporate, at a minimum, either a volumetric or flow based treatment control design standard, or both, as identified below to mitigate (infiltrate, filter or treat) storm water runoff. 
1.  Volumetric treatment control BMP — Treatment systems depending on volume capacity, such as detention/retention units or infiltration structures, shall be designed to treat stormwater runoff equal to: 
a.  The maximized stormwater quality capture volume for the area, based on historical rainfall records, determined using the formula and volume capture coefficients set forth in Urban Runoff Quality Management, WEF Manual of Practice No. 23/ASCE Manual of Practice No. 87, (1998), pages 175-178 (e.i. approximately the eighty-fifth percentile twenty-four-hour storm runoff event); or 
b.  The volume of annual runoff required to achieve eighty percent or more capture, determined in accordance with the methodology set forth in Appendix D of the California Stormwater Best Management Practices Handbook for New Development and Redevelopment (2003), using local rainfall data; or 
c.  The volume of runoff produced from a historical-record based reference twenty-four-hour rainfall criterion for "treatment" that achieves approximately the same reduction in pollutant loads achieved by the eighty-fifth percentile twenty-four-hour runoff event. 
2.  Flow-based treatment control BMP — Treatment BMPs whose primary mode of action depends on flow capacity, such as swales, sand filters, or wetlands, shall be sized to treat: 
a.  The flow of runoff produced from a rain event equal to at least two times the eighty-fifth percentile hourly rainfall intensity for the area; or 
b.  The flow of runoff produced from a rain event that will result in treatment of the same portion of runoff as treated using volumetric standards above. 
D.  Design Standards for Peak Storm Water Runoff Discharge Rates. Post-development peak storm water runoff discharge rates shall not exceed the estimated pre development rate for developments where the increased peak storm water discharge rate will result in increased potential for downstream erosion. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.140.050 - Stormwater runoff management plan required. 
A.  Projects meeting the criteria of Section 18.140.030A must provide a stormwater runoff management plan. The stormwater runoff management plan shall detail how runoff and associated water quality impacts resulting from the activity will be controlled or managed by the project's post construction BMP designs. 
B.  No building permit shall be issued until the stormwater runoff management plan has been reviewed and approved by the chief engineer or designee. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.140.060 - Stormwater runoff management plan contents. 
The stormwater runoff management plan shall include sufficient information to evaluate the environmental characteristics of affected areas, the potential impacts of the proposed development on water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of measures proposed for managing stormwater runoff. The minimum information submitted for support of the stormwater management plan shall meet the requirements as outlined in City of Morgan Hill Stormwater Post Construction Best Management Practices Development Standards for New Development and Redevelopment manual. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.140.070 - Preparation of the stormwater runoff management plan. 
A.  The stormwater runoff management plan shall be prepared under the direction of a professional civil engineer registered in the state of California. The responsible professional civil engineer shall stamp and sign the approved stormwater runoff management plan. 
B.  The chief engineer or designee may require a developer to provide a signed certification from the civil engineer responsible for preparing the stormwater runoff management plan that all stormwater best management practices have been designed to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
C.  Each certifying civil engineer shall establish to the city's satisfaction that such person has been trained on the design of stormwater quality best management practices not more than three years prior to the certification signature date. 
D.  Qualifying training shall be conducted by an organization with stormwater quality management expertise, such as a university, the Bay Area Stormwater Management Agencies Association, the American Society of Civil Engineers, the American Public Works Association, or the California Water Environment Association. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.140.080 - Stormwater BMP operation, maintenance, and replacement responsibility. 
A.  For the life of projects meeting the criteria of Section 18.140.030A, all on-site stormwater management facilities shall be operated and maintained in good condition and promptly repaired/replaced by the property owner(s), an owners' or homeowners' association or other legal entity approved by the city. 
B.  Any repairs or restoration/replacement and maintenance shall be in accordance with city-approved plans. 
C.  The property owner(s) shall develop a maintenance schedule for the life of any stormwater management facility and shall describe the maintenance to be completed, the time period for completion, and who shall perform the maintenance. This maintenance schedule shall be included with the approved stormwater runoff management plan. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.140.090 - Stormwater BMP operation and maintenance agreement. 
A.  Prior to the issuance of any building permit requiring stormwater management BMPs, the owner(s) of the site shall enter into a formal written stormwater BMP operation and maintenance agreement with the city. The city shall record this agreement, against the property or properties involved, with the County of Santa Clara and it shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the stormwater management treatment BMPs. 
B.  The stormwater BMP operation and maintenance agreement shall require that the BMPs not be modified and that BMP maintenance activities not alter the designed function of the facility from its original design unless approved by the city prior to the commencement of the proposed modification or maintenance activity. 
C.  The stormwater BMP operation and maintenance agreement shall provide that in the event that maintenance or repair is neglected, or the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public health or safety, the city shall have the authority to perform maintenance and/or repair work and to recover the costs from the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.140.100 - Stormwater BMP inspection responsibility. 
A.  The property owner(s) shall be responsible for having all stormwater management facilities inspected for condition and function by a knowledgeable party. 
B.  Unless otherwise required by the chief engineer or designee, stormwater facility inspections shall be done at least twice per year, once in fall, in preparation for the wet season, and once in winter. Written records shall be kept of all inspections and shall include, at minimum, the following information: 
1.  Site address; 
2.  Date and time of inspection; 
3.  Name of the person conducting the inspection; 
4.  List of stormwater facilities inspected; 
5.  Condition of each stormwater facility inspected; 
6.  Description of any needed maintenance or repairs; and 
7.  As applicable, the need for site reinspection. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.140.110 - Records of maintenance and inspection activities. 
On or before April 15th of each year, the party responsible for the operation and maintenance of on-site stormwater management facilities under the BMP operation and maintenance agreement shall provide the chief engineer or designee with records of all inspections, maintenance and repairs. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.140.120 - Failure to maintain. 
A.  If the responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the stormwater BMP operation and maintenance agreement, the authorized enforcement officer may give a thirty-day written notice to such responsible party under BMP operation and maintenance agreement to correct the failure and breach of contractual obligation. 
B.  If such responsible party fails to correct such conditions, the city may take such remedies such provided in the BMP operation and maintenance agreement. Additionally, such conditions shall be deemed a nuisance subject to all procedures, abatement of such conditions and remedies as provided in Chapter 1.18 of this code. 
C.  In the event the city determines that the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four hours written notice from the city shall be sufficient in lieu of the thirty-day written notice required under Section 18.140.120A. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.140.130 - Authority to inspect. 
A.  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this chapter, or whenever the authorized enforcement officer has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter, the authorized enforcement officer may enter such premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same and to inspect and copy records related to storm water compliance provided that (i) if such building or premises be occupied, he or she shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and (ii) if such building or premises be unoccupied, he or she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
B.  In any circumstance where there appears an immediate threat to the public health or safety, the authorized enforcement officer may enter any structure or premises without the consent of any person or court process. 
C.  Routine or area inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of this chapter, including but not limited to random sampling and/or sampling in areas with evidence of storm water contamination, illicit discharges, discharges of non-storm water to the storm water system, or similar factors. 
D.  The city shall have the right to establish on any property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. During any inspection as provided herein, the authorized enforcement officer may take any samples and perform any testing deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or to record site activities. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.140.140 - Notice of violation. 
Whenever the authorized enforcement officer finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the authorized enforcement officer may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
A.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
B.  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
C.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
D.  The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
E.  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
F.  The implementation of BMP, source control or treatment BMPs; 
G.  Compliance with the stormwater runoff management plan and the BMP operation and maintenance agreement. 
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by the city or a contractor designated by the authorized enforcement officer and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator pursuant to Section 18.140.170. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.140.150 - Appeal. 
Any person receiving a notice of violation under Section 18.140.140, above may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement officer to the city manager. The notice of appeal must be received by the city manager within five days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the city manager or his/her designee shall take place within fifteen days from the date of city's receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the city manager or designee shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.140.160 - Abatement by city. 
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal under Section 18.140.150, within ten days of the decision of the city manager upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement officer, then the city or a contractor designated by the authorized enforcement officer may enter upon the subject private property and is authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the city or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.140.170 - Charging cost of abatement. 
Within thirty days after abatement of the nuisance by city, the authorized enforcement officer shall notify the property owner of the property of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment with the city clerk within fifteen days. The city clerk shall set the matter for public hearing by the city council. The decision of the city council shall be set forth by resolution and shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.140.180 - Urgency abatement. 
The authorized enforcement officer is authorized to require immediate abatement of any violation of this chapter that constitutes an immediate threat to the health, safety or well-being of the public. If any such violation is not abated immediately as directed by the authorized enforcement officer, the city is authorized to enter onto private property and to take any and all measures required to remediate the violation. Any expense related to such remediation undertaken by the city shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner and/or responsible party. Any relief obtained under this section shall not prevent city from seeking other and further relief authorized under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.140.190 - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. A violation of or failure to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punished as set forth in Chapter 1.24 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.140.200 - Compensatory action. 
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this chapter, the authorized enforcement officer may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.140.210 - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties hereinbefore provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored by the city at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken by the city pursuant to Chapter 1.18 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.140.220 - Acts potentially resulting in a violation of the Federal Clean Water Act and/or California Porter-Cologne Act. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any provision of any requirement issued pursuant to this chapter may also be in violation of the Clean Water Act and/or the Porter-Cologne Act and may be subject to the sanctions of those acts including civil and criminal penalties. Any enforcement action authorized under this chapter shall also include written notice to the violator of such potential liability. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.140.230 - Fees set by resolution. 
The city council shall establish, by resolution, any fees necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.144 - SCHOOL IMPACTION 
 
18.144.010 - Findings of overcrowding—Notice to city. 
If at any time during the school year the board of education of the Morgan Hill Unified School District finds that overcrowding exists within the district which impairs the normal functioning of educational programs, and that all reasonable methods of mitigating conditions of overcrowding have been evaluated and no feasible method for reducing such conditions exists, the board of education of the Unified School District shall so notify the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.144.020 - Notice of findings—Contents. 
The notice of findings shall be in the form of a resolution by the board of education of the Morgan Hill Unified School District specifying: 
A.  The school or schools found to be overcrowded, including a map of the attendance area; 
B.  The criteria used by the board of education to determine overcrowding; 
C.  The various methods of mitigating conditions considered by the board of education, including: 
1.  Temporary buildings, 
2.  Busing, 
3.  Double sessions, 
4.  Extended day programs, 
5.  Year-round school attendance, 
6.  Open enrollment, 
7.  Attendance area realignment, 
8.  Elimination of low-priority uses at impacted schools. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.144.030 - Notice of findings—Public hearing—Expiration and renewal. 
A.  The city council shall set a public hearing within thirty days of receipt of such notice of findings by the board of education of the Morgan Hill Unified School District. Following completion of the public hearing, the city council shall adopt a declaration of impaction if it concurs with the findings of the board of education that conditions of overcrowding exist. 
B.  "Conditions of overcrowding" means that the total enrollment of a school, including enrollment from proposed development, exceeds the capacity of such school, as determined by the board of education of the district. 
C.  The declaration of impaction automatically expires one year from date of adoption unless application for renewal is made by the board of education. Application for renewal shall be processed and acted upon in the same manner as the original notice of findings. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.144.040 - Mitigating measures—Submittal required. 
A.  Together with its notice of findings, the board of education shall submit the range of mitigating measures available to an applicant for a building permit. The specific mitigating measures shall be based upon the following: 
1.  That any dedication of land or fees to be paid, or both, as determined by the board of education, shall bear a reasonable relationship and will be limited to the needs of the community for interim school facilities; 
2.  Shall be reasonably related and limited to the need for school facilities caused by the development. 
B.  Fees shall not exceed the amount necessary to pay five annual lease payments for the interim facilities. 
C.  Only the payment of fees may be required in subdivisions containing fifty parcels or less. 
D.  In lieu of fees, the builder of a residential development may, at his/her option and at his/her expense, provide interim facilities, owned or controlled by such builder, at the place designated by the school district, and at the conclusion of the fifth year, the builder shall, at the builder's expense, remove the interim facilities from such place. Facilities provided under this section shall: 
1.  Meet all the standards of safety, access, durability, aesthetics and usability required of other district facilities; 
2.  Conform with all building requirements of the district, city, county and state; 
3.  Be maintained by the builder pursuant to district standards; 
4.  Be insured to the level of insurance carried by the district, including liability, fire, allied perils, and vandalism; 
5.  Be energy-efficient; 
6.  Be provided within ninety days of request by the district; 
7.  Be removed within sixty days of a request by the district, with the site restored to its original condition. Further, the builder shall be responsible for all damages suffered by the district in the installation, operation and removal of such facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.144.050 - Mitigating measures—Required when—Type. 
A.  Upon the adoption of a declaration of impaction by the city council, all persons applying for a building permit to construct a new residential structure, or move a residential structure into the city, shall be required to dedicate land or pay an appropriate fee to mitigate any potential impact cause by such development. "Residential structure" shall include mobile homes. 
B.  Based upon the recommendations of the board of education and the criteria in Section 18.144.040, the city council shall adopt the mitigation measures to be applied and/or set the mitigation fee by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.144.060 - Satisfaction of mitigating measures—Certification. 
The responsibility for assuring that actions are taken to obtain compliance with the mitigation measures and/or collect mitigation fees shall be the responsibility of the Morgan Hill Unified School District, in accordance with the provisions outlined within this chapter. The district shall issue to each developer, meeting his/her obligation of mitigation, a letter so stating. The city shall issue the building permit only upon receipt of a copy of the letter. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.144.070 - Mitigating measures—Annual report. 
Prior to August 1st of each year, the district shall submit to the city council a report indicating: 
A.  The mitigation fee fund balance as of the close of the previous fiscal year, showing income from each jurisdiction; 
B.  A listing of the facilities leased, purchased and constructed during the previous fiscal year; 
C.  The identification of those attendance areas which are anticipated to be overcrowded at the beginning of the fall semester, and the anticipated date when the overcrowding will no longer exist. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.144.080 - Prior agreements not affected. 
The adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not be construed as to change any agreements currently in effect between a developer and the Morgan Hill Unified School District. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.144.090 - Waiver of mitigation fees—Conditions. 
A.  Any applicant for a building permit may request of the board of education of the Morgan Hill Unified School District that all or a portion of the fee be waived. 
B.  Following a public hearing on the request for waiver, the board of education may, upon finding overriding economic or personal hardship, waive all or a portion of the mitigating fees, and so notify the city. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.148 - WATER CONSERVATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note— The appendices referenced in Ch. 18.148 are not set out herein at length, but are on file and available for public inspection in the offices of the city. 
 
18.148.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the city of Morgan Hill water conservation in landscaping ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.148.020 - Applicability. 
A.  The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all of the following landscape projects: 
1.  New construction projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than five hundred square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review, 
2.  Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than one thousand square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check, or design review; 
3.  Existing landscapes limited to Sections 493, 493.1 and 493.2 in Division 2, Title 23 of the California Code of Regulations; all other existing landscapes shall only be subject to the provisions for existing landscapes provided for in Section 18.148.210, "Provisions for existing landscapes over one acre in size". 
4.  Cemeteries. New and rehabilitated cemeteries shall only be subject to the provisions of Section 18.148.080, "Water budget calculations", Section 18.148.130, "Landscape audit report", and Section 18.148.150, "Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule." Existing cemeteries are limited to Section 18.148.210, "Provisions for existing landscapes over one acre in size." 
B.  Any project with an aggregate landscape area of two thousand five hundred square feet or less may comply with the performance requirements of this ordinance or conform to the prescriptive measures contained in Appendix D. 
C.  For projects using treated or untreated graywater or rainwater captured on site, any lot or parcel within the project that has less than two thousand five hundred square feet of landscape and meets the lot or parcel's landscape water requirement (estimated total water use) entirely with treated or untreated graywater or through stored rainwater captured on site is subject only to Appendix D, Section B.5. 
D.  This ordinance does not apply to: 
1.  New construction with irrigated landscape areas less than five hundred square feet; 
2.  Rehabilitated landscapes with irrigated landscape areas less than one thousand square feet; 
3.  Landscapes that do not require a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review, or new or expanded water service; 
4.  Landscapes, or portions of landscapes, that are designed to be only irrigated for an establishment period of one to three years and will not be irrigated after the establishment period; 
5.  Registered local, state or federal historical sites where landscaping establishes a historical landscape style, as determined by a public board or commission responsible for architectural review or historic preservation; 
6.  Ecological restoration or mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or 
7.  Community gardens or plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public, agricultural uses, commercial nurseries and sod farms. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.148.030 - Definitions. 
A.  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1.  "Applied water" means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape. 
2.  "Automatic irrigation controller" means a timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system. Automatic irrigation controllers are able to self-adjust and schedule irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (weather-based) or soil moisture data. 
3.  "Backflow prevention device" means a safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system. 
4.  "Certificate of completion" means the document required under Section 492.9. 
5.  "Certified irrigation designer" means a person certified to design irrigation systems by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's WaterSense irrigation designer certification program and irrigation association's certified irrigation designer program. 
6.  "Certified landscape irrigation auditor" means a person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's WaterSense irrigation auditor certification program and irrigation association's certified landscape irrigation auditor program. 
7.  "Check valve" or "anti-drain valve" means a valve located under a sprinkler head, or other location in the irrigation system, to hold water in the system to prevent drainage from sprinkler heads when the sprinkler is off. 
8.  "Common interest developments" means community apartment projects, condominium projects, planned developments, and stock cooperatives per Civil Code Section 1351. 
9.  "Compost" means the safe and stable product of controlled biologic decomposition of organic materials that is beneficial to plant growth. 
10.  "Conversion factor (0.62)" means the number that converts acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year. 
11.  "Distribution uniformity" means the measure of the uniformity of irrigation water over a defined area. 
12.  "Drip irrigation" means any non-spray low volume irrigation system utilizing emission devices with a flow rate measured in gallons per hour. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants. 
13.  "Ecological restoration project" means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem. 
14.  "Effective precipitation" or "usable rainfall" (Eppt) means the portion of total precipitation which becomes available for plant growth. 
15.  "Emitter" means a drip irrigation emission device that delivers water slowly from the system to the soil. 
16.  "Established landscape" means the point at which plants in the landscape have developed significant root growth into the soil. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth. 
17.  "Establishment period of the plants" means the first year after installing the plant in the landscape or the first two years if irrigation will be terminated after establishment. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth. Native habitat mitigation areas and trees may need three to five years for establishment. 
18.  "Estimated total water use" (ETWU) means the total water used for the landscape as described in Section 18.148.080. 
19.  "ET adjustment factor" (ETAF) means a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for non-residential areas, that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape. The ETAF for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. The ETAF for existing non-rehabilitated landscapes is 0.8. 
20.  "Evapotranspiration rate" means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time. 
21.  "Flow rate" means the rate at which water flows through pipes, valves and emission devices, measured in gallons per minute, gallons per hour, or cubic feet per second. 
22.  "Flow sensor" means an inline device installed at the supply point of the irrigation system that produces a repeatable signal proportional to flow rate. Flow sensors must be connected to an automatic irrigation controller, or flow monitor capable of receiving flow signals and operating master valves. This combination flow sensor/controller may also function as a landscape water meter or submeter. 
23.  "Friable" means a soil condition that is easily crumbled or loosely compacted down to a minimum depth per planting material requirements, whereby the root structure of newly planted material will be allowed to spread unimpeded. 
24.  "Fuel modification plan guideline" means guidelines from a local fire authority to assist residents and businesses that are developing land or building structures in a fire hazard severity zone. 
25.  "Graywater" means untreated wastewater that has not been contaminated by any toilet discharge, has not been affected by infectious, contaminated, or unhealthy bodily wastes, and does not present a threat from contamination by unhealthful processing, manufacturing, or operating wastes. "Graywater" includes, but is not limited to, wastewater from bathtubs, showers, bathroom washbasins, clothes washing machines, and laundry tubs, but does not include wastewater from kitchen sinks or dishwashers. Health and Safety Code Section 17922.12. 
26.  "Hardscapes" means any durable material (pervious and non-pervious). 
27.  "Hydrozone" means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs and rooting depth. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated. 
28.  "Infiltration rate" means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour). 
29.  "Invasive plant species" means species of plants not historically found in California that spread outside cultivated areas and can damage environmental or economic resources. Invasive species may be regulated by county agricultural agencies as noxious species. Lists of invasive plants are maintained at the California Invasive Plant Inventory and USDA invasive and noxious weeds database. 
30.  "Irrigation audit" means an in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. An irrigation audit includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule. The audit must be conducted in a manner consistent with the Irrigation Association's Landscape Irrigation Auditor Certification program or other U.S. Environmental Protection Agency "Watersense" labeled auditing program. 
31.  "Irrigation efficiency" (IE) means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The irrigation efficiency for purposes of this ordinance are 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip systems. 
32.  "Irrigation survey" means an evaluation of an irrigation system that is less detailed than an irrigation audit. An irrigation survey includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system test, and written recommendations to improve performance of the irrigation system. 
33.  "Irrigation water use analysis" means an analysis of water use data based on meter readings and billing data. 
34.  "Landscape architect" means a person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture in the state of California Business and Professions Code, Section 5615. 
35.  "Landscape area" means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance calculation. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated areas designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation). 
36.  "Landscape contractor" means a person licensed by the state of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems. 
37.  "Landscape documentation package" means the documents required under Section 18.148.040. 
38.  "Landscape project" means total area of landscape in a project as defined in "landscape area" for the purposes of this chapter, meeting requirements under Section 18.148.020. 
39.  "Landscape water meter" means an inline device installed at the irrigation supply point that measures the flow of water into the irrigation system and is connected to a totalizer to record water use. 
40.  "Lateral line" means the water delivery pipeline that supplies water to the emitters or sprinklers from the valve. 
41.  "Local agency" means a city or county, including a charter city or charter county, that is responsible for adopting and implementing the ordinance. The local agency is also responsible for the enforcement of this ordinance, including but not limited to, approval of a permit and plan check or design review of a project. 
42.  "Local water purveyor" means any entity, including a public agency, city, county, or private water company that provides retail water service. 
43.  "Low volume irrigation" means the application of irrigation water at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low-volume emitters such as drip, drip lines, and bubblers. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants. 
44.  "Low water use plant" means a plant species whose water needs are compatible with local climate and soil conditions. Species classified as "very low water use" and "low water use" by WUCOLS, having a regionally adjusted plant factor of 0.0 through 0.3, shall be considered low water use plants. 
45.  "Main line" means the pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the water source to the valve or outlet. 
46.  "Master shut-off valve" is an automatic valve installed at the irrigation supply point which controls water flow into the irrigation system. When this valve is closed water will not be supplied to the irrigation system. A master valve will greatly reduce any water loss due to a leaky station valve. 
47.  "Maximum applied water allowance" (MAWA) means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in Section 18.148.090. It is based upon the area's reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscape area. The estimated total water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. Special landscape areas, including recreation areas, areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, and areas irrigated with recycled water are subject to the MAWA with an ETAF not to exceed 1.0. MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) [(ETAF x LA) + ((1-ETAF) x SLA)] 
48.  "Median" is an area between opposing lanes of traffic that may be unplanted or planted with trees, shrubs, perennials, and ornamental grasses. 
49.  "Microclimate" means the climate of a small, specific area that may contrast with the climate of the overall landscape area due to factors such as wind, sun exposure, plant density, or proximity to reflective surfaces. 
50.  "Microspray" means a microirrigation emission device with one or more orifices to convert irrigation water pressure to water discharge with a flow rate not to exceed thirty gallons per hour at the largest area of coverage available for the nozzle series when operated at thirty psi. Microsprays are inclusive of microbubbers, microspinners, and microspray jets. 
51.  "Mined-land reclamation projects" means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975. 
52.  "Mulch" means any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, or inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, or decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperature, and preventing soil erosion. 
53.  "Native plant" means a plant indigenous to a specific area of consideration. For the purposes of these guidelines, the term shall refer to plants indigenous to the coastal ranges of Central and Northern California, and more specifically to such plants that are suited to the ecology of the present or historic natural community(ies) of the project's vicinity. 
54.  "New construction" means, for the purposes of this ordinance, a new building with a landscape or other new landscape, such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building. 
55.  "Non-residential landscape" means landscapes in commercial, institutional, industrial and public settings that may have areas designated for recreation or public assembly. It also includes portions of common areas of common interest developments with designated recreational areas and multifamily homes where landscaping is managed by a homeowners association or other common interest development. 
56.  "No-water using plant" means a plant species with water needs that are compatible with local climate and soil conditions such that regular supplemental irrigation is not required to sustain the plant after it has become established. 
57.  "Operating pressure" means the pressure at which the parts of an irrigation system are designed by the manufacturer to operate. 
58.  "Overhead sprinkler irrigation systems" or "overhead spray irrigation systems" means systems that deliver water through the air (e.g., spray heads and rotors). 
59.  "Overspray" means the irrigation water which is delivered beyond the target area. 
60.  "Parkway" means the area between a sidewalk and the curb or traffic lane. It may be planted or unplanted, and with or without pedestrian egress. 
61.  "Permit" means an authorizing document issued by local agencies for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes. 
62.  "Pervious" means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil. 
63.  "Plant factor" or "plant water use factor" is a factor, when multiplied by ETo, estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this ordinance, the plant factor range for very low water use plants is 0 to 0.1, the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0.1 to 0.3, the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6, and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in this ordinance are derived from the publication "Water Use Classification of Landscape Species." Plant factors may also be obtained from horticultural researchers from academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR). 
64.  "Project applicant" means the individual or entity submitting a landscape documentation package required under Section 18.148.040, to request a permit, plan check, or design review from the local agency. A project applicant may be the property owner or his or her designee. 
65.  "Rain sensor" or "rain sensing shutoff device" means a component which automatically suspends an irrigation event when it rains. 
66.  "Record drawing" or "as-builts" means a set of reproducible drawings which show significant changes in the work made during construction and which are usually based on drawings marked up in the field and other data furnished by the contractor. 
67.  "Recreational area" means areas, excluding private single family residential areas, designated for active play, recreation or public assembly in parks, sports fields, picnic grounds, amphitheaters or golf course tees, fairways, roughs, surrounds and greens. 
68.  "Recycled water," "reclaimed water," or "treated sewage effluent water" means treated or recycled waste water or reused water of a quality suitable for nonpotable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption. 
69.  "Reference evapotranspiration" or "ETo" means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is expressed in inches per day, month, or year as represented in Appendix A, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowances so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated. 
70.  "Regional water efficient landscape ordinance" means a local ordinance adopted by two or more local agencies, water suppliers and other stakeholders for implementing a consistent set of landscape provisions throughout a geographical region. Regional ordinances are strongly encouraged to provide a consistent framework for the landscape industry and applicants to adhere to. 
71.  "Rehabilitated landscape" means any relandscaping project that requires a permit, plan check, or design review, meets the requirements of Section 490.1, and the modified landscape area is equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred square feet. 
72.  "Residential landscape" means landscapes surrounding single family homes or multifamily homes where landscapes are managed by individual homeowners. 
73.  "Run off" means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscape area. For example, run off may result from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a slope. 
74.  "Soil moisture sensing device" or "soil moisture sensor" means a device that measures the amount of water in the soil. The device may also suspend or initiate an irrigation event. 
75.  "Soil texture" means the classification of soil based on its percentage of sand, silt, and clay. 
76.  "Special landscape area" (SLA) means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants, recreational areas, areas irrigated with recycled water, or water features using recycled water. 
77.  "Sprinkler head" or "spray head" means a device which delivers water through a nozzle. 
78.  "Static water pressure" means the pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when water is not flowing. 
79.  "Station" means an area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously. 
80.  "Swimming pool" means any structure intended for swimming, recreational bathing or wading that contains water over twenty-four inches (six hundred ten millimeters) deep. This includes in-ground, above ground, and on-ground pools; hot tubs; spa and fixed in place wading pools. 
81.  "Swing joint" means an irrigation component that provides a flexible, leak-free connection between the emission device and lateral pipeline to allow movement in any direction and to prevent equipment damage. 
82.  "Submeter" means a metering device to measure water applied to the landscape that is installed after the primary utility water meter. 
83.  "Turf" means a ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, perennial ryegrass, red fescue, and tall fescue are cool-season grasses. Bermuda grass, kikuyu grass, seashore paspalum, St. Augustine grass, zoysia grass, and buffalo grass are warm-season grasses. 
84.  "Valve" means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system. 
85.  "Water conserving plant species" means a plant species identified as having a very low or low plant factor. 
86.  "Water feature" means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscape area. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment or stormwater best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or stormwater retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation. 
87.  "Watering window" means the time of day irrigation is allowed. 
88.  "WUCOLS" means the current version of the Water Use Classification of Landscape Species current edition published by the University of California Cooperative Extension and the Department of Water Resources, available at: http://ucanr.edu/sites/WUCOLS/Download_WUCOLS_IV_List/ 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.148.040 - Water conservation in landscaping ordinance requirements. 
A.  All owners of new construction and rehabilitated landscapes of applicable sizes shall: (1) complete the landscape project application and documentation package (Section 18.148.060) and (2) comply with the landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule (Section 18.148.150) requirements of this chapter. 
B.  All owners of existing landscapes over one acre in size, even if installed before enactment of this chapter, shall: (1) comply with local agency programs that may be instituted relating to irrigation audits, surveys and water use analysis, and (2) shall maintain landscape irrigation facilities to prevent water waste and runoff. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.148.050 - Compliance with chapter. 
A.  The local agency shall: 
1.  Provide the project applicant with the ordinance and landscape project application and documentation package requirements and the procedures for permits, plan checks, design reviews, or new or expanded water service; 
2.  Review the landscape project application submitted by the project applicant; 
3.  Approve or deny the project applicant's landscape project application submittal; 
4.  Issue or approve a permit, plan check or design review that complies with the approved landscape project application or approve a new or expanded water service application that complies with the approved landscape project application; 
5.  Submit a copy of the complete landscape project application to the local water purveyor or land use authority, as the case may be. 
B.  The project applicant shall: 
1.  Prior to construction, submit all portions of the landscape project application, except the landscape audit report, to the local agency; and 
2.  Upon approval of the landscape project application by the local agency: 
a.  Receive a permit or approval of the plan check or design review and record the date of the permit in the certificate of completion; 
b.  Submit a copy of the approved landscape documentation package along with the record drawings, and any other information to the property owner or his/her designee; and 
c.  Submit a copy of the water efficient landscape worksheet to the local water purveyor. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.148.060 - Landscape project application and documentation package. 
A.  The elements of a landscape must be designed to achieve water efficiency and will comply with the criteria described in this chapter. In completing the landscape project application, project applicants may choose one of two options to demonstrate that the landscape meets the ordinance's water efficiency goals. Regardless of which option is selected, the applicant must complete and comply with all other elements of the ordinance. The options include: 
1.  Planting restrictions: 
a.  The landscape areas may include no turf or high-water using plants; and 
b.  At least eighty percent of the plants in landscape areas shall be native plants, low-water using plants, or no-water using plants; or the 
2.  Water budget calculation option (Section 18.148.080). 
B.  The landscape project application shall include the following elements: 
1.  Project information: 
a.  Date; 
b.  Project applicant; 
c.  Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot numbers); 
d.  Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery, homeowner-installed); 
e.  Total landscape area (square feet); 
f.  Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identify the local retail water purveyor if the applicant is not served by a private well; 
g.  Checklist of all documents in landscape documentation package; 
h.  Project contacts to include contact information for the project applicant and property owner; 
i.  Applicant signature and date with statement, "I agree to comply with the requirements of the water efficient landscape ordinance and submit a complete landscape documentation package." 
2.  Water budget calculations, if applicant selects to use a water budget approach rather than comply with the turf area limitations or specified plant type restrictions (Section 18.148.080); 
3.  Soil management report or soil management survey (Section 18.148.080); 
4.  Landscape design plans (Section 18.148.090); 
5.  Irrigation system design plans (Section 18.148.100); 
6.  Landscape audit report (Section 18.148.130); and 
7.  Grading design plan or grading design survey (Section 18.148.110). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.148.070 - Soil management report. 
A.  In order to reduce runoff and encourage healthy plant growth, a soil management report shall be completed by the project applicant, or his/her designee, or the applicant shall complete a soil management survey (Appendix E). The soil management report shall be completed as follows: 
1.  Submit soil samples to a laboratory for analysis and recommendations. 
a.  Soil sampling shall be conducted in accordance with laboratory protocol, including protocols regarding adequate sampling depth for the intended plants. 
b.  The soil analysis shall include: 
(1)  soil texture; 
(2)  infiltration rate determined by laboratory test or soil texture infiltration rate table; 
(3)  pH; 
(4)  total soluble salts; 
(5)  sodium 
(6)  percent organic matter; and 
(7)  recommendations. 
c.  In projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e. production home developments) a soil sampling rate of one in seven lots or approximately fifteen percent will satisfy this requirement. Large landscape projects shall sample at a rate equivalent to one in seven lots. 
2.  The project applicant, or his/her designee, shall comply with one of the following: 
a.  If significant mass grading is not planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the local agency as part of the landscape documentation package; or 
b.  If significant mass grading is planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the local agency as part of the certificate of completion. 
3.  The soil analysis report shall be made available, in a timely manner, to the professionals preparing the landscape design plans and irrigation design plans to make any necessary adjustments to the design plans. 
4.  The project applicant, or his/her designee, shall submit documentation verifying implementation of soil analysis report recommendations to the local agency with certificate of completion. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.148.080 - Water budget calculations. 
Project applicant may elect to complete a water budget calculation for the landscape project using the water efficient landscape worksheet in Appendix B. Water budget calculations, if prepared, shall adhere to the following requirements: 
A.  The plant factor used shall be from WUCOLS or from horticultural researchers with academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR). The plant factor ranges from 0 to 0.1 for very low water using plants, 0.1 to 0.3 for low water use plants, from 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate water use plants, and from 0.7 to 1.0 for high water use plants. 
B.  All water features shall be included in the high water use hydrozone and temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the low water use hydrozone. 
C.  All special landscape areas (SLA) shall be identified and their water use included in the water budget calculations. 
D.  The reference evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF) for SLA shall not exceed 1.0. The ETAF for all other landscaped areas shall not exceed 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for non-residential areas. 
E.  ETo values from the reference evapotranspiration table in Appendix A shall be used in calculating the maximum applied water allowance (MAWA) and estimated total water use (ETWU). For geographic areas not covered in Appendix A, use data from other cities located nearby in the same reference evapotranspiration zone, as found in the CIMIS Reference Evapotranspiration Zones Map, Department of Water Resources, 1999. For the purpose of determining estimated total water use, average irrigation efficiency is assumed to be 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip system devices. 
F.  MAWA shall be calculated using the equation below: 
MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) [(0.55 x LA) + (0.45 x SLA)] for residential areas 
MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) [(0.45 x LA) + (0.55 x SLA)] for non-residential areas 
Where: 
MAWA = maximum applied water allowance (gallons per year) 
ETo = reference evapotranspiration (inches per year) 
0.62 = conversion factor (to gallons) 
0.55 = reference evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF) for residential areas 
0.45 = reference evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF) for non-residential areas 
LA = landscape area including SLA (square feet) 
0.45 = additional water allowance for SLA in residential areas 
0.55 = additional water allowance for SLA in non-residential areas 
SLA = special landscape area (square feet) 
G.  A local agency or project applicant may consider effective precipitation (Twenty-five percent of annual precipitation) in tracking water use and may use the following equation to calculate the MAWA: 
MAWA = (ETo - Eppt) (0.62) [(0.55 x LA) + (0.45 x SLA)] for residential areas. 
MAWA = (ETo - EPPT) (0.62) [(0.45 x LA) + (0.55 x SLA)] for non-residential areas. 
H.  Estimated total water use (ETWU) will be calculated using the equation below. The sum of the ETWU calculated for all hydrozones will not exceed the MAWA. 
  
Where: 
ETWU = estimated total water use per year (gallons) 
ETo = reference evapotranspiration (inches) 
PF = plant factor from WUCOLS (see Section 491) 
HA = hydrozone area [high, medium, and low water use areas] (square feet) 
0.75 = irrigation efficiency (IE) for overhead spray devices 
0.81 = irrigation efficiency (IE) for drip system devices 
SLA = special landscape area (square feet) 
0.62 = conversion factor 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.148.090 - Landscape design plan. 
A.  For the efficient use of water, a landscape shall be carefully designed and planned for the intended function of the project. A landscape design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. 
1.  Plant Material. 
a.  Any plant may be selected for the landscape, providing the estimated total water use in the landscape area does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more of the following: 
(1)  Protection and preservation of native species and natural vegetation; 
(2)  Selection of water-conserving plant, tree and turf species, especially local native plants; 
(3)  Selection of plants based on local climate suitability, disease and pest resistance; 
(4)  Selection of trees based on applicable local tree ordinances or tree shading guidelines, and size at maturity as appropriate for the planting area; and 
(5)  Selection of plants from local and regional landscape program plant lists. 
(6)  Selection of plants from local fuel modification plan guidelines. 
b.  Each hydrozone shall have plant materials with similar water use, with the exception of hydrozones with plants of mixed water use, as specified in Section 18.148.100.A.2.d. 
c.  Plants shall be selected and planted appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of the project site. Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more of the following: 
(1)  Use the Sunset Western Climate Zone System which takes into account temperature, humidity, elevation, terrain, latitude, and varying degrees of continental and marine influence on local climate; 
(2)  Recognize the horticultural attributes of plants (i.e., mature plant size, invasive surface roots) to minimize damage to property or infrastructure [e.g., buildings, sidewalks, power lines]; allow for adequate soil volume for healthy root growth; 
(3)  Consider the solar orientation for plant placement to maximize summer share and winter solar gain. 
d.  Turf is not allowed on slopes greater than twenty-five percent where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and where twenty-five percent means one foot of vertical elevation change for every four feet of horizontal length (rise divided by run times one hundred = slope percent). 
e.  High water use plants, characterized by a plant factor of 0.7 to 1.0, are prohibited in street medians. 
f.  A landscape design plan for projects in fire-prone areas shall address fire safety and prevention. A defensible space or zone around a building or structure is required per Public Resources Code Section 4291(a) and (b). Avoid fire-prone plant materials and highly flammable mulches. Refer to the local fuel modification plan guidelines. 
g.  The use of invasive plant species, such as those listed by the California Invasive Plant Council, is strongly discouraged. 
h.  The architectural guidelines of a common interest development, which include community apartment projects, condominiums, planned developments, and stock cooperatives, shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low-water use plants as a group. 
2.  Water features. 
a.  Recirculating water systems shall be used for water features. 
b.  Where available, recycled water shall be used as a source for decorative water features. 
c.  Surface area of a water feature shall be included in the high water use hydrozone area of the water budget calculation. 
d.  Pool and spa covers are required on any newly constructed pool or spa. 
3.  Soil preparation, mulch and amendments. 
a.  Prior to the planting of any materials, compacted soils shall be transformed to a friable condition. On engineered slopes, only amended planting holes need meet this requirement. 
b.  Soil amendments shall be incorporated according to recommendations of the soil report and what is appropriate for the plants selected (see Section 18.148.070). 
c.  For landscape installations, compost at a rate of a minimum of four cubic yards per one thousand square feet of permeable area shall be incorporated to a depth of six inches into the soil. Soils with greater than six percent organic matter in the top six inches of soil are exempt from adding compost and tilling. 
d.  A minimum three-inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated. To provide habitat for beneficial insects and other wildlife, up to five percent of the landscape area may be left without mulch. Designated insect habitat must be included in the landscape design plan as such. 
e.  Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes that meet current engineering standards. 
f.  The mulching portion of the seed/mulch slurry in hydro-seeded applications shall meet the mulching requirement. 
g.  Organic mulch materials made from recycled or post-consumer shall take precedence over inorganic materials or virgin forest products unless the recycled post-consumer organic products are not locally available. Organic mulches are not required where prohibited by local fuel modification plan guidelines or other applicable local ordinances. 
B.  The landscape design plan, at a minimum, shall: 
1.  Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter, or other method; 
2.  Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water, or mixed water use. Temporarily irrigated areas of the landscape shall be included in the low water use hydrozone for the water budget calculation; 
3.  Identify recreational areas; 
4.  Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants; 
5.  Identify areas irrigated with recycled water; 
6.  Identify type of mulch and application depth; 
7.  Identify soil amendments, type, and quantity; 
8.  Identify type and surface area of water features; 
9.  Identify hardscapes (pervious and non-pervious); 
10.  Identify location, installation details, and twenty-four-hour retention or infiltration capacity of any applicable stormwater best management practices that encourage on-site retention and infiltration of stormwater. Project applicants shall refer to the local agency or regional water quality control board for information on any applicable stormwater technical requirements. Stormwater best management practices are encouraged in the landscape design plan and examples are provided in Section 18.148.160. 
11.  Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment technologies as discussed in Section 18.148.160 and their twenty-four-hour retention or infiltration capacity; 
12.  Identify any applicable graywater discharge piping, system components and area(s) of distribution; 
13.  Contain the following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them for the efficient use of water in the landscape design plan"; and 
14.  Bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design a landscape. (See Sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the Business and Professions Code, Section 832.27 of Title 16 of the California Code of Regulations, and Section 6721 of the Food and Agriculture Code.). 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.148.100 - Irrigation design plan. 
A.  This section applies to landscaped areas requiring permanent irrigation, not areas that require temporary irrigation solely for the plant establishment period. For the efficient use of water, an irrigation system shall meet all the requirements listed in this section and the manufacturers' recommendations. The irrigation system and its related components shall be planned and designed to allow for proper installation, management, and maintenance. An irrigation design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. 
1.  System. 
a.  Landscape water meters, defined as either a dedicated water service meter or private submeter, shall be installed for all non-residential irrigated landscapes of one thousand square feet but not more than five thousand square feet (the level at which Water Code 535 applies) and residential irrigated landscapes of five thousand square feet or greater. A landscape water meter may be either: 
(1)  A customer service meter dedicated to landscape use provided by the local water purveyor; or 
(2)  A privately owned meter or submeter. 
b.  Automatic irrigation controllers utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data utilizing non-volatile memory shall be required for irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems. 
c.  If the water pressure is below or exceeds the recommended pressure of the specified irrigation devices, the installation of a pressure regulating device is required to ensure that the dynamic pressure at each emission device is within the manufacturer's recommended pressure range for optimal performance. 
(1)  If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system, pressure-regulating devices such as inline pressure regulators, booster pumps, or other devices shall be installed to meet the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system. 
(2)  Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure, and flow reading of the water supply shall be measured at the point of connection. These pressure and flow measurements shall be conducted at the design stage. If the measurements are not available at the design stage, the measurements shall be conducted at installation. 
d.  Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.), either integral or auxiliary, that suspend or alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather conditions shall be required on all irrigation systems, as appropriate for local climatic conditions. Irrigation should be avoided during windy or freezing weather or during rain. 
e.  Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be required, as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an emergency (such as a main line break) or routine repair. 
f.  Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the water supply from contamination by the irrigation system. A project applicant shall refer to the applicable local agency code (i.e., public health) for additional backflow prevention requirements. 
g.  Flow sensors that detect high flow conditions created by system damage or malfunction are required for all on non-residential landscapes and residential landscapes of five thousand square feet or larger. 
h.  Master shut-off valves are required on all projects except landscapes that make use of technologies that allow for the individual control of sprinklers that are individually pressurized in a system equipped with low pressure shut down features. 
i.  The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where irrigation water flows onto non-targeted areas, such as adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, hardscapes, roadways, or structures. 
j.  Relevant information from the soil management plan, such as soil type and infiltration rate, shall be utilized when designing irrigation systems. 
k.  The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the hydrozones of the landscape design plan. 
l.  The irrigation system must be designed and installed to meet, at a minimum, the irrigation efficiency criteria as described in Section 18.148.080 regarding the maximum applied water allowance. 
m.  All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard, American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers'/International Code Council's (ASABE/ICC) 802-2014 "Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard." All sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014. 
n.  It is highly recommended that the project applicant or local agency inquire with the local water purveyor about peak water operating demands (on the water supply system) or water restrictions that may impact the effectiveness of the irrigation system. 
o.  In mulched planting areas, the use of low volume irrigation is required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone. 
p.  Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall have matched precipitation rates, unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer's recommendations. 
q.  Head to head coverage is recommended. However, sprinkler spacing shall be designed to achieve the highest possible distribution uniformity using the manufacturer's recommendations. 
r.  Swing joints or other riser-protection components are required on all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to hardscapes or in high traffic areas of turf grass. 
s.  Check valves or anti-drain valves are required on all sprinkler heads where low point drainage could occur. 
t.  Areas less than ten feet in width in any direction shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or other means that produces no runoff or overspray. 
u.  Overhead irrigation shall not be permitted within twenty-four inches of any non-permeable surface. Allowable irrigation within the setback from non-permeable surfaces may include drip, drip line, or other low flow non-spray technology. The setback area may be planted or unplanted. The surfacing of the setback may be mulch, gravel, or other porous material. These restrictions may be modified if: 
(1)  The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or 
(2)  The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping; or 
(3)  The irrigation designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation package and clearly demonstrates strict adherence to irrigation system design criteria in Section 18.148.100A.1. Prevention of overspray and runoff must be confirmed during the irrigation audit. 
v.  Slopes greater than twenty-five percent shall not be irrigated with an irrigation system with an application rate exceeding three-fourths of one inch per hour. This restriction may be modified if the landscape designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation package, and clearly demonstrates no runoff or erosion will occur. Prevention of runoff and erosion must be confirmed during the irrigation audit. 
2.  Hydrozone. 
a.  Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope, sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water use. 
b.  Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected based on what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone. 
c.  Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate valves from shrubs, groundcovers, and turf to facilitate the appropriate irrigation of trees. The mature size and extent of the root zone shall be considered when designing irrigation for the tree. 
d.  Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate and low water use, or moderate and high water use, may be allowed if: 
(1)  Plant factor calculation is based on the proportions of the respective plant water uses and their plant factor; or 
(2)  The plant factor of the higher water using plant is used for calculations. 
e.  Individual hydrozones that mix high and low water use plants shall not be permitted. 
f.  On the landscape design plan and irrigation design plan, hydrozone areas shall be designated by number, letter, or other designation. On the irrigation design plan, designate the areas irrigated by each valve, and assign a number to each valve. Use this valve number in the hydrozone information table (see Appendix B, Section A). This table can also assist with the irrigation audit and programming the controller. 
B.  The irrigation design plan, at a minimum, shall contain: 
1.  Location and size of separate water meters for landscape; 
2.  Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system, including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices; 
3.  Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply; 
4.  Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station; 
5.  Recycled water irrigation systems as specified in Section 18.148.170; 
6.  The following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the irrigation design plan"; and 
7.  The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design an irrigation system. (See Sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the Business and Professions Code, Section 832.27 of Title 16 of the California Code of Regulations, and Section 6721 of the Food and Agricultural Code.) 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.148.110 - Grading design plan. 
A.  For the efficient use of water, grading of a project site shall be designed to minimize soil erosion, runoff, and water waste. A grading plan or completed grading design survey (Appendix E) shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. A comprehensive grading plan prepared by a civil engineer for other local agency permits satisfies this requirement. 
1.  The project applicant shall submit a landscape grading plan that indicates finished configurations and elevations of the landscape area including: 
a.  Height of graded slopes; 
b.  Drainage patterns; 
c.  Pad elevations; 
d.  Finish grade; and 
e.  Stormwater retention improvements, if applicable 
2.  To prevent excessive erosion and runoff, it is highly recommended that project applicants: 
a.  Grade so that all irrigation and normal rainfall remains within property lines and does not drain on to non-permeable hardscapes; 
b.  Avoid disruption of natural drainage patterns and undisturbed soil; and 
c.  Avoid soil compaction in landscape areas. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.148.120 - Certificate of completion. 
A.  The certificate of completion (see Appendix C for a sample certificate) shall include the following six elements: 
1.  Project information sheet that contains: 
a.  Date; 
b.  Project name; 
c.  Project applicant name, telephone, and mailing address; 
d.  Project address and location; and 
e.  Property owner name, telephone, and mailing address. 
2.  Certification by either the signer of the landscape design plan, the signer of the irrigation design plan, or the licensed landscape contractor that the landscape project has been installed per the approved landscape documentation package; 
a.  Where there have been significant changes made in the field during construction, these "as-built" or record drawings shall be included with the certification; 
b.  A diagram of the irrigation plan showing hydrozones shall be kept with the irrigation controller for subsequent management purposes. 
3.  Irrigation scheduling parameters used to set the controller (see Section 18.148.140); 
4.  Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule (see Section 18.148.150); 
5.  Irrigation audit report (see Section 18.148.130); and 
6.  Soil analysis report or soil management survey, if not submitted with landscape documentation package, and documentation verifying implementation of soil report recommendations (see Section 18.148.070). 
B.  The project applicant shall: 
1.  Submit the signed certificate of completion to the local agency for review; 
2.  Ensure that copies of the approved certificate of completion are submitted to the local water purveyor and property owner or his or her designee. 
C.  The local agency shall: 
1.  Receive the signed certificate of completion from the project applicant; 
2.  Approve or deny the certificate of completion. If the certificate of completion is denied, the local agency shall provide information to the project applicant regarding reapplication, appeal, or other assistance. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.148.130 - Landscape audit report. 
A.  The landscape audit report shall include, but is not limited to: inspection to confirm that the landscaping and irrigation system were installed as specified in the landscape and irrigation design plan, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule. 
B.  The landscape audit report shall include the following statement: "The landscape and irrigation system has been installed as specified in the landscape and irrigation design plan and complies with the criteria of the ordinance and the permit". 
C.  Local agency shall administer on-going programs that may include, but not be limited to, post-installation landscape inspection, irrigation water use analysis, irrigation audits, irrigation surveys and water budget calculations to evaluate compliance with the MAWA. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.148.140 - Irrigation scheduling. 
A.  For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules shall be developed, managed, and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount of water required to maintain plant health. Irrigation schedules shall meet the following criteria: 
1.  Irrigation scheduling shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers. 
2.  Overhead irrigation shall be scheduled between eight p.m. and ten a.m. unless weather conditions prevent it. If allowable hours of irrigation differ from the local water purveyor, the stricter of the two shall apply. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance. 
3.  For implementation of the irrigation schedule, particular attention must be paid to irrigation run times, emission device, flow rate, and current reference evapotranspiration, so that applied water meets the estimated total water use. Total annual applied water shall be less than or equal to maximum applied water allowance (MAWA). Actual irrigation schedules shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers using current reference evapotranspiration data (e.g., CIMIS) or soil moisture sensor data. 
4.  Parameters used to set the automatic controller shall be developed and submitted for each of the following: 
a.  The plant establishment period; 
b.  The established landscape; and 
c.  Temporarily irrigated areas 
5.  Each irrigation schedule shall consider for each station all of the following that apply: 
a.  Irrigation interval (days between irrigation); 
b.  Irrigation run times (hours or minutes per irrigation event to avoid runoff); 
c.  Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event to avoid runoff; 
d.  Amount of applied water scheduled to be applied on a monthly basis; 
e.  Application rate setting; 
f.  Root depth setting; 
g.  Plant type setting; 
h.  Soil type; 
i.  Slope factor setting; 
j.  Shade factor setting; and 
k.  Irrigation uniformity or efficiency setting. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.148.150 - Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule. 
A.  Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule shall be submitted with the certificate of completion. 
B.  A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to, routine inspection; auditing; adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its components; aerating and dethatching turf areas; topdressing with compost; replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; weeding in all landscape areas; and removing obstructions to emission devices. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance. 
C.  Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally installed components or their equivalents or with components with greater efficiency. 
D.  A project applicant is encouraged to implement established landscape industry sustainable best practices for all landscape maintenance activities. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.148.160 - Stormwater management and rainwater retention. 
A.  Stormwater management practices minimize runoff and increase infiltration which recharges groundwater and improves water quality. Implementing stormwater best management practices into the landscape and grading design plans to minimize runoff and to increase on-site rainwater retention and infiltration are encouraged. 
B.  Project applicants shall refer to the local agency or regional water quality control board for information on any applicable stormwater technical requirements. 
C.  All planted landscape areas are required to have friable soil to maximize water retention and infiltration. Refer to Section 18.148.090.A.3. 
D.  It is strongly recommended that landscape areas be designed for capture and infiltration capacity that is sufficient to prevent runoff from impervious surfaces (i.e. roof and paved areas) from either: the one inch, twenty-four-hour rain event or (2) the eighty-fifth percentile, twenty-four-hour rain event, and/or additional capacity as required by any applicable local, regional, state or federal regulation. 
E.  It is recommended that stormwater projects incorporate any of the following elements to improve on-site stormwater and dry weather runoff capture and use: 
1.  Grade impervious surfaces, such as driveways, during construction to drain to vegetated areas. 
2.  Minimize the area of impervious surfaces such as paved areas, roof and concrete driveways. 
3.  Incorporate pervious or porous surfaces (e.g., gravel, permeable pavers or blocks, pervious or porous concrete) that minimize runoff. 
4.  Direct runoff from paved surfaces and roof areas into planting beds or landscaped areas to maximize site water capture and reuse. 
5.  Incorporate rain gardens, cisterns, and other rain harvesting or catchment systems. 
6.  Incorporate infiltration beds, swales, basins and drywells to capture stormwater and dry weather runoff and increase percolation into the soil. 
7.  Consider constructed wetlands and ponds that retain water, equalize excess flow, and filter pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.148.170 - Recycled water. 
A.  The installation of recycled water irrigation systems shall allow for the current and future use of recycled water. 
B.  All recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed and operated in accordance with all applicable local and state laws. 
C.  Landscapes using recycled water are considered special landscape areas. The ET adjustment factor for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.148.180 - Graywater systems. 
A.  Graywater systems promote the efficient use of water and are encouraged to assist in on-site landscape irrigation. All graywater systems shall conform to the California Plumbing Code (Title 24, Part 5, Chapter 16) and any applicable local ordinance standards. Refer to Section 18.148.020.B. for the applicability of this ordinance to landscape areas less than two thousand five hundred square feet with the estimated total water use met entirely by graywater. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.148.190 - Environmental review. 
The local agency must comply with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.148.200 - Provisions for existing landscapes. 
A local agency may by mutual agreement, designate another agency, such as a water purveyor, to implement some or all of the requirements contained in this ordinance. Local agencies may collaborate with water purveyors to define each entity's specific responsibilities relating to this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.148.210 - Provisions for existing landscapes over one acre in size. 
This section shall apply to all existing landscapes that were installed before [February 17, 2016] and are over one acre in size. 
A.  Irrigation Audit, Irrigation Survey, and Irrigation Water Use Analysis. 
1.  For landscapes that have a water meter, the local agency shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation water use analyses, irrigation surveys, and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary to reduce landscape water use to a level that does not exceed the MAWA for existing landscapes. The MAWA for existing landscapes shall be calculated as: 
MAWA = (0.8) (ETo)(LA)(0.62). 
2.  For landscapes that do not have a meter, the local agency shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation surveys and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary in order to prevent water waste. 
3.  All landscape irrigation audits for existing landscapes that are greater than one acre in size shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. 
B.  Water Waste Prevention. 
1.  Local agencies shall prevent water waste resulting from inefficient landscape irrigation by prohibiting runoff from leaving the target landscape due to low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways, parking lots, or structures. 
2.  Restrictions regarding overspray and runoff may be modified if: 
a.  The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or 
b.  The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.148.220 - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and shall be punished in accordance with Section 1.24.010.B. of this code. As an alternative to all other available remedies, including penalties available pursuant to this section, any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to administrative penalties and fines pursuant to the authorities and procedures set forth in Chapter 1.19. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Chapter 18.152 - AGRICULTURAL MITIGATION 
 
18.152.010 - Agricultural lands preservation program. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "agricultural lands preservation program" of the city of Morgan Hill. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.152.020 - Purpose. 
A.  The city of Morgan Hill has determined that small-scale agriculture is viable in the Morgan Hill sphere of influence (SOI) if land use tools are used effectively to protect an adequate agricultural land use supply. Establishing land use policies and an implementation program to preserve agricultural lands will help to preserve open space, provide access to locally grown foods, promote sustainable food production, contribute to a unique cultural environment within Morgan Hill, and address regional land use planning policy objectives. For Morgan Hill, an effective agricultural preservation program will need to focus upon the use of agricultural land use easements supported by agricultural preservation land use policies. 
B.  The Morgan Hill agricultural lands preservation program is intended to promote continued and viable agricultural activities in and around Morgan Hill through a comprehensive set of land use policies and implementation activities that together accomplish the following: 
1.  Preserve open space agricultural lands and agricultural activity within the Morgan Hill sphere of influence. 
2.  Promote the viability of small-scale agriculture through the preservation of agricultural land and the implementation of supporting general plan policies. 
3.  Identify the combination of tools, techniques, mechanisms, and funding sources that form the best agricultural/open space land preservation program for the city of Morgan Hill. 
4.  Establish CEQA mitigation procedures to mitigate the loss of agricultural lands. 
5.  Focus land preservation in the city's southeast quadrant 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.152.030 - Definitions. 
The following terms when used in this chapter shall have the following respective meanings: 
A.  Agricultural Land. For "agricultural land" that requires off-setting preservation/mitigation under this agricultural lands preservation program, agricultural land is defined as land that is depicted on the 2010 map of the Farmland Mapping and Monitoring Program (FMMP) of the California Department of Conservation as Prime Farmland, Farmland of Statewide Importance, Unique Farmland, and Farmland of Local Importance and that was not subsequently developed for non-agricultural use prior to August 1, 2014 or subsequently developed per the provisions of this ordinance. Lands identified as grazing land are not subject to the offsetting preservation/mitigation requirements set forth in this policy. 
B.  Agricultural Conservation Easement. An agricultural conservation easement is a specific type of easement whose purpose is to enable the encumbered property to remain in productive agricultural use by preventing any use or activity that would diminish or impair the agriculturally productive capacity. Therefore, the terms of an agricultural- conservation easement restrict the use of the encumbered property to agriculture, while prohibiting development, subdivision, and commercial use of the property other than as agriculture. Agricultural conservation easements are perpetual, running with the land so that their terms are binding on all future fee-title owners of the property. 
C.  Agricultural Mitigation Land. Agricultural land (as defined above) that is encumbered by an agricultural conservation easement or other farmland conservation mechanism acceptable to the city. If the agricultural land is also being used to meet open agricultural land preservation goals, the easement or other mechanism must ensure that at least ninety percent of any property being used as agricultural mitigation land remain as open space free of structures or other impervious surfaces so that it retains its value as agricultural land under the FMMP criteria. Uses allowed on agricultural mitigation land shall be consistent with the agricultural use described below and pertaining land use regulations, and as further defined in the applicable agricultural conservation easement or other farmland conservation mechanism. 
D.  Agricultural Priority Area. The agricultural priority area is an area within the SEQ that has been identified within the agricultural lands preservation program as a priority location to preserve and encourage the long-term viability of agriculture and open agricultural lands, recognizing both the vital contributions agriculture makes to the economy and quality of life within the county and the community preference for maintenance of open space areas. By designating this area, the program identifies those lands within the Morgan Hill SOI most suitable for agricultural production and related uses. Designating the agricultural priority area provides stability for ongoing agricultural operations and supports new uses necessary to support a viable local agriculture industry. The agricultural priority area is also intended to retain in open space uses any lands that are not being actively farmed until agricultural activities resume on those lands. 
E.  Agricultural Use. Agricultural use is defined as the use of the land for agricultural purposes, including crops, or crop trees, including floriculture, horticulture, viticulture, crops grown within greenhouses or other buildings, vineyards, crop harvesting, raising of animals (including apiaries, aviaries, dairying, pasturage, and fish farms), and grazing, and including necessary accessory uses for packing, processing, treating or storing of produce, and consistent with the governing jurisdiction's pertaining land use regulations. Qualifying agricultural use activities may include: 
1.  Agricultural processing: Processing facilities for the handling, processing, packing, packaging, storing and shipping of agricultural commodities grown primarily in Santa Clara County. Does not include processing of meat, poultry, or animal products (butcheries), nor timber or wood processing. Does not include routine harvesting and handling activities incidental to agriculture. 
2.  Agriculturally related entertainment and commercial uses: Visitor-oriented services, sales and attractions with an agricultural theme that are conducted in conjunction with on-site agricultural uses. Such uses include but are not limited to food and retail sales, tasting rooms, reception facilities, outdoor entertainment areas. 
3.  Agricultural research: Establishments for experimental greenhouse and field growing of agricultural commodities, landscaping and seeds, including experimental use of herbicides, pesticides and other agricultural practices. Agricultural research excludes experiments involving livestock and other animals. 
4.  Dairy: Establishments where cows or goats are maintained for the production of milk or other dairy products for commercial distribution or sale. 
5.  Feed lot: Establishments primarily engaged in the fattening of livestock in a confined area. 
6.  Field research: Research activities, field studies and educational activities (e.g., student field research) that are dependent on a natural, open setting. Examples include biological, geological or atmospheric studies. 
7.  Mushroom farm: Establishments primarily used for the cultivation and subsequent distribution and sale of mushrooms. 
8.  Nursery: an area where agricultural products are grown for transplanting, for use of stock for building and grafting, or for sale on the premises. Nurseries may include sale and cultivation of ornamental trees, shrubs, and plants, and incidental sale or rental of garden and landscape materials and equipment. 
9.  Poultry and egg farms: Establishments where fowl are raised or kept in confined areas or facilities for the purpose of commercial distribution or sale of birds or eggs. 
10.  Wildlife refuge: undeveloped land kept as natural habitat for the purpose of supporting a species or multiple species of wildlife. 
11.  Wineries: Facilities for the production of wine from fruit or fruit juices through fermentation that are subject to type 02 licenses by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. Wineries shall be entitled to all uses and activities provided under the type 02 license. Wineries may also include related storage, blending and bottling activities, as well as administrative offices, marketing, tours, public tasting, wholesale and retail sales of wine, and ancillary distilling of wine to produce brandy or similar distilled spirits. Wineries may include outdoor areas for picnics, gatherings and other activities incidental to wine-tasting. Incidental sale of marketing products and accessories related to the winery's brand identity, wine drinking, food paring, local agriculture and local history is also permitted. 
12.  Ancillary uses: Uses conducted subordinate to the primary agricultural use being conducted upon a property and which do not occupy in total more than ten percent of the property, including: 
a.  Direct sales of locally produced agricultural products. 
b.  One dwelling of persons regularly employed on the premises for farming or domestic duties; 
c.  Ancillary private garages and other structures for parking and storage of equipment, private stables, and other accessory buildings; 
d.  Quarters, accommodations or areas for transient labor, such as labor cabins or camps. 
F.  Agricultural Preservation In-lieu Fee. A fee paid to the city of Morgan Hill which will be credited to the city's open space fund or other city fund created for the purpose of acquiring agricultural mitigation land or transferred to a qualifying entity and used by either agency solely for the purpose of acquiring agricultural conservation easements. The program provides for an in-lieu fee in order to allow the utilization of funding from multiple sources and to maximize the city's ability to preserve open space agricultural lands within the agricultural priority area. 
G.  Agricultural Lands Preservation Program Surcharge Fee. A fee paid to the city of Morgan Hill which will be credited to the city's open space fund or other city fund created for the purpose of acquiring agricultural mitigation land or transferred to a qualifying entity and used by either agency for the purpose of administering the agricultural lands preservation program and/or to cover ongoing management and monitoring of the easements. The surcharge fee is either incorporated into the overall in-lieu fee for projects that make use of this option, or charged directly to projects which independently establish an agricultural conservation easement. 
H.  Open Agricultural Land. Open agricultural land is defined as agricultural land that is at least ninety percent free of buildings, structures or other impervious surface and therefore available for planting of outdoor crops, grazing, or other agricultural use. The city may make use of open space funding sources to acquire agricultural conservation easements where that easement specifies that the encumbered property be maintained as open agricultural land. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.152.040 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all new development/activities under the jurisdiction of the city of Morgan Hill, including both private development and public development projects that directly result in the conversion of agricultural land (as defined above) will be required to mitigate loss of agricultural land per the provisions of this policy. This includes projects within the existing city boundaries as well as projects that propose annexation into Morgan Hill. Projects which have received discretionary land use approval prior to the adoption August 1, 2014, including completion of the CEQA process, are not subject to this policy unless specifically required as mitigation or a condition of project approval. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.152.050 - Mitigation ratio. 
A minimum of one acre of agricultural land (1:1 mitigation ratio) shall be preserved for each acre of agricultural land changed to a non-agricultural use. The required acreage of area to be protected through an agricultural conservation easement or agricultural preservation in-lieu fee will depend on the measurement of affected area as defined below. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.152.060 - "Stay ahead" provision. 
Conservation easements will be established at least at a 1:1 mitigation ratio in advance of the development of agricultural lands. Development occurs with either the issuance of grading permit or building permits that would result in the loss of agricultural land. To meet this provision the city may utilize existing open space funding to establish agricultural conservation easements, or individual projects may establish such easements in advance of development activity. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.152.070 - Measurement of affected area. 
Areas subject to agricultural mitigation requirements will be the developed footprint for properties with a general plan land use designation of open space, public facilities, or sports recreation/leisure. Areas proposed to be so reserved shall have an aggregated area of at least ten acres in size to qualify for exclusion from the developed footprint calculation. For the remaining land use designations of residential, commercial, and industrial, the entire site will be used for calculating the required mitigation. Disturbed footprint will include irrigated fields for proposed sports fields or facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.152.080 - Mitigation mechanism. 
Conversion of agricultural land will require off-setting acquisition and/or dedication of agricultural conservation easements over approved agricultural mitigation land, or payment to the city of the agricultural preservation in-lieu fee, to support agricultural preservation. In addition to land acquisition/dedication, or payment of the agricultural preservation in-lieu fee, in either case developers are also required to pay an agricultural lands preservation program surcharge fee (on a per acre basis) to cover administrative costs and ongoing management and monitoring of the easements. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.152.090 - Eligible mitigation lands. 
In order to meet the goals of this chapter, lands proposed to be used as agricultural mitigation shall conform to the above definitions for agricultural mitigation land and/or open agricultural land and shall meet the following criteria: 
A.  Agricultural conservation easements resulting from this program shall be acquired from willing sellers only; eminent domain will not be used to acquire lands for conservation; 
B.  The property is of adequate size, configuration and location to be viable for continued agricultural use; 
C.  The land shall have access to an adequate water supply to maintain the purposes of the easement, i.e., to irrigate farmland if the converted farmland is irrigated or capable of irrigation. The water supply shall be sufficient to support ongoing agricultural uses, and the water rights on the agricultural mitigation land shall be protected in the agricultural conservation easement; 
D.  Other considerations for appropriate conserved agricultural lands include: soil type, parcel size, existing irrigation supplies, strong agricultural production history, proximity to agricultural infrastructure, proximity to the first point of processing, uses on surrounding lands, and proximity to urban areas now and into the foreseeable future; 
E.  The mitigation land shall be located within Santa Clara County; and 
F.  The mitigation land may not overlap with land being acquired as habitat mitigation by the Santa Clara Valley Habitat Agency. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.152.100 - Ineligible mitigation lands. 
A property is ineligible to serve as agricultural mitigation if any of the circumstances below apply: 
A.  The property is currently encumbered by a conservation, flood, or other type of easement or deed restriction that legally or practicably prevents converting the property to a nonagricultural use; or 
B.  The property is currently under public ownership and will remain so in the future, except to the extent it is included within a mitigation bank that may subsequently be established by the city or other public agency; or 
C.  The property is subject to conditions that practicably prevent utilizing the property for a viable agricultural use. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.152.110 - Agricultural priority area. 
Dedications inside the Morgan Hill sphere of influence (SOI) will be strongly encouraged within the southeast quadrant (SEQ) as the first priority. The city has identified an agricultural priority area within the SEQ as the city's first priority for conservation. The city's secondary priority is the preservation of other rural county agricultural lands within the Morgan Hill SOI. Dedications outside the SOI are less desirable and must be inside Santa Clara County as described under 'eligible mitigation lands' above. The agricultural priority area encompasses approximately six hundred fifty acres of land. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.152.120 - Responsibility for easement acquisition. 
A.  In cases where the mitigation fee is paid, the city of Morgan Hill will either take on responsibility for acquiring the easement or transfer the in-lieu fee and accompanying responsibility to a qualifying entity. 
B.  Developments requiring less than ten acres of agricultural mitigation are required to pay the agricultural preservation in-lieu fee on a per acre basis except that acquisition of agricultural conservation easements of less than ten acres may be allowed when located immediately adjacent to an existing agricultural conservation easement area that when combined, exceeds ten acres in size. 
C.  Developers may independently establish an agricultural conservation easement on eligible mitigation lands within the county. In such cases, the developer will be required to pay all acquisition costs, the costs of establishing the easement, and the agricultural lands preservation program surcharge fee. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.152.130 - Management and monitoring fee. 
The developer shall pay a one-time per acre fee (agricultural lands preservation program surcharge fee) to cover the average cost administration of the program. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.152.140 - Implementing entity. 
The city will hold the easements and collect management and monitoring fees until an alternative implementing entity (qualifying entity), such as a nonprofit conservation organization or agricultural consultant, has been identified. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.152.150 - Mitigation timing and implementation. 
Agricultural mitigation will be required prior to the acceptance of a final parcel or subdivision map or prior to issuance of a building permit or grading permit that results in physical development involving the conversion of agricultural lands, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.152.160 - Planned developments/development agreements. 
Developers may provide agricultural mitigation through a planned development project that consolidates existing development rights onto a portion of the property so that the remaining undeveloped portion is then reserved for agricultural use. Such an approach may be used within the SEQ or within other areas of the city's SOI in which agricultural lands are present. Such a project must be governed by a development agreement. This method of mitigation will only be considered if it results in an equal or greater agricultural benefit as would have resulted from the mitigation measures described above. Factors that may be considered include, but are not limited to: (1) the number, size, and location of permissible clustered home sites; (2) the amount of land dedicated for agricultural conservation; (3) the location of agricultural land in relation to the agricultural priority area and contiguity with existing and already conserved agricultural land; and (4) commitments to actively farm agricultural land within the development agreement area. The developer will be required to enter into a development agreement with the city specifying the terms of the agreement and the extraordinary benefits accruing to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.152.170 - Funding for easements. 
Given the city's policy objective of agricultural land preservation within the Morgan Hill sphere of influence and within the southeast quadrant in particular, it is anticipated that the city will need to use multiple funding sources to support the acquisition of easements within the desired area. In addition to use of money obtain through grants and other contributions, the city will use open space funds collected through administration of its residential development control system (RDCS) to supplement the acquisition of conservation easements. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.152.180 - Clustering of development. 
The city may work with land owners or developers through the land use entitlement process to preserve agricultural lands by allowing a clustering of existing development rights onto a portion of a site so that a large portion of the site may be preserved for agricultural use. The city should allow such alternate methods of agricultural mitigation through planned development zoning and/or a development agreement so that it will result in equal or greater agricultural benefit than would result from standard mitigation requirements. At a minimum, mitigation shall still be required at a ratio of 1:1, but may allow flexibility with respect to timing and location. Also, an agricultural conservation easement shall be recorded over the agricultural mitigation lands subject to the planned development zoning and/or development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
Division III. - Residential Development Control System (RDCS)  
Chapter 18.156 - RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT CONTROL SYSTEM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note— Sections which may be amended or repealed by the city council without voter approval are identified with the note "[CCA]" following the section heading. 
 
18.156.010 - RDCS purpose and history. 
A.  Purpose. This chapter establishes requirements for the Morgan Hill Residential Development Control System (RDCS). The purpose of the RDCS is to: 
1.  Establish a limit on the amount and rate of residential growth in Morgan Hill through 2035. 
2.  Encourage high quality residential development that enhances residents' quality of life. 
3.  Ensure that new residential development does not adversely impact the level of public services and infrastructure provided for current and future residents. 
4.  Promote a diverse stock of high quality housing to meet the full range of housing needs within Morgan Hill. 
5.  Encourage new residential development to contribute community benefits that enhance the public health, safety, and welfare. 
6.  Encourage an orderly, efficient, and sustainable residential development pattern. 
7.  Advance the goals and policies of the general plan and Downtown Specific Plan. 
8.  Provide certainty to residents that residential development patterns will reflect local goals and values. 
B.  History. The RDCS is a continuation and refinement of the voter-approved growth management system first established in Morgan Hill in 1977. The RDCS was originally approved by voters in response to concerns over the amount and pace of residential growth and the impacts of this growth on city services and infrastructure. RDCS ballot measures adopted by the voters include the following: 
1.  Measure E (1977), which set a target population of thirty thousand for year 2000 and established the RDCS. 
2.  Measure P (1990), which refined the RDCS and established a population ceiling of thirty-eight thousand eight hundred for 2010. 
3.  Measure C (2004), which again refined the RDCS and set the population ceiling to forty-eight thousand for 2020. 
4.  Measure F (2006) and Measure A (2009), which established exemptions for units constructed Downtown. 
5.  Measure S (2016), which was adopted in conjunction with the city's general plan update to further refine the RDCS and set the population ceiling to fifty-eight thousand two hundred for 2035. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.156.020 - Amendments to RDCS ordinance. 
This ordinance (Chapter 18.156 of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code) was adopted by the voters of Morgan Hill in 2016 and may be amended or repealed only with voter approval except as specified in subsections A and B below. 
A.  Amendments Allowed without Voter Approval. The following sections may be amended by an ordinance duly adopted by the city council in accordance with state law: 
1.  18.156.120 (RDCS Procedures - Application Submittal and Review, Project Scoring, and Award of Allotments). 
2.  18.156.130 (Pre-Application Review). 
3.  18.156.140 (Project Phasing). 
4.  18.156.150 (Land Use Entitlements Required). 
5.  18.156.160 (Expiration of Allotments). 
6.  18.156.170 (Extensions). 
B.  Reorganizing and Renumbering of Municipal Code. The Morgan Hill Municipal Code may be reorganized or readopted in a different format, and individual provisions may be renumbered or reordered, in the course of ongoing updates of the municipal code, provided that the provisions of this chapter adopted by the voters of Morgan Hill in 2016 remains in the municipal code unless earlier repealed or amended by the voters or by the city council in accordance with subsection A, above. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.156.030 - Transitional provisions. 
A.  Replacement of Prior RDCS Ordinance. This chapter repeals and replaces in its entirety the prior RDCS ordinances, previously codified in Division IV (Residential Development Code) of Title 18 (Zoning) of the Morgan Hill Municipal Code. 
B.  Prior Actions Remain Valid. Any city action taken or approval granted pursuant to the prior RDCS ordinance is not affected by the enactment of this chapter. All future actions and approvals shall comply with this chapter. 
C.  Previously Approved Allotments. 
1.  Allotments awarded and exercised prior to March 1, 2017, shall remain valid and are not affected by this chapter. 
2.  Allotments awarded prior to March 1, 2017, but which have not yet been exercised shall remain valid until the expiration date established at the time of allotment or as established in the project's development agreement. Applicant requests for an extension to the date by which these allotments must be exercised and city action on these requests are governed by Section 18.156.170 (Extensions) of this chapter. 
D.  No Changes to Prior Projects Required. No provision of this chapter shall require any change in the plans, construction, or design of the portion of a project which received allotments prior to March 1, 2017. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.156.040 - Population limit. 
A.  Maximum Population. Morgan Hill's population as of January 1, 2035 shall not exceed fifty-eight thousand two hundred. 
B.  Ceiling, Not a Target. The fifty-eight thousand two hundred population limit is a maximum ceiling, not a target. The city is not required to actively strive to reach fifty-eight thousand two hundred residents by 2035. Instead, the city shall ensure that Morgan Hill's population does not exceed this limit by 2035 while continuing to meet the full range of housing needs in Morgan Hill. 
C.  Limit to all Population Growth. Morgan Hill's population limit is intended to limit all population growth, including growth from new housing exempt from receiving RDCS allotments as specified in Section 18.156.050.C (Exemptions from Allotments) and set-aside allotments awarded as allowed by Section 18.156.070 (Downtown and Agricultural Preservation Set Asides). The number of allotments available each year and the process to adjust this number is intended to ensure that residential growth from all sources does not result in a population that exceeds the population limit of fifty-eight thousand two hundred residents in 2035. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.156.050 - Allotments—General. 
A.  Allotments Based on Population Limit. The city council shall establish a maximum number of residential allotments available each year, not to exceed two hundred fifteen allotments per year, such that the population in Morgan Hill does not exceed fifty-eight thousand two hundred as of January 1, 2035. 
B.  Allotment Requirement. A residential allotment authorizes an applicant to apply for land use entitlements and to construct these units should the city approve these entitlements. No residential unit may be developed without first obtaining an allotment, except for exempt units specified in Section C below. 
C.  Exemptions from Allotments. The following types of residential projects may be developed without first receiving any allotments: 
1.  One single-family home on a lot existing as of March 1, 2017; 
2.  Secondary dwelling units; 
3.  The conversion of an existing single-family home into a duplex provided that a new detached primary structure is not constructed on the lot or lots; 
4.  Assisted living/nursing homes; and 
5.  The annexation of existing dwelling units outside of city limits into the city. 
D.  Timing of Allotment Use. To maintain a steady rate of residential development, allotments must be used ("exercised") by a specific date as established in Section 18.156.160 (Expiration of Allotments). Allotments that are not used by the specified date expire and are no longer valid. Projects with expired allotments must reapply for allotments in the same manner as all other new proposed projects requesting allotments. 
E.  Rate of Growth. The planning commission shall allocate available allotments each year with the goal of maintaining a steady rate of growth. 
F.  Cancellation of Allotment Awards. The city council may cancel the process to award allotments upon finding that public services and facilities are inadequate to accommodate additional residential development and that awarding allotments would significantly impact the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.156.060 - Downtown and agricultural preservation set asides. 
A.  General. Through 2035 a certain number of allotments are set aside for residential projects in Downtown Morgan Hill and for projects that contribute to the city's agricultural preservation goals. 
B.  Eligibility. To be eligible to receive set-aside allotments, a project must receive at least eighty percent of the total maximum score in the RDCS competition criteria. 
C.  Competition Not Required. Eligible projects are not required to compete for set-aside allotments. Instead, allotments are issued to eligible projects by the planning commission on a first-come, first- served basis up to the total number of available set-aside allotments each year. 
D.  Number of Available Set-Aside Allotments. 
1.  Downtown Set-Asides. Through 2035, five hundred allotments are set aside for housing within the Downtown Specific Plan boundaries set forth in the city's general plan as of July 27, 2016. No more than one hundred set-aside allotments are available for downtown projects within a single year. 
2.  Agricultural Preservation Set-Asides. Through 2035, three hundred allotments are set-aside for housing that may be applied anywhere within the city. Recipient projects must directly establish permanent agricultural conservation easements within the city limits or within the city's priority agricultural conservation area. Easements must be established within the city's sphere of influence in a manner consistent with the citywide agricultural lands preservation program. The number of allotments granted to an eligible project shall be commensurate with the community benefit obtained from the resulting preservation of agricultural lands. No more than thirty-five set-aside allotments are available for agricultural preservation projects within a single year. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.156.070 - Urban service area boundaries. 
A.  Allotments within Urban Service Area Only. The city may approve allotments only for projects located within the city's urban service area boundaries. 
B.  Application to Expand Urban Service Area. The city may apply to the Santa Clara County Local Agency Formation Commission to expand the urban service area boundary of the city to accommodate additional residential development if the city council first makes all of the following findings supported by substantial evidence on the record of a duly noticed public hearing on the matter: 
1.  The expansion is necessary to accommodate the amount, rate, location, and type of residential development envisioned in the general plan. 
2.  The expansion is consistent with any city adopted plans, policies, or ordinances specifying a preferred sequence of future annexations. 
3.  Public services and infrastructure are or will be sufficient to accommodate development resulting from the expansion of the urban service area boundary. Additional development will not adversely impact public services and infrastructure, including public schools, the transportation system, parks, police, fire service, storm drainage, wastewater, and water service. 
4.  The expansion supports an orderly development pattern that prioritizes infill development adjacent to existing development and served by existing public services and infrastructure. 
5.  The expansion is necessary to accommodate the housing and/or employment needs of Morgan Hill. 
6.  The expansion promotes fiscal responsibility, cost-effective service delivery, and the city's ability to plan for and adequately maintain urban services over time. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.156.080 - Competition for allotments. 
A.  Annual Competition. Each year the city may conduct a competition for allotments for development of residential units, except when the city council cancels the competition allowed by Paragraph D below. Projects exempt from the RDCS competition as specified in Section 18.156.050.C (Exemptions from Allotments) and projects eligible for set-aside allotments as specified in Section 18.156.060 (Downtown and Agricultural Preservation Set Asides) do not participate in the competition. 
B.  Minimum Score. To be eligible to compete for allotments, a project must receive a minimum score of at least eighty percent of the total maximum score in the RDCS competition criteria. 
C.  Award of Allotments. The planning commission shall award allotments based on a scoring of projects using criteria established by the city council pursuant to Section 18.156.100 (Competition Manual). The planning commission may award a project fewer than the total number of allotments requested by the applicant. In such a case, the planning commission may award the surplus allotments to the next highest scoring projects if doing so would help create a more balanced and equitable distribution of allotments and help to achieve the goals of the general plan. 
D.  Cancellation of Allotment Awards. The city council may cancel the process to award allotments upon finding that public services and facilities are inadequate to accommodate additional residential development and that awarding allotments would significantly impact the public health, safety and welfare, or if there is insufficient demand necessary to produce high quality developments. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.156.090 - Competition categories. 
A.  General. Each year the city council may establish competition categories for certain types of projects. Projects within a competition category will compete for allotments only with other projects in the same competition category. For each competition category, the city council shall identify the number of allotments available for projects competing within the competition category. 
B.  Example Competition Categories. Example of competition categories may include, but are not limited to, projects within the Monterey Road corridor, small projects (less than fifteen units), senior housing, vertical mixed use, and multi-family rental. 
C.  Affordable Housing. When establishing competition categories, the city council shall ensure that an adequate number of allotments are available for affordable housing projects consistent with the city's regional housing needs allocation (RHNA) and adopted housing element. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.156.100 - Competition manual. 
The city council shall adopt and maintain an RDCS competition manual that establishes criteria and point values for the RDCS competition. The competition manual shall define terms and provide detail as needed to ensure that the city awards points consistently for all competing projects. 
A.  Competition Criteria. The competition manual shall identify the criteria that the city will use to award allotments to competing projects. Competition criteria in the competition manual shall advance the nine city objectives below, which may be modified only with voter approval. 
1.  Schools. Provide safe and convenient access to schools and ensure high quality schools in Morgan Hill. 
2.  Location. Encourage infill development adjacent to existing development and close to existing community services and facilities. 
3.  Affordable Housing. Increase the supply of housing affordable to households of all incomes levels. 
4.  Housing Diversity. Provide a variety of housing types and sizes to meet the range of housing needs within Morgan Hill. 
5.  Parks and Open Space. Provide high quality parks and recreational facilities and protect and preserve open space and productive agricultural land. 
6.  Environmental Protection. Increase energy efficiency, renewable energy, energy conservation, water conservation, habitat protection, and achieve other sustainability goals. 
7.  Transportation. Support a balanced and efficient transportation system for pedestrians, cyclists, public transit, and automobiles that maintains quality of life in residential neighborhoods. 
8.  Infrastructure and Services. Emphasize efficient use of public infrastructure and services. 
9.  Project Quality. Ensure quality design related to general livability, public safety, neighborhood form, site planning, building design, and landscape design. 
B.  Points. The Competition Manual shall establish points available for competition criteria that advance the city goals identified in Section A above. 
1.  Limitations on Number of Points and Changes. The total number of points for each of the nine objectives above (e.g., schools, location, affordable housing, etc.) shall be no more than twenty percent and no less than five percent of the total number of available RDCS competition points. The city council may adjust the number of points within each objective by no more than fifteen percent of the points available within the objective the previous year. 
2.  Intent of Points. Points shall be awarded only for projects that provide for excellence in project design and provide a community benefit that exceeds minimum requirements of the city and other governmental agencies. All projects must comply with city standards established in the general plan, municipal code, and other city rules and regulations together with other applicable laws. 
C.  Revisions to Criteria and Points. In order to promote long term consistency and reduce uncertainty for applicants for residential development, the city council shall amend competition criteria and point values in the competition manual only when necessary and no more frequently than once a year. The planning commission shall recommend to the city council any revisions to the competition criteria and/or point values. If amended, competition criteria and/or point values shall be established no later than six months prior to the RDCS application submittal deadline. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.156.110 - Number of available allotments. 
A.  Annual Allocations. Beginning with the competition in year 2017, the city may allocate no more than two hundred fifteen allotments in any given year for residential development that must compete for allotments. Set-aside allotments as described in Section 18.156.060 (Downtown and Agricultural Preservation Set-Asides) may be awarded in addition to the annual allotment maximum. 
B.  Annual Reductions to Available Allotments. Each year staff shall provide the planning commission with an assessment of conditions, per the findings below, that may necessitate a reduction in the number of available allotments. No later than six months prior to the RDCS application submittal deadline each year, the planning commission may recommend and the city council may reduce the number of available allotments for an RDCS competition year upon finding that: 
1.  Reducing the number of allotments is necessary to prevent a sudden spike in construction of new housing caused by a backlog of awarded allotments which have not yet been exercised. 
2.  Public infrastructure and services are or will be inadequate to accommodate the new development. Public infrastructure and services include public schools, the transportation system, parks, police, fire service, storm drainage, wastewater, and water service. 
3.  Other conditions are present that necessitate a reduction in the number of available allotments to achieve the RDCS purpose as stated in Section 18.156.010 (RDCS Purpose and History). 
4.  Downtown and/or agricultural preservation set-aside allotments have been issued. The number of annual allotments must be reduced to address the issuance of any set-aside allotments. 
5.  There is insufficient demand necessary to produce high quality developments or public benefits. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.156.120 - RDCS procedures—Application submittal and review, project scoring, and award of allotments [CCA]. 
A.  Pre-Competition Orientation. The city shall hold an open pre-competition orientation meeting at least four months prior to the RDCS application submittal deadline. At this meeting the city shall review with prospective applicants the RDCS schedule, application requirements, and competition criteria for awarding points. 
B.  Pre-Application Review. To be eligible to submit an RDCS application, applicants must have completed pre-application review as described in Section 18.156.130 (Pre-Application Review). 
C.  Applications. Applicants shall submit an RDCS application consisting of the information and materials required by the city. Applications shall be submitted on a date determined by the community development director. Applications may not be modified after submittal except as otherwise provided for in this chapter. 
D.  General Plan and Zoning Consistency Determination. After deeming an RDCS application complete, the community development director or the director's designee shall evaluate each application for consistency with the city's general plan and zoning code and reject any applications which are found to be inconsistent with either the city's general plan or zoning code. The community development director's determination is appealable to the city council. The city council may direct the applicant to make modifications to the application and if these modifications bring the application into compliance with the general plan and zoning code the application may continue to compete for allotments. 
E.  Staff Scoring of Applications. After deeming an RDCS application complete and consistent with the general plan and zoning code, the community development director or director's designee shall recommend point assignments to projects using scoring criteria established by the city council. City staff shall forward recommended scoring to the planning commission. 
F.  Planning Commission Hearings — Project Scores. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing to consider the scoring recommendation and to make a final determination of project scoring. 
G.  Staff Recommendation — Award of Allotments. After the completion of the appeal period following the planning commission determination of project scoring, the community development director or the director's designee shall recommend the award of allotments based on the project scoring. City staff shall forward recommended award of allotments to the planning commission. 
H.  Planning Commission Hearings — Award of Allotments. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing to consider the award of allotment recommendation and to award allotments based on the project scoring. The planning commission may award fewer than the total number of allotments requested for a project and may award allotments to lower-scoring projects if doing so would create a more balanced and equitable distribution of allotments and help to achieve the goals of the general plan. 
I.  Appeals. All decisions of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council pursuant to municipal code Chapter 18.64. 
J.  Development Agreement. The city may issue building permits only after the applicant has entered into a development agreement with the city confirming the specific development commitments made by the applicant at the time the planning commission awarded allotments. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.156.130 - Pre-application review [CCA]. 
A.  Pre-Application Review Requirement. Applicants may apply for allotments only after completing the pre-application review process. Pre-application review is required only once for a development project - projects which previously received allotments and reapply for additional allotments in subsequent competitions are not required to complete pre-application review again prior to reapplication. Significant changes to a project, as determined by the community development director, will require pre-application review. 
B.  Project Quality and Consistency. Pre-application review allows city staff to evaluate the overall project quality as well as consistency with the general plan, any applicable specific plan, the Morgan Hill Municipal Code, architectural review handbook, and other applicable city rules and regulations. Pre-application review is intended to help ensure that projects receiving allotments can be built consistent with their approved RDCS application. 
C.  Timing and Schedule. The community development director shall establish a schedule for submittal of materials and city staff review that provides sufficient time for the completion of pre-application review prior to the RDCS application submittal date. 
D.  Project Information Required. Applicants shall submit information and materials for pre- application review necessary to present the project concept and demonstrate compliance with city land use and neighborhood design policies in the general plan. Detailed architectural plans are not required. Materials submitted for pre-application review become part of the public record and are not confidential. 
E.  Multi-Department Review. The city planning division of the community development department, engineering division of the public works department, and other city staff involved in the land use entitlement approval process shall participate in the pre-application review. 
F.  Review Letter. After reviewing the submittal and meeting with the applicant, the community development director shall provide applicants with a pre-application review letter either making a preliminary finding that for the purposes of the RDCS competition the project is consistent with city policies and ordinances, or recommending changes to a project necessary to achieve consistency with those policies and regulations. The pre-application review letter is not a project approval or final determination by the city as to a project's conformity to city policies and ordinances. 
G.  Applicant Response. Applicants shall submit their pre-application review letter with their allotment application and any response, if needed, detailing the changes made to the project to address staff comments, or reasons why changes were not possible or desirable. 
H.  Planning Commission Consideration. The planning commission shall consider the pre-application review letter and the applicant's response to the letter when awarding competition points under the project quality criteria category. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.156.140 - Project phasing [CCA]. 
A.  Multi-Year Allotments. The planning commission may distribute allotments awarded to a single project over multiple years as allowed by this section. 
B.  Intent. Multi-year allotments are intended to support a fair and efficient RDCS process by allowing high quality projects constructed over multiple years to compete one time for allotments. 
C.  Eligibility. The planning commission shall have the discretion to determine which projects are eligible for multi-year allotments. 
D.  Number of Years. The planning commission may award allotments over a period of up to: 
1.  Three years for projects with less than one hundred units; and 
2.  Five years for projects with one hundred or more units. 
E.  Findings. The planning commission may award multi-year allotments to projects only upon finding that: 
1.  The multi-year allotments will support a steady rate of growth and help to avoid a sudden spike in construction of new housing; 
2.  The multi-year allotments will help the city to plan for adequate public services and infrastructure to accommodate new development; 
3.  The city will benefit from requiring the applicant to compete only once to receive allotments for all project phases; and 
4.  An adequate number of allotments will remain in future years to accommodate a range of housing types to meet Morgan Hill's housing needs. 
F.  Use of Allotments. 
1.  Multi-year allotments must be exercised by the date specified by the Planning Commission consistent with Section 18.156.160 (Expiration of Allotments). 
2.  If allotments for one year are not exercised by the specified expiration date, all multi-year allotments awarded to the project shall expire. 
G.  Regular Rate of Growth. Allotments awarded for future years shall be subtracted from the number of allotments available to other projects in those years so as to maintain a regular rate of growth consistent with the RDCS. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.156.150 - Land use entitlements required [CCA]. 
A.  Authorization to Apply for Entitlements. An award of an allotment is not an entitlement to develop. Allotments authorize an applicant to apply for land use entitlements and to construct these units should the city approve the required land use entitlements. 
B.  Effective Allotment. Applicants may submit an application for land use entitlements only after receiving an award of allotment. Planned development zoning applications may be filed prior to receiving an award of allotment. 
C.  Finding of Compliance with Approved RDCS Application. To approve land use entitlements, the city must find that the project substantially complies with the RDCS application as approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.156.160 - Expiration of allotments [CCA]. 
A.  Exercise of Allotment. Allotments must be exercised within thirty months of approval or by an alternative date specified in the development agreement. An allotment is considered exercised with the recordation of a final map, issuance of a grading permit, or the commencement of construction if no final map or grading permit is required. The city may grant an extension to an allotment only as permitted under Section 18.156.170 (Extensions). 
B.  Expiration. Allotments that are not exercised consistent with the terms above expire the day following the exercise date specified in the development agreement. 
C.  Reapplication. Projects with expired allotments must reapply for allotments in the same manner as all other new proposed projects requesting allotments. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018)  
18.156.170 - Extensions [CCA]. 
A.  General. The city may approve an extension to the date by which an allotment must be exercised only as allowed by this section. 
B.  Extension Request. Extension requests shall be submitted in writing to the community development department a minimum of sixty days prior to the allotment expiration date and shall describe how the project meets the extension eligibility criteria in Subsection F below. 
C.  Administrative Extension. For projects that received allotments under the previous RDCS, but have not secured a development agreement, the community development director may issue a six month extension. 
D.  Number and Duration. In addition to receiving an administrative extension and/or prior extensions under the previous RDCS, a project may receive no more than one extension for a maximum one additional year period. Phased projects may only receive one one-year extension. 
E.  Public Notice and Hearing. The planning commission shall review and act on an extension request at a noticed public hearing. 
F.  Eligibility Criteria. 
1.  The planning commission may approve an extension only when the city or other public agency is responsible for a delay in the issuance of permits or granting approvals required to exercise the allotments, or due to an earthquake, flood, fire, or other severe act of nature outside of the applicant's control. It is the applicant's responsibility to provide evidence that the request is consistent with this requirement. 
2.  The planning commission may not approve an extension for any reason other than in Paragraph E.1 above, including but not limited to difficulties obtaining financing, changes to the project not required by the city or other public agencies, applicant delays responding to requests from the city or other public agency, personal circumstances of the applicant, or changes in property ownership. 
G.  Appeals. Planning commission denial of a requested extension may be appealed to the city council. The city council may grant the appeal only upon finding that the request complies with the eligibility criteria in Paragraph F above. 
H.  Effect of Denial. If a request for extension is denied, the allotments shall expire the day following the exercise date specified in the development agreement. Projects with expired allotments must reapply for allotments in the same manner as all other new proposed projects requesting allotments. 
(Ord. No. 2277 N.S., § 5(Exh. A), 6-6-2018) 
